 

 

                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                CITY COUNCIL 
                                      COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE MEETING 
                                            JULY 8, 2015|6:00 PM 
                                          CITY COUNCIL CHAMBERS  

 

 Call to Order 
 Roll Call 
 Approval of Minutes of Previous Meeting – June 24, 2015 
 Special Presentations and Reports ‐ None 
 Initiatives and Other Items 

                  A.  Consideration of Engineering Services Agreement with Hampton, Lenzini & Renwick, 
                      Inc. for the Improvements to the Railroad‐Highway Grade Crossing at McLean 
                      Boulevard and Timber Drive (No cost to the City) 
   
                      Objective: Improve the railroad‐highway grade crossing warning devices and traffic 
                      signal at McLean Boulevard and Timber Drive by Illinois Department of Transportation 
       
                      and Metra Rail.  

                    B.  Consideration of Intergovernmental Agreement with Illinois Department of 
                        Transportation and Metra Rail for Improvements to a Railroad‐Highway Grade 
                        Crossing (No cost to the City) 
   
                        Objective: Improvements to the railroad‐highway grade crossing warning devices and 
                        traffic signal at Mclean Boulevard and Timber Drive by Illinois Department of 
       
                        Transportation and Metra Rail.  

                  C.  Consideration of Amendment to Chapter 11.24.202 B of the Municipal Code, Entitled 
                      “One Way Streets and Alleys” (No cost to the City) 
     
                      Objective: Amend ordinance to facilitate the construction and operation of parking on 
       
                      Lincoln Avenue and to create a one‐way street to the east.   

                  D.  Consideration of Amendment to Chapter 11.32.030 of the Municipal Code, Entitled 
                      “Stop Intersections” (No cost to the City) 
     
                      Objective: Increase Safety at the intersection of Spring Street and Summit Street by 
       
                      installing Four‐Way Stop Signs.  
                                        COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE AGENDA 
                                                  July 8, 2015 
                                                          
                  E.  Consideration of Maintenance Agreement with Motorola Solutions, Inc. to Support 
                      Intrado 911 and Non‐Emergency Phone Systems ($106,110) 
     
                      Objective: Provide continued support for the Elgin Emergency Communications and 
       
                      Backup Dispatch centers emergency 911 and non‐emergency phone systems.  

                  F.  Consideration of Amendment to the 50/50 and 75/25 Historic Architectural 
                      Rehabilitation Grant Programs to Combine Funding From Both Programs into One 
                      Grant Program and Approve the List of Selected Recipients to Participate in the 2015 
                      Round of the Combined Grant Program (50/50 Program: $97,721; 75/25 Program: 
                      $144,000; Total Available funding: $241,721) 
                      Objective: Increase the effectiveness of the use of historic grant program funds and 
                      award a grant to owners of historic landmark properties or those located within the 
                      city’s historic districts for exterior rehabilitation and restoration work to their residential 
       
                      properties.  
 Announcements from Council 
 Announcements from Staff 
 Adjournment 
 

 
PLEASE  NOTE:  The  City  of  Elgin  is  subject  to  the  requirements  of  the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act  of  1990.  
Individuals with disabilities who plan to attend this meeting and who require certain accommodations in order to 
allow them to observe and/or participate in this meeting, or who have questions regarding the accessibility of the 
meeting or the facilities, are requested to contact the Human Resources Department at (847) 931‐6076 or TT/TDD 
(847) 931‐5616 promptly to allow the City of Elgin to make reasonable accommodations for those persons. 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC PLAN 2013‐2017 ICON KEY 
 
              Public Safety                     Financial Stewardship 
                                                 
               
              Neighborhoods                     Economic Development 
                                           
               
              Downtown                          Education & Workforce Development 
                                           
               
              Diverse Workforce                 Image and Engagement 
                                           
               
 




                                                               2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGENDA ITEM:       A  
MEETING DATE:  July 8, 2015 
 
      ITEM: 
      Engineering Services Agreement with Hampton, Lenzini & Renwick, Inc. for the Improvements 
      to the Railroad‐Highway Grade Crossing at McLean Boulevard and Timber Drive  
      (No cost to the City) 
       
      OBJECTIVE: 
      Improve  the  railroad‐highway  grade  crossing  warning  devices  and  traffic  signal  at  McLean 
      Boulevard and Timber Drive by Illinois Department of Transportation and Metra Rail.  
       
      RECOMMENDATION: 
      Approve the engineering services agreement to Hampton, Lenzini & Renwick, Inc. in accordance 
      with  the  intergovernmental  agreement  with  Illinois  Department  of  Transportation  and  Metra 
      Rail for improvements to the railroad highway grade crossing at McLean Boulevard and Timber 
      Drive.  
       
       
      The engineering firm of Hampton, Lenzini & Renwick, Inc. (HLR) obtained a $100,017 grant to 
      design and engineer traffic signalization intersection improvements for the railroad crossing at 
      the intersection of Big Timber Road and McLean Boulevard.  
       
      HLR  also  obtained  for  the  city  a  grant  to  pay  for  the  signalization  improvements  that  will  be 
      constructed by the Illinois Department of Transportation in the amount of $610,000 which re‐
      quires separate approval (and is the next agenda item). 
       
      Work is expected commence in the late summer of 2016 with final completion late that year or 
      in the spring of 2017. 
       
      BACKGROUND 
       
      Representatives from Metra Rail and the Illinois Commerce Commission (ICC) identified neces‐
      sary  improvements  for  the  railroad‐highway  grade  crossing  at  McLean  Boulevard  and  Timber 
      Drive. The city’s contract engineers, Hampton,  Lenzini & Renwick, Inc. (HLR), represented the 
      city’s interest during that inspection in conjunction with its traffic operations agreement with 
      the city. The McLean Boulevard and Timber Drive grade crossing has experienced an inordinate 
      number of vehicle crashes with the railroad crossing gates with thirteen reports identifying gate 
      damage between January 1, 2009 and July 1, 2013.  
 




 
HLR initiated a grant proposal to the ICC and Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) seek‐
ing  financial  assistance  for  the  recommend  improvements  the  inspection.  The  grant  was  ap‐
proved, and consistent with the city’s agreement with HLR, a consultant that secures a grant for 
the city is rewarded with the work contemplated in that grant.  
 
HLR will complete the tasks necessary to obtain the required IDOT approvals requires for these 
federally‐funded safety improvements and coordinate work with the city to provide opportuni‐
ties for discussions, reviews and approvals for project initiation and data collection. HLR will al‐
so order JULIE locates for utilities within the limits of the project and obtain and review existing 
as‐built plans available from the city. HLR’s services will also include checking existing right‐of‐
way and easements using tax maps, on‐line databases and subdivision plats available from the 
city’s records, conduct a field inspection of the project site to observe existing traffic operations 
and view locations of visible utilities and other features that must be accounted for in the pro‐
posed design.  A project description and proposed scope of services is included as Attachment 
A. 
 
HLR will also coordinate with Metra, the Union Pacific Railroad and ICC to determine their re‐
quirements  for  the  extent  of  improvements  needed  for  the  railroad  crossing  warning  devices 
and  for  their  preliminary  review  of  signal  sequence‐of‐operation  alternatives  and  conduct  a 
topographic  survey  sufficient  to  prepare  traffic  signal  plans.  The  engineering  services  agree‐
ment is included as Attachment B. 
 
OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS 
 
The  proposed  project  involves  safety  improvements  at  the  existing  McLean  Boulevard  Metra 
railroad crossing at Timber Drive. The improvements will include the adjoining signalized inter‐
section of McLean Boulevard with Big Timber Road to the north and the unsignalized intersec‐
tion with Timber Drive to the south.  
 
Improvements will include upgrades to the traffic signals at McLean Boulevard and Big Timber 
Road, including the possible addition of traffic signal control to McLean Boulevard and Timber 
Drive.  The  two  intersections  will  be  operated  by  one  signal  controller, which  will maintain  its 
integration  with  the  existing  railroad  warning  devices.  Modifications  to  the  traffic  signal–
railroad  interconnect  will  be  determined  via  coordination  between  the  city,  Metra,  the  UPRR 
and the ICC. The base proposal assumes that an ICC hearing will not be required. 
 
INTERESTED PERSONS CONTACTED 
 
None. 
 




                                                                                                            
                                                    2 
 
 




FINANCIAL ANALYSIS  
 
The contract for the engineering is $100,017. This total amount is reimbursable to the city from 
IDOT.  
 
BUDGET IMPACT 
 
      FUND(S)          ACCOUNT(S)         PROJECT #(S)        AMOUNT              AMOUNT 
                                                             BUDGETED             AVAILABLE 
        N/A                N/A                 N/A              N/A                 N/A 
 
LEGAL IMPACT 
 
The proposed agreement requires an exception to the procurement ordinance which requires 
approval by two thirds of the members of the city council. 
 
ALTERNATIVES 
 
The city council may choose not to approve the engineering services agreement with HLR for 
the  improvements  to  the  railroad‐highway  grade  crossing  at  McLean  Boulevard  and  Timber 
Drive. 
 
NEXT STEPS 
 
1.      Approve the engineering services agreement and authorize staff to execute the neces‐
        sary documents. 
 
2.      Remit the executed documents to HLR. 
 
 
Originators:          Gregory J. Rokos, Public Services Director 
 
Final Review:         Debra Nawrocki, Chief Financial Officer 
                      William A. Cogley, Corporation Counsel/Chief Development Officer 
                      Richard G. Kozal, Assistant City Manager/Chief Operating Officer 
                      Sean R. Stegall, City Manager 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
A.      Proposed Scope of Services 
B.      Engineering Services Agreement 
 



                                                                                                  
                                                3 
 
                                          AGREEMENT

      THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this ____ day of _________, 20_____, by and
between the CITY OF ELGIN, an Illinois municipal corporation (hereinafter referred to as “CITY”)
and Hampton, Lenzini, and Renwick, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as “ENGINEER”).

        WHEREAS, the CITY desires to engage the ENGINEER to furnish certain professional
services in connection with McLean and Timber Drive Railroad Signal Improvements (hereinafter
referred to as the PROJECT); and

        WHEREAS, the ENGINEER represents that he is in compliance with Illinois Statutes
relating to professional registration of individuals and has the necessary expertise and experience to
furnish such services upon the terms and conditions set forth herein below.

         NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby agreed by and between the CITY and the ENGINEER that
the CITY does hereby retain the ENGINEER for and in consideration of the mutual promises and
covenants contained herein, the sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged to act for and represent
it in the engineering matters involved in the PROJECT as described herein, subject to the following
terms and conditions and stipulations, to-wit:

1.     SCOPE OF SERVICES

       A.      All work hereunder shall be performed under the direction of the Director of Public
               Works of the CITY, herein after referred to as the “DIRECTOR”.

       B.      The project will involve four sections, project initiation and data collection;
               preliminary engineering to determine final solutions; design engineering; and
               construction observation.

       C.      A detailed Scope of Services is attached hereto as Attachment A.

2.     PROGRESS REPORTS

       A.      An outline project milestone schedule is provided hereinunder.

       B.      A detailed project schedule for the Project is included as Attachment B, attached
               hereto. Progress will be recorded on the project schedule and submitted monthly as a
               component of the Status Report described in C below.

       C.      The ENGINEER will submit to the DIRECTOR monthly a status report keyed to the
               project schedule. A brief narrative will be provided identifying progress, findings and
               outstanding issues.

3.     WORK PRODUCTS
     All work product prepared by the ENGINEER pursuant hereto including, but not limited to,
     reports, plans, designs, calculations, work drawings, studies, photographs, models and
     recommendations shall be the property of the CITY and shall be delivered to the CITY upon
     request of the DIRECTOR; provided, however, that the ENGINEER may retain copies of
     such work product for its records. ENGINEER’S execution of this Agreement shall
     constitute ENGINEER’S conveyance and assignment of all right, title and interest, including
     but not limited to any copyright interest, by the ENGINEER to the CITY of all such work
     product prepared by the ENGINEER pursuant to this Agreement. The CITY shall have the
     right either on its own or through such other engineers as determined by the CITY to utilize
     and/or amend such work product. Any such amendment to such work product shall be at the
     sole risk of the CITY. Such work product is not intended or represented to be suitable for
     reuse by the CITY on any extension to the PROJECT or on any other project, and such reuse
     shall be at the sole risk of the CITY without liability or legal exposure to the ENGINEER.

4.   PAYMENTS TO THE ENGINEER (Not To Exceed Method)

     A.     For services provided the ENGINEER shall be paid at the rate of 1 times the direct
            hourly rate of personnel employed on this PROJECT, with the total fee not to exceed
            $113,851 regardless of the actual costs incurred by the ENGINEER unless substantial
            modifications to the scope of the work are authorized in writing by the DIRECTOR.

     B.     For outside services provided by other firms or subconsultants, the CITY shall pay
            the ENGINEER the invoiced fee to the ENGINEER, plus 0.

     C.     The CITY shall make periodic payments to the ENGINEER based upon actual
            progress within 30 days after receipt and approval of invoice. Said periodic
            payments to the ENGINEER shall not exceed the amounts shown in the following
            schedule, and full payments for each task shall not be made until the task is
            completed and accepted by the DIRECTOR.

                                              (

                                    (payment schedule)
5.   INVOICES

     A.     The ENGINEER shall submit invoices in a format approved by the CITY. Progress
            reports (2C above) will be included with all payment requests.

     B.     The ENGINEER shall maintain records showing actual time devoted and cost
            incurred. The ENGINEER shall permit the authorized representative of the CITY to
            inspect and audit all data and records of the ENGINEER for work done under this
            Agreement. The ENGINEER shall make these records available at reasonable times
            during the Agreement period, and for a year after termination of this Agreement.

6.   TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT

                                             -2-
     Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, the CITY may terminate this Agreement at any
     time upon fifteen (15) days prior written notice to the ENGINEER. In the event that this
     Agreement is so terminated, the ENGINEER shall be paid for services actually performed
     and reimbursable expenses actually incurred prior to termination, except that reimbursement
     shall not exceed the task amounts set forth under Paragraph 4 above.

7.   TERM

     This Agreement shall become effective as of the date the ENGINEER is given a notice to
     proceed and, unless terminated for cause or pursuant to Article 5, shall be deemed concluded
     on the date the CITY determines that all of the ENGINEER's work under this Agreement is
     completed. A determination of completion shall not constitute a waiver of any rights or
     claims which the CITY may have or thereafter acquire with respect to any term or provision
     of the Agreement.

8.   NOTICE OF CLAIM

     If the ENGINEER wishes to make a claim for additional compensation as a result of action
     taken by the CITY, the ENGINEER shall give written notice of his claim within 15 days after
     occurrence of such action. No claim for additional compensation shall be valid unless so
     made. Any changes in the ENGINEER's fee shall be valid only to the extent that such
     changes are included in writing signed by the CITY and the ENGINEER. Regardless of the
     decision of the DIRECTOR relative to a claim submitted by the ENGINEER, all work
     required under this Agreement as determined by the DIRECTOR shall proceed without
     interruption.

9.   BREACH OF CONTRACT

     If either party violates or breaches any term of this Agreement, such violation or breach shall
     be deemed to constitute a default, and the other party has the right to seek such
     administrative, contractual or legal remedies as may be suitable to the violation or breach;
     and, in addition, if either party, by reason of any default, fails within fifteen (15) days after
     notice thereof by the other party to comply with the conditions of the Agreement, the other
     party may terminate this Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, or anything else to the
     contrary in this Agreement, with the sole exception of an action to recover the monies the
     CITY has agreed to pay to the ENGINEER pursuant to Paragraph 4 hereof, no action shall be
     commenced by the ENGINEER against the CITY for monetary damages. ENGINEER
     hereby further waives any and all claims or rights to interest on money claimed to be due
     pursuant to this Agreement, and waives any and all such rights to interest which it claims it
     may otherwise be entitled pursuant to law, including, but not limited to, the Local
     Government Prompt Payment Act (50 ILCS 501/1, et seq.), as amended, or the Illinois
     Interest Act (815 ILCS 205/1, et seq.), as amended. The parties hereto further agree that any
     action by the ENGINEER arising out of this Agreement must be filed within one year of the


                                               -3-
      date the alleged cause of action arose or the same will be time-barred. The provisions of this
      paragraph shall survive any expiration, completion and/or termination of this Agreement.

10.   INDEMNIFICATION

      To the fullest extent permitted by law, ENGINEER agrees to and shall indemnify, defend and
      hold harmless the CITY, its officers, employees, agents, boards and commissions from and
      against any and all claims, suits, judgments, costs, attorneys fees, damages or other relief,
      including but not limited to workers compensation claims, in any way resulting from or
      arising out of negligent actions or omissions of the ENGINEER in connection herewith,
      including negligence or omissions of employees or agents of the ENGINEER arising out of
      the performance of this Agreement. In the event of any action against the CITY, its officers,
      employees, agents, boards or commissions, covered by the foregoing duty to indemnify,
      defend and hold harmless such action shall be defended by legal counsel of the CITY's
      choosing. The provisions of this paragraph shall survive any expiration and/or termination of
      this Agreement.

11.   NO PERSONAL LIABILITY

      No official, director, officer, agent or employee of the CITY shall be charged personally or
      held contractually liable under any term or provision of this Agreement or because of their
      execution, approval or attempted execution of this Agreement.

12.   INSURANCE

      A.     Comprehensive Liability. The ENGINEER shall provide, pay for and maintain in
             effect, during the term of this Agreement, a policy of comprehensive general liability
             insurance with limits of at least $1,000,000 aggregate for bodily injury and
             $1,000,000 aggregate for property damage.

             The ENGINEER shall deliver to the DIRECTOR a Certification of Insurance naming
             the CITY as additional insured. The policy shall not be modified or terminated
             without thirty (30) days prior written notice to the DIRECTOR.

             The Certificate of Insurance which shall include Contractual obligation assumed by
             the ENGINEER under Article 10 entitled “Indemnification” shall be provided.

             This insurance shall apply as primary insurance with respect to any other insurance or
             self-insurance programs afforded to the CITY. There shall be no endorsement or
             modification of this insurance to make it excess over other available insurance,
             alternatively, if the insurance states that it is excess or prorated, it shall be endorsed
             to be primary with respect to the CITY.




                                               -4-
      B.      Comprehensive Automobile Liability. Comprehensive Automobile Liability
              Insurance covering all owned, non-owned and hired motor vehicles with limits of not
              less than $500,000 per occurrence for damage to property.

      C.      Combined Single Limit Policy. The requirements for insurance coverage for the
              general liability and auto exposures may be met with a combined single limit of
              $1,000,000 per occurrence subject to a $1,000,000 aggregate.

      D.      Professional Liability. The ENGINEER shall carry Engineers Professional Liability
              Insurance Covering claims resulting from error, omissions or negligent acts with a
              combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence. A Certificate of
              Insurance shall be submitted to the DIRECTOR as evidence of insurance protection.
              The policy shall not be modified or terminated without thirty (30) days prior written
              notice to the DIRECTOR.

13.   CONSTRUCTION MEANS,                    METHODS,          TECHNIQUES,           SEQUENCES,
      PROCEDURES AND SAFETY

      The ENGINEER shall not have control over or charge of and shall not be responsible for
      construction means, methods, techniques, sequences or procedures, or for safety precautions
      and programs in connection with the construction, unless specifically identified in the Scope
      of Services.

14.   NONDISCRIMINATION

      In all hiring or employment made possible or resulting from this Agreement, there shall be no
      discrimination against any employee or applicant for employment because of sex, age, race,
      color, creed, national origin, marital status, of the presence of any sensory, mental or physical
      handicap, unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification, and this requirement
      shall apply to, but not be limited to, the following: employment advertising, layoff or
      termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation and selection for training, including
      apprenticeship.

      No person shall be denied or subjected to discrimination in receipt of the benefit of any
      services or activities made possible by or resulting from this Agreement on the grounds of
      sex, race, color, creed, national origin, age except minimum age and retirement provisions,
      marital status or the presence of any sensory, mental or physical handicap. Any violation of
      this provision shall be considered a violation of a material provision of this Agreement and
      shall be grounds for cancellation, termination or suspension, in whole or in part, of the
      Agreement by the CITY.

15.   ASSIGNMENT AND SUCCESSORS




                                                -5-
      This Agreement and each and every portion thereof shall be binding upon the successors and
      the assigns of the parties hereto; provided, however, that no assignment shall be made
      without the prior written consent of the CITY.

16.   DELEGATIONS AND SUBCONTRACTORS

      Any assignment, delegation or subcontracting shall be subject to all the terms, conditions and
      other provisions of this Agreement and the ENGINEER shall remain liable to the CITY with
      respect to each and every item, condition and other provision hereof to the same extent that
      the ENGINEER would have been obligated if it had done the work itself and no assignment,
      delegation or subcontract had been made. Any proposed subcontractor shall require the
      CITY's advanced written approval.

17.   NO CO-PARTNERSHIP OR AGENCY

      This Agreement shall not be construed so as to create a partnership, joint venture,
      employment or other agency relationship between the parties hereto.

18.   SEVERABILITY

      The parties intend and agreed that, if any paragraph, sub-paragraph, phrase, clause or other
      provision of this Agreement, or any portion thereof, shall be held to be void or otherwise
      unenforceable, all other portions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.

19.   HEADINGS

      The headings of the several paragraphs of this Agreement are inserted only as a matter of
      convenience and for reference and in no way are they intended to define, limit or describe the
      scope of intent of any provision of this Agreement, nor shall they be construed to affect in
      any manner the terms and provisions hereof or the interpretation or construction thereof.

20.   MODIFICATION OR AMENDMENT

      This Agreement and its attachments constitutes the entire Agreement of the parties on the
      subject matter hereof and may not be changed, modified, discharged or extended except by
      written amendment duly executed by the parties. Each party agrees that no representations or
      warranties shall be binding upon the other party unless expressed in writing herein or in a
      duly executed amendment hereof, or change order as herein provided.
21.   APPLICABLE LAW

      This Agreement shall be deemed to have been made in, and shall be construed in accordance
      with the laws of the State of Illinois. Venue for the resolution of any disputes or the
      enforcement of any rights pursuant to this Agreement shall be in the Circuit Court of Kane
      County, Illinois.


                                              -6-
22.   NEWS RELEASES

      The ENGINEER may not issue any news releases without prior approval from the
      DIRECTOR, nor will the ENGINEER make public proposals developed under this
      Agreement without prior written approval from the DIRECTOR prior to said documentation
      becoming matters of public record.

23.   COOPERATION WITH OTHER CONSULTANTS

      The ENGINEER shall cooperate with any other consultants in the CITY's employ or any
      work associated with the PROJECT.

24.   INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC CONTRACTING

      The ENGINEER certifies hereby that it is not barred from bidding on this contract as a result
      of a violation of 720 ILCS 5/33E et seq. or any similar state or federal statute regarding bid
      rigging.

25.   SEXUAL HARASSMENT

      As a condition of this contract, the ENGINEER shall have written sexual harassment policies
      that include, at a minimum, the following information:

      A.     the illegality of sexual harassment;

      B.     the definition of sexual harassment under state law;

      C.     a description of sexual harassment, utilizing examples;

      D.     the vendor's internal complaint process including penalties;

      E.     the legal recourse, investigative and complaint process available through the Illinois
             Department of Human Rights, and the Illinois Human Rights Commission;

      F.     directions on how to contact the department and commission;

      G.     protection against retaliation as provided by Section 6-101 of the Human Rights Act.

      A copy of the policies shall be provided by ENGINEER to the Department of Human Rights
      upon request 775 ILCS 5/2-105.

26.   SUBSTANCE ABUSE PROGRAM.

      As a condition of this agreement, ENGINEER shall have in place a written substance abuse
      prevention program which meets or exceeds the program requirements in the Substance

                                              -7-
       Abuse Prevention Public Works Project Act at 820 ILCS 265/1 et seq. A copy of such policy
       shall be provided to the City’s Assistant City Manager prior to the entry into and execution of
       this agreement.

27.    WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS

       All recommendations and other communications by the ENGINEER to the DIRECTOR and
       to other participants which may affect cost or time of completion, shall be made or confirmed
       in writing. The DIRECTOR may also require other recommendations and communications
       by the ENGINEER be made or confirmed in writing.

28.    NOTICES

       All notices, reports and documents required under this Agreement shall be in writing and
       shall be mailed by First Class Mail, postage prepaid, addressed as follows:

       A.      As to CITY:

               Joseph Evers
               City Engineer
               City of Elgin
               150 Dexter Court
               Elgin, Illinois 60120-5555

       B.      As to ENGINEER:

               ____________________________
               ____________________________
               ____________________________

29.    COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS

         Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement it is expressly agreed and understood
that in connection with the performance of this Agreement that the ENGINEER shall comply with all
applicable Federal, State, City and other requirements of law, including, but not limited to, any
applicable requirements regarding prevailing wages, minimum wage, workplace safety and legal
status of employees. Without limiting the foregoing, ENGINEER hereby certifies, represents and
warrants to the CITY that all ENGINEER'S employees and/or agents who will be providing products
and/or services with respect to this Agreement shall be legal residents of the United States.
ENGINEER shall also at its expense secure all permits and licenses, pay all charges and fees and
give all notices necessary and incident to the due and lawful prosecution of the work, and/or the
products and/or services to be provided for in this Agreement. The CITY shall have the right to
audit any records in the possession or control of the ENGINEER to determine ENGINEER'S
compliance with the provisions of this section. In the event the CITY proceeds with such an audit
the ENGINEER shall make available to the CITY the ENGINEER'S relevant records at no cost to

                                                -8-
the CITY. ENGINEER shall pay any and all costs associated with any such audit.

        IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have entered into and executed this Agreement
effective as of the date and year first written above.


FOR THE CITY:                                                 FOR THE ENGINEER:


By                                                            By:
          City Manager                                        Name/Print:
                                                              Title:

Attest:


City Clerk




F:\Legal Dept\Agreement\ENGINEERING AGREEMENT-FORM-01-23-12.doc




                                                       -9-
                                       ATTACHMENT A
                                     SCOPE OF SERVICES


HLR will complete the following tasks to obtain the required IDOT approvals needed for these
federally- funded safety improvements. We will coordinate our work with the City as is timely to
provide opportunities for discussions, reviews and approvals.

Project Initiation and Data Collection

                                                                  -off meeting held at the Elgin
Public Works office on May 6.

                                   -built plans available from the City.
                       -of-way and easements using tax maps, on-line databases and subdivision
plats available from the City’s records.

locations of visible utilities and other features that must be accounted for in the proposed design.

improvements needed for the railroad crossing warning devices and for their preliminary review
of signal sequence-of-operation alternatives.

pavement centerlines and edges, curb lines, pavement markings, traffic signal and railroad signal
equipment, signs, visible utilities, visible right-of-way monumentation and features outside the
r.o.w. that may affect the placement of signal equipment. Import the survey data and prepare
CADD files for plan sheets.
                                       subconsultant, Rubino Engineering, to obtain soil borings
and a geotechnical report. We will review the findings to select proposed traffic signal mast arm
foundation designs.
￼￼￼380 Shepard Drive
Elgin, Illinois 60123-7010 Tel. 847.697.6700
Fax 847.697.6753
3085 Stevenson Drive, Suite 201 Springfield, Illinois 62703
Tel. 217.546.3400
1335 Lakeside Drive, Unit 4 Romeoville, Illinois 60446 Tel. 847.997.1211
Fax 217.546.8116
Proposed Scope of Services (continued) Page 2 of 3
                                     soil borings operation and deliver them to Prairie Analytical
Systems for lab analyses. This will provide soil characterization sampling for Illinois EPA
LPC#663 for disposal of excess excavated soils. Due to the railroad and gas stations adjoining
the intersections, it is assumed that contamination will be found.
Phase I (Preliminary) Engineering

signalized intersection. A future Timber Drive signal evaluation will be considered.
                                                                                        aerial
photo exhibit as required for the IDOT Phase I submittal package.

prepare a memorandum of our findings for the City’s review and use.

engineering.
I submittal package and submit to IDOT for District 1 approval.
Phase II (Design) Engineering
   Design and prepare plans for temporary and permanent traffic signals including pavement
markings, pay items, quantities, cost estimates, specifications and special provisions. Prepare the
traffic signal sequence of operation, railroad preemption sequence of operation and Emergency
Vehicle Preemption (EVP) sequence of operation in a chart format.

modifications required by Metra, the UPRR or ICC for the integration of the traffic signals with
the railroad warning devices.


   Assist City staff with the preparation and updates of the IDOT-Local Agency Agreement and
the Project Program Information forms.
￼￼
Proposed Scope of Services (continued) Page 3 of 3
Optional Services Available Upon Request
Although not included in the base scope of services, HLR will provide the following optional
services upon the City’s request.
                             -in-right-out at Timber Drive is desired the following will be needed:
o Obtain peak period turning-movement traffic counts at McLean Blvd / Big Timber Road and
McLean Blvd / Timber Drive, classified by vehicle type, bicycles and pedestrians. This will
include tracing counts of vehicle movements that cross the railroad tracks and enter or exit
Timber Drive. This information may be desired if the ICC or railroad recommends restricting
Timber Drive to right turns only as a safety measure. The data will demonstrate that most large
truck traffic enters Timber Drive from the McLean Blvd north approach.
o Analyze traffic flow through the intersection based on future traffic projections using the
Highway Capacity Software (HCS)
o Prepare an Intersection Design Study (IDS) and submit to IDOT for approval
                                                                                             the
railroad warning system and/or modifications to the traffic signal plan and sequences of
operation. These hearings are typically held in Chicago.




                                               - 11 -
  ATTACHMENT B
PROJECT SCHEDULE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGENDA ITEM:       B  
MEETING DATE:  July 8, 2015 
 
      ITEM: 
      Intergovernmental  Agreement  with  Illinois  Department  of  Transportation  and  Metra  Rail  for 
      Improvements to a Railroad‐Highway Grade Crossing (No cost to the City) 
       
      OBJECTIVE: 
      Improvements  to  the  railroad‐highway  grade  crossing  warning  devices  and  traffic  signal  at 
      Mclean Boulevard and Timber Drive by Illinois Department of Transportation and Metra Rail.  
       
      RECOMMENDATION: 
      Approve  the  Intergovernmental  Agreement  with  Illinois  Department  of  Transportation  and 
      Metra Rail for improvements to the railroad‐highway grade crossing at McLean Boulevard and 
      Timber Drive.  
       
       
      The engineering firm of Hampton, Lenzini & Renwick, Inc. (HLR) obtained for the city a grant to 
      pay  for  the  signalization  improvements  that  will  be  constructed  by  the  Illinois  Department  of 
      Transportation in the amount of $610,000.  
       
      Work is expected commence in the late summer of 2016 with final completion late that year or 
      in the spring of 2017. 
       
      BACKGROUND 
       
      Representatives from Metra Rail and the Illinois Commerce Commission (ICC) identified neces‐
      sary  improvements  for  the  railroad‐highway  grade  crossing  at  McLean  Boulevard  and  Timber 
      Drive. The city’s contract engineers, Hampton,  Lenzini & Renwick, Inc. (HLR), represented the 
      city’s interest during that inspection in conjunction with its traffic operations agreement with 
      the city. The McLean Boulevard and Timber Drive grade crossing has experienced an inordinate 
      number of vehicle crashes with the railroad crossing gates with thirteen reports identifying gate 
      damage between January 1, 2009 and July 1, 2013.  
       
      Recommendations  were  outlined  following  the  inspection  which  include  changes  to  both  the 
      traffic  signal  system  and  the  railroad  gate  system.  Attachment  A  is  the  preliminary  improve‐
      ments  shown  at  the  location  site.  Local  funding  was  unavailable  in  July,  2013  to  support  the 
      recommended  improvements  at  an  estimated  cost  of  $610,000.  Funding  has  since  been  se‐
 




cured for the improvements through the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) at no cost 
to the city. 
 
After reviewing the recommendations from the annual inspection, observing the existing rail‐
road and traffic signal system and review of the Metra police crash reports, IDOT is approving 
and funding the following improvements to the area: 
 
     Eliminate  the  existing  protected  permissive  left‐turn  traffic  signal  sequence  at  Timber 
        Drive and replace it with a protected left turn only 
     Install railroad cantilevers for northbound and southbound McLean Boulevard 
     Revise the railroad warning system to display railroad flashing signals for five seconds in 
        advance of lowering the railroad gates 
     Install a battery backup for the traffic signal system 
     Modify traffic signal cabinet for a second (redundant) railroad preemption input 
     Establish remote connection capabilities and connection for remote monitoring 
         
OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS 
 
The intergovernmental agreement establishes a scope of services for work to be performed at 
McLean Boulevard and Timber Drive by both Metra and the city (Attachment B). The costs in‐
curred by the city will be reimbursed by IDOT which include planning, design and construction 
of the improvement. Once the agreement is approved, the cost of the Metra train portion will 
be added to the agreement and submitted to IDOT. Once signed by all parties, the design can 
begin. 
 
HLR anticipates that construction would begin late summer of 2016  with possible completion 
by end of 2016 or spring of 2017. 
 
INTERESTED PERSONS CONTACTED 
 
None. 
 
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS  
 
None. 
 
BUDGET IMPACT 
 
     FUND(S)            ACCOUNT(S)           PROJECT #(S)         AMOUNT               AMOUNT 
                                                                 BUDGETED              AVAILABLE 
       N/A                  N/A                   N/A               N/A                  N/A 
 




                                                                                                        
                                                   2 
 
 




LEGAL IMPACT 
 
None. 
 
ALTERNATIVES 
 
The city council may choose not to approve the Intergovernmental Agreement with IDOT and 
not have improvements made to the railroad‐highway grade crossing at McLean Boulevard and 
Timber Drive. 
 
NEXT STEPS 
 
1.     Approve the intergovernmental agreement and authorize staff to execute the necessary 
       documents. 
2.     Remit the executed documents to IDOT. 
 
 
Originators:         Gregory J. Rokos, Public Services Director 
 
Final Review:        Debra Nawrocki, Chief Financial Officer 
                     William A. Cogley, Corporation Counsel/Chief Development Officer 
                     Richard G. Kozal, Assistant City Manager/Chief Operating Officer 
                     Sean R. Stegall, City Manager 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
A.     Location Map and Preliminary Improvements 
B.     Intergovernmental Agreement 




                                                                                            
                                              3 
 
Preliminary Signal Layout
Big Timber Rd & McLean Blvd
          Elgin, IL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGENDA ITEM:       C 
MEETING DATE:  July 8, 2015 
 
      ITEM:  
      Amendment to Chapter 11.24.202 B of the Municipal Code, Entitled “One Way Streets and Al‐
      leys”  
      (No cost to the City) 
       
      OBJECTIVE: 
      Amend ordinance to facilitate the construction and operation of parking on Lincoln Avenue and 
      to create a one‐way street to the east.  
       
      RECOMMENDATION: 
      Approve  the  installation  of  a  one‐way  street  eastbound  for  Lincoln  Avenue  between  Dundee 
      Avenue and Hill Avenue.  
       
       
      The city council’s provisional approval of new diagonal parking on Lincoln Street Between Dun‐
      dee  Avenue  and  Hill  Street  necessitates  the  Lincoln  Street  being  turned  into  a  one‐way,  east‐
      bound thoroughfare because of its reduced width from the new parking configuration. 
       
      BACKGROUND 
       
      On June 24, 2015, council approved a bid to construct additional parking along Lincoln Avenue 
      between  Dundee  Avenue  and  Hill  Avenue.  To  complete  the  project  and  use  the  new  parking 
      spaces, the traffic must flow in one direction.  
       
      OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS 
       
      The  only  means  of  creating  additional  parking  spaces  on  Lincoln  Street  is  to  change  the  on‐
      street  parking  configuration  from  parallel  to  diagonal  parking.  Because  of  the  width  of  the 
      street, when diagonal parking is added, the vehicles will encroach several feet into the street. 
      This requires restricting the street to one lane.  
       
      The staff has determined that most of the business customers seeking to park on Lincoln Street 
      will be entering from Dundee Avenue. Accordingly, the one‐way designation for Lincoln Street 
      will be eastbound from Dundee Avenue to Hill Avenue the east. This change will require one‐
      way  signs  to  be  placed  at  both  ends  of  the  block  with  “Do  Not  Enter’  at  the  east  end  of  the 
      block.  
 




 
The signs will be installed prior to construction to allow for the street to be open during con‐
struction. Once the construction is completed, the new parking slots will be in the direction of 
the signage.  
 
INTERESTED PERSONS CONTACTED 
 
Each adjacent property owner was contacted and all agreed to the proposed change to a one‐
way street.  
 
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS  
 
The cost for sign material is nominal at approximately $750 and will be paid for from the Gen‐
eral Fund, Traffic Division, Sign Material fund. 
 
BUDGET IMPACT 
 
    FUND(S)            ACCOUNT(S)           PROJECT #(S)        AMOUNT              AMOUNT 
                                                               BUDGETED             AVAILABLE 
   General Fund  010‐3321‐753.19‐08                            $75,500              $24,100 
 
LEGAL IMPACT 
 
None. 
 
ALTERNATIVES 
 
The council may choose not to install the signs and leave the current traffic control in place.  
 
NEXT STEPS 
 
1.     Approve the ordinance change per staff recommendation. 
        
2.     Install the signs. 
 
 
Originators:           Gregory J. Rokos, Public Services Director 
 
Final Review:          Debra Nawrocki, Chief Financial Officer 
                       William A. Cogley, Corporation Counsel 
                       Richard G. Kozal, Assistant City Manager/Chief Operating Officer 
                       Sean R. Stegall, City Manager 
 



                                                                                                     
                                                 2 
 
 




 
ATTACHMENTS 
A.    Area Map 




                        
                  3 
 
    Attachment A 
 




                                 

    Lincoln and Hill Streets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGENDA ITEM:     D    
MEETING DATE:  July 8, 2015 
 
      ITEM:  
      Amendment to Chapter 11.32.030 of the Municipal Code, Entitled “Stop Intersections”  
      (No cost to the City) 
       
      OBJECTIVE: 
      Increase the safety of the Spring Street and Summit Street intersection by making it a four‐way 
      stop intersection. 
       
      RECOMMENDATION: 
      Approve the installation of four‐way stop signs at the intersection of Spring and Summit Streets. 
       
       
      A recently completed traffic study of the Spring and Summit Streets intersection determined that 
      while traffic volumes do not meet the recommended threshold for a four‐way stop intersection 
      recommended by the industry standard Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, the intersec‐
      tion’s crash history nonetheless warrants the use of all‐way stop control. 
       
      BACKGROUND 
       
      The increasing frequency of traffic accidents occurring at the intersection of Spring and Summit 
      Streets prompted the city conduct a traffic study at that location to identify possible traffic con‐
      trol changes that would reduce further accidents.  
       
      OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS 
       
      The city utilizes its on‐call consultant, Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc. (HLR), to supplement 
      staff for traffic engineering issues. HLR was asked to perform a traffic study at Spring and Sum‐
      mit Streets in order to determine if there was a need for changes in traffic control at the loca‐
      tion. HLR conducted the study at a cost of $2,236 which is included in the multi‐year traffic en‐
      gineering services agreement.  
       
      The traffic study determined that while traffic volumes do not meet the recommended thresh‐
      old for a four‐way stop intersection recommended by the industry standard Manual on Uniform 
      Traffic Control Devices, the intersection’s crash history nonetheless warrants the use of all‐way 
      stop control. 
        
 




 
INTERESTED PERSONS CONTACTED 
 
None. 
 
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS  
 
None. 
 
BUDGET IMPACT 
 
The cost for sign material is nominal at approximately $500 and will be paid for from the Gen‐
eral Fund, Traffic Division, Sign Material fund. 
 
    FUND(S)           ACCOUNT(S)          PROJECT #(S)         AMOUNT           AMOUNT 
                                                              BUDGETED          AVAILABLE 
   General Fund  010‐3321‐753.19‐08                          $75,500             $24,100 
 
LEGAL IMPACT 
 
None.  
 
ALTERNATIVES 
 
The council may choose not to install the four‐way stop signs and leave the current traffic con‐
trol in place.  
 
NEXT STEPS 
 
1.       Approve the ordinance change per staff recommendation. 
          
2.       Install the four‐way stop with advance warning. 
 
 
Originators:          Gregory J. Rokos, Public Services Director 
 
Final Review:         Debra Nawrocki, Chief Financial Officer 
                      William A. Cogley, Corporation Counsel 
                      Richard G. Kozal, Assistant City Manager/Chief Operating Officer 
                      Sean R. Stegall, City Manager 
 
 
 



                                                                                                  
                                               2 
 
 




ATTACHMENTS 
A.    Traffic Study from Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc.  




                                                                 
                                             3 
 
                                                        Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc.
                                                                        380 Shepard Drive, Elgin, IL 60123-7010



Memorandum
To:    Gregory J Rokos, PE
       Director of Public Services, City of Elgin
From: P. Brien Funk, PE, PTOE
Date: 4/21/2015
Re:    Summit Street & Spring Street – Intersection Traffic Study



Hampton, Lenzini & Renwick, Inc. (HLR) has conducted a traffic study of the subject intersection. The
study performed included a site visit to observe existing conditions, collection of traffic counts, and a
review of recent crash data. This memo summarizes the analysis and presents the findings and
recommendations of HLR.

Existing Conditions

The existing intersection of Summit Street and Spring Street is a four-approach intersection with stop-
control on eastbound and westbound Summit Street. The intersection is located in a residential
neighborhood with a 30 miles per hour (mph) speed limit on both streets. The intersection
approaches are relatively flat with no horizontal curves. Parking was previously allowed on the west
side of Spring Street both north and south of the intersection. Parking is restricted on Summit Street
in the vicinity of the intersection. Recently, the City has restricted parking on Spring Street within the
block north and south of the subject intersection. There is a single overhead street light in the
northeast quadrant.

Analysis
Traffic Volumes
Traffic count data was collected at the subject intersection on Tuesday, February 15, 2015. The
counts were collected from 6:00 AM to 7:00 PM and included turning movement data as well as
vehicle classification. These counts were used to determine whether all-way stop control is warranted
based on the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) guidance. A summary of the
traffic counts can be seen in Exhibit 1 attached to this memo.

According to the MUTCD, all-way stop control should be considered when the total major street
volume (both approaches) exceeds 300 vehicles per hour (vph) for any 8 hours of the day while the
side street approach volumes exceed 200 vph for the same 8 hours and there is observed average
delay of at least 30 seconds per vehicle during the peak hour. A review of the traffic counts at the
intersection shows that the existing traffic volumes do not meet the thresholds recommended by the
MUTCD during any hours of the day. The highest hourly volume observed on the mainline during the
day is 241 vph.

Although Spring Street is the uncontrolled movement and considered the major street, traffic volumes
on Summit Street are actually higher during parts of the day. The MUTCD thresholds were also
checked using Summit Street as the major street and the volumes still did not meet the MUTCD



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 3
                                                                                       April 21, 2015
guidelines for all-way stop control during any hours of the day. The highest hourly volume observed
on Summit Street during the day is 294 vph for two hours. During these two hours, the volumes on
Spring Street are 197 vph and 185 vph. These are the closest two hours to meeting the MUTCD
recommended volume threshold. However, capacity analyses of these hours show side street delays
of less than 13 seconds per vehicle.

Crash Data
Intersection crash data was provided by the City of Elgin from 2012, 2013, 2014, and the beginning of
2015. The MUTCD suggests considering all-way stop control at an intersection with five or more
reported crashes in a 12-month period that are susceptible to correction by an all-way stop
installation. Crash types that are most susceptible to correction by all-way stop control are Angle and
Turning crashes. An Angle crash is one which involves two vehicles traveling in perpendicular
directions (N-E, N-W, S-E, S-W, etc.) that collide at an angle. A Turning crash is one in which one or
more of the vehicles involved are making a turning movement at the moment of impact. These two
crash types often occur when one vehicle is on an uncontrolled approach while another vehicle either
disobeys the side-street stop control or does not see the approaching vehicle and enters the
intersection, resulting in a collision. All-way stop control limits these types of crashes by eliminating
the uncontrolled movement. This reduces the risks of collision because if one vehicle disobeys the
stop control, other vehicles will either be stopped or travelling at a much lower speed due to the
presence of stop control. It is significantly less likely that two vehicles will violate the stop control
simultaneously than only one vehicle. A review of the crash data showed eight crashes in 2012, six
crashes in 2013, and eight crashes in 2014. Crash reports indicate that all but one of these crashes
are Angle or Turning crashes.

The review also included looking at date, time, weather, roadway surface condition, lighting, crash
type, vehicle type, and vehicle direction of travel to see if any patterns existed that might indicate
common contributing factors to the crashes. There were no distinct patterns found during the review.
Nearly all crashes occurred in clear weather conditions with dry pavement and daylight. There are no
patterns in directionality or type of vehicles involved in the crashes. Table 1 attached to this memo
provides a summary of the crash data provided.

Intersection Sight Distance
An on-site review of existing intersection sight distance was performed to check if adequate sight
distance is provided given the existing design speed (35 mph). This site review was performed after
the new parking restrictions were implemented along Spring Street. The Illinois Department of
Transportation’s (IDOT) Bureau of Local Roads and Streets Manual (BLRS) requires a sight distance
of 390 feet for a road with design speed of 35 mph (BLRS Figure 28-3D). This distance is measured
from the center of the lane in which the stopped vehicle waits to cross or enter the major street (BLRS
Figure 28-3C). Field measurements showed that greater than 390 feet of sight distance is provided
for the both the eastbound and westbound approaches in both directions with one obstruction present
in the westbound sight triangle view of northbound traffic. The measured intersection sight distance
triangles can be seen in Exhibits 2 and 3 attached to this memo.

The view of northbound oncoming traffic for a stopped westbound vehicle is momentarily blocked by a
large mature tree in the parkway approximately 110 feet south of the intersection on the east side of
the street. The crash reports show that there were five crashes over the past three plus years which
involved a westbound vehicle and a northbound vehicle, approximately 20% of the reported crashes.

Prior to the recently implemented parking restrictions on Spring Street, sight distance may have been
obstructed for eastbound drivers looking both north and south depending on the number and type of
vehicles parked. There were 11 crashes reported over the past three plus years which involved an
eastbound vehicle, approximately 46% of all reported crashes. As parking was already restricted at
the time of this review, HLR cannot state certainly that parked vehicles obstructed sight distance.
                                                                                       April 21, 2015
If the intersection is changed to all-way stop control, stopping sight distance becomes the sight
distance of interest. The IDOT Bureau of Local Roads and Streets Manual requires a stopping sight
distance of 250 feet for a road with design speed of 35 mph (BLRS Figure 28-1A). Field
measurements show that greater than 250 feet of stopping sight distance is available on all four
approaches. The approaches are all relatively flat with no horizontal curvature.

Findings and Recommendations

The results of the analysis show that while traffic volumes do not meet the recommended MUTCD
thresholds for all-way stop control, the crash history of the intersection warrants the use of all-way
stop control. The number of recorded crashes is above the five crashes in a 12-month period
recommendation and nearly all are susceptible to correction by the installation of all-way stop control.
There is also an obstruction present in the westbound sight triangle which may contribute to sight
distance related crashes involving northbound vehicles.

An all-way stop control capacity analysis of the am and pm peak hours was performed to check
anticipated intersection operations if all-way stop control were installed. The results of the capacity
analysis show that all approaches are anticipated to operate at a level-of-service (LOS) A for both
peak hours. Under the existing two-way stop control, Summit Street operates at LOS B for both peak
periods. The installation of all-way stop control is expected to improve the operations on Summit
Street, which is actually the heavier movement during the pm peak hour.

After reviewing the existing intersection conditions, intersection sight distance, traffic volumes, and
crash history, HLR recommends the implementation of all-way stop control at the intersection of
Summit Street and Spring Street. New STOP signs (MUTCD R1-1) should be installed on the Spring
Street approaches. HLR recommends placing new STOP signs on both the right-hand and left-hand
sides of the roadway for both north- and southbound approaches. This will improve not only visibility
but also awareness of the new condition. It is also recommended to install a supplemental ALL WAY
(MUTCD R1-3P) plaque under all STOP signs at the intersection. The new STOP signs should have
two orange flags installed above the signs, according to MUTCD Section 2A.15, for a period of 30
days after installation. In addition, temporary STOP SIGN AHEAD (MUTCD W3-1) signs should be
placed at least 100 feet in advance, per MUTCD Figure 2C-4, of the new STOP signs on Spring
Street for a period of 30 days after installation. This will also improve awareness of the new condition.
Installers should take care when placing the advanced warning signs to ensure that they do not block
the sight distance out of a driveway. Mounting the signs at the proper mounting height of seven feet
above the parkway, per MUTCD Figure 2A-2, should help avoid this concern. The use of changeable
message signs is not recommended in this area due to their large size causing sight distance issues
from residential driveways.

After the implementation of the all-way stop control, the recently instated parking restrictions on
Spring Street can be removed and previous parking conditions can be restored. Prior to the parking
restriction, vehicles were not allowed to park within 90 feet of Summit Street on the southbound
approach. This should remain the case in order to not block the STOP sign. HLR recommends
continued monitoring of this intersection to verify that the change on traffic control has improved the
crash rate of the intersection.

If you have any questions or comments regarding this study please contact Alex Garbe or Brien Funk
at 847-697-6700.
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N Spring St -- Summit St                                                                                              QC JOB #: 13207801
 CITY/STATE: Elgin, IL                                                                                                           DATE: Tue, Feb 17 2015
                       91           87                          Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM                                     3.3        4.6

                         0    71    20
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 8:15 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 1.4 10.0


       73    5                             5    98
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                       0.0       1.0
             51              0.88         72
                                                                                                                          2.0                       0.0
       60    4                            21   101
                                                                                                                    3.3   25.0                      4.8       4.0

                         1    77    30
                                                                                                                                  0.0 5.2 3.3

                       96           108
                                                                                                                                  3.1        4.6



                              0                                                                                                    0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                           0

             4                             0                                                                              0                           0

                                                                                                                          0                           0

                              0                                                                                                    0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                           NA                                                                              NA                        NA




                             NA                                                                                                         NA



 15-Min Count                 N Spring St                    N Spring St                   Summit St                  Summit St                    Total       Hourly
    Period                   (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right       U     Left    Thru Right    U       Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right         U
    6:00 AM        0            3      1       0      3       11      0    0        1       8     1     0     0        6     0          0           34
    6:15 AM        1            5      2       0      3        9      1    0        0       6     1     0     2        4     0          0           34
    6:30 AM        0            5      3       0      4       12      0    0        0       5     1     0     3        7     1          0           41
    6:45 AM        1            7      5       0      1       17      0    0        0       3     1     0     8        4     0          0           47              156
    7:00 AM        0            5      3       0      3        9      0    0        0      10     1     0     2        6     1          0           40              162
    7:15 AM        0           16      2       0      4       19      0    0        0       8     0     0     1       18     0          0           68              196
    7:30 AM        0           10    10        0      3       21      0    0        0       7     1     0     7       21     1          0           81              236
    7:45 AM        0           25      5       0      6       17      0    0        0      14     1     0     2       13     0          0           83              272
    8:00 AM        1           19      5       0      7       17      0    0        2      14     1     0     4       21     1          0           92              324
    8:15 AM        0           23    10        0      4       16      0    0        3      16     1     0     8       17     3          0          101              357
    8:30 AM        0           11      8       0      3       20      0    0        2      11     0     0     7       17     1          0           80              356
    8:45 AM        0           11      5       0      3        9      1    0        1      10     1     0     4       22     2          0           69              342
    9:00 AM        1            7      6       0      1       11      1    0        0       8     1     0     2        9     4          0           51              301
    9:15 AM        0           11      7       0      2       14      0    0        0       5     0     0     6       12     1          0           58              258
    9:30 AM        1           10      3       0      3       13      0    0        0       5     0     0     9       14     2          0           60              238
    9:45 AM        1           12      5       0      1        9      0    0        0      15     0     0     4       12     3          0           62              231
   10:00 AM        0           12      8       0      1        6      0    0        0       8     0     0     4       12     1          0           52              232
   10:15 AM        0            6      4       0      3       11      0    0        0       9     0     0     3        8     2          0           46              220
   10:30 AM        0           12      3       0      1       14      0    0        0       8     1     0     1        9     1          0           50              210
   10:45 AM        0           17      8       0      2        8      0    0        1      13     0     0     4       18     1          0           72              220




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     0          92     40     0         16     64      0     0        12     64      4    0     32      68    12     0                       404
 Heavy Trucks      0           4      0                0      0      0               0      0      0           0       0     0                              4
  Pedestrians                  0                              0                             8                          0                                    8
    Bicycles       0           0      0               0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/26/2015 11:56 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                              Exhibit 1
                                                                                                                                        Traffic Counts
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N Spring St -- Summit St                                                                                            QC JOB #: 13207802
 CITY/STATE: Elgin, IL                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Feb 17 2015
                       56           64                        Peak-Hour: 12:15 PM -- 1:15 PM                                    0.0        1.6

                         1    46    9
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 12:30 PM -- 12:45 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0


       80    1                           10   106
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             58              0.91        75
                                                                                                                         1.7                      0.0
       60    1                           21    84
                                                                                                                   1.7   0.0                      0.0       1.2

                         4    53    17
                                                                                                                                0.0 1.9 0.0

                       68           74
                                                                                                                                0.0        1.4



                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

             1                            0                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                          NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min Count                 N Spring St                   N Spring St                   Summit St                  Summit St                   Total       Hourly
    Period                   (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right      U     Left    Thru Right    U       Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
   11:00 AM        1           20      5      0      2       11      2    0        1      11     0     0     3       16     1         0           73
   11:15 AM        0            5      3      0      1        9      0    0        0      12     0     0     5       13     1         0           49
   11:30 AM        1           10      5      0      2       17      0    0        0      14     3     0     4       18     1         0           75
   11:45 AM        0           11      5      0      4       11      0    0        1      13     1     0     2       16     0         0           64              261
   12:00 PM        0           15      6      0      2       12      0    0        0      11     0     0     6       11     2         0           65              253
   12:15 PM        1           13      2      0      3        9      0    0        0      15     0     0     1       19     5         0           68              272
   12:30 PM        2           12      5      0      1       12      0    0        0      13     0     0     8       26     2         0           81              278
   12:45 PM        1           17      4      0      2       13      1    0        0      13     0     0     7       17     1         0           76              290
    1:00 PM        0           11      6      0      3       12      0    0        1      17     1     0     5       13     2         0           71              296
    1:15 PM        0           13      1      0      0        9      0    0        0       8     0     0     5       12     3         0           51              279
    1:30 PM        0           11    10       0      3       11      1    0        0      11     0     0     2       18     1         0           68              266
    1:45 PM        1           10      8      0      3       16      1    0        1      12     0     0     4       26     1         0           83              273




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     8          48     20     0        4      48      0     0        0      52      0    0     32     104     8     0                      324
 Heavy Trucks      0           0      0              0       0      0              0       4      0           0       0     0                             4
  Pedestrians                  0                             0                             0                          0                                   0
    Bicycles       0           0      0              0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/26/2015 11:56 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                            Exhibit 1
                                                                                                                                      Traffic Counts
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N Spring St -- Summit St                                                                                              QC JOB #: 13207803
 CITY/STATE: Elgin, IL                                                                                                           DATE: Tue, Feb 17 2015
                       88           125                          Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                    0.0        0.0

                         3    75    10
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0


       151   1                             21   206
                                                                                                                     1.3   0.0                      0.0       0.5
             69              0.93         142
                                                                                                                           1.4                      0.7
       74    4                             43   118
                                                                                                                     1.4   0.0                      0.0       0.8

                         6   103 39
                                                                                                                                  16.7 0.0 0.0

                    122             148
                                                                                                                                  0.0        0.7



                              0                                                                                                    0    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

             2                              0                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                              0                                                                                                    0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                           NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                         NA



 15-Min Count                 N Spring St                     N Spring St                   Summit St                  Summit St                   Total       Hourly
    Period                   (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right    U       Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    2:00 PM        0           16      5        0      0       14      0    0        0       9     1     0      4      19     2         0           70
    2:15 PM        1           17    12         0      0       16      0    0        2      16     1     0     13      19     4         0          101
    2:30 PM        0           24      8        0      7       35      2    0        3      15     2     0      9      27     1         0          133
    2:45 PM        1           20      9        0      0       19      1    0        0      20     1     0      4      22     5         0          102              406
    3:00 PM        0           22    12         0      5       10      1    0        0      16     2     0      5      20     6         0           99              435
    3:15 PM        1           36      8        0      1       19      0    0        0      25     0     0      6      31     2         0          129              463
    3:30 PM        2           27     11        0      6       15      0    0        0      20     0     0     12      39     1         0          133              463
    3:45 PM        2           22      5        0      1       17      0    0        1      20     2     0      9      26     7         0          112              473
    4:00 PM        0           18      7        0      3       11      0    0        1      31     0     0     12      37     3         0          123              497
    4:15 PM        2           18     11        0      3       16      0    0        1      25     1     0      6      37     3         0          123              491
    4:30 PM        2           20      6        0      4       17      0    0        0      30     0     0      6      33     3         0          121              479
    4:45 PM        1           24    13         0      0       16      0    0        0       9     1     0      9      34     4         0          111              478
    5:00 PM        0           27      5        0      5       21      0    0        0      22     2     0     11      43     2         0          138              493
    5:15 PM        2           26     11        0      2       20      2    0        1      19     1     0     10      38     7         0          139              509
    5:30 PM        3           26    10         0      3       18      1    0        0      19     0     0     13      27     8         0          128              516
    5:45 PM        1           25      8        0      2       13      1    0        0      16     2     0      5      30     6         0          109              514
    6:00 PM        3           28      8        0      1       21      1    0        1      15     1     0     13      32     8         0          132              508
    6:15 PM        0           22      7        0      2       11      2    0        0      18     4     0      3      22     4         0           95              464
    6:30 PM        0           22      5        0      0       20      0    0        0      19     1     0     11      22     6         0          106              442
    6:45 PM        0           19      5        0      1        9      0    0        0       9     2     0      8      21     2         0           76              409




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U         Left   Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     8         104     44     0          8      80      8     0        4      76      4    0     40     152    28     0                      556
 Heavy Trucks      4           0      0                0       0      0              0       0      0           0       4     0                             8
  Pedestrians                  0                               0                             0                          0                                   0
    Bicycles       0           0      0                0       0      0              0       0      0           0       0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/26/2015 11:56 AM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                              Exhibit 1
                                                                                                                                        Traffic Counts
   Exhibit 2
Westbound Intersection
   Sight Distance
  Spring St & Summit St
   Exhibit 3
Eastbound Intersection
    Sight Distance
  Spring St & Summit St
Table 1: Intersection Crash Summary
 Crash                                       Rodway                        Collision        Injury
             Date        Time      Weather                  Light                                         Unit 1 Dir Unit 2 Dir
 Record                                      Surface                         Type      K   A      B   C
12-42797     4/4/2012   12:00 PM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle                    1      EB         SB
12-64854    7/25/2012   11:20 AM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle         1     1           EB        NB
12-65232    7/27/2012    8:45 AM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle               2           EB         SB
12-56263    6/13/2012    5:52 AM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle                           EB        NB
12-69290    8/17/2012   12:55 PM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle                           WB         SB
12-69586    8/18/2012   10:55 PM    Clear      Dry     Darkness, Lighted     Angle                           WB        NB
12-70281    8/22/2012    9:05 AM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle                           EB         SB
12-76476    9/22/2012    6:07 PM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle                           WB         SB
13-09140    2/16/2013    2:18 PM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle               1           WB         SB
13-58036    10/4/2013   10:30 AM    Clear      Dry         Daylight         Turning                          EB         SB
13-61041   10/17/2013    4:23 PM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle                           WB        NB
13-62121   10/22/2013    4:23 PM    Rain       Wet         Daylight          Angle                           WB        NB
13-65720    11/7/2013    9:28 AM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle                           EB         SB
13-75541   12/27/2013   11:27 AM    Clear      Wet         Daylight          Angle                           EB        NB
14-05989    1/30/2014    5:27 PM    Clear      Wet     Darkness, Lighted    Turning                          WB        Unk.
14-20789     4/7/2014    4:01 PM    Clear      Wet         Daylight          Angle                           WB        NB
14-24531    4/23/2014    4:36 PM     Unk       Dry         Daylight          Angle               1           WB         SB
14-33939     6/2/2014    9:02 PM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle                           EB        NB
14-42086     7/6/2014    5:36 PM    Clear      Dry         Daylight        Sideswipe             3    5      EB         SB
14-57712     9/9/2014    4:42 PM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle                           WB         SB
14-69265    11/1/2014   11:57 AM    Clear      Dry         Daylight          Angle                           WB         SB
14-72267   11/16/2014   12:27 PM     Unk       Ice         Daylight          Angle                    3      WB         SB
15-05074    1/27/2015    8:06 AM    Clear      Wet         Daylight          Angle     1   1     1           EB         SB
15-06700     2/3/2015    3:54 PM    Snow      Snow         Daylight          Angle                           WB        NB
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGENDA ITEM:       E
                    
MEETING DATE:  July 8, 2015 
 
      ITEM: 
      Maintenance  Agreement  with  Motorola  Solutions,  Inc.  to  Support  Intrado  911  and  Non‐
      Emergency Phone Systems  
      ($106,110) 
       
      OBJECTIVE: 
      Provide continued support for the Elgin Emergency Communications and Backup Dispatch cen‐
      ters emergency 911 and non‐emergency phone systems.  
       
      RECOMMENDATION: 
      Authorize  the  maintenance  agreement  with  Motorola  Solutions  Inc.  for  the  Intrado  911  and 
      non‐emergency phone systems in the amount of $106,110.  
       
       
      The city council in 2013 approved a backup phone system for both emergency (911) and non‐
      emergency communication. An annual maintenance agreement for the backup system was in‐
      cluded as part that approval and was incorporated into the city’s operating budget. The warran‐
      ty period for the backup phone system has expired and the city’s first annual payment on the 
      maintenance agreement is now due. 
       
      BACKGROUND 
       
      The city council in 2012 authorized the purchase of a new police and fire radio system which 
      included the purchase of a backup emergency (911) and non‐emergency phone systems (Intra‐
      do).  System  development  sessions  occurred  in 2013,  inclusive  of  Intrado,  Motorola  Solutions, 
      and the city’s build team. The system was customized for the city’s needs and installed at the 
      primary and backup communications centers. Upon installation, final configuration and training 
      occurred.  The  city  went  live  in  February  2014  with  the  new  Intrado  system,  starting  the  one‐
      year warranty period from the manufacturer.  
       
      Intrado’s system provides the gateway between those calling Elgin’s communication center for 
      help and the city’s emergency responders. The warranty period has now ended and the police 
      and fire departments are seeking continued support for this critical component to public safety. 
       




                                                                                                                 
                                                           1 
         
 




OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS 
 
The Intrado systems consist of completely redundant infrastructure at the primary and backup 
dispatch centers to ensure that the system remains operational despite the loss of either site’s 
functionality.  Prior  to  these  new  systems  being  implemented,  there  was  only  a  single  control 
point that existed at the primary center. As these phone systems are required to be continuous‐
ly operational, it is recommended that they be maintained by Motorola Solutions Field Service 
Organization  for  hardware  and  software,  inclusive  of  advance  hardware  replacements  in  the 
event of a failure.  
 
Support also includes proactive monitoring of the city’s systems by Motorola’s Managed Net‐
work Operations Center on a 24/7/365 basis. This center will automatically initiate the diagno‐
sis of issues and dispatch personnel if needed. The proposed contract will support the system 
through December 31, 2015.  
 
INTERESTED PERSONS CONTACTED 
 
None.  
 
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS  
 
The cost of the Maintenance Agreement with Motorola Solutions is $106,110, which is less than 
the $117,273 that was estimated when the contract was presented to the city council in 2012. 
There  are  sufficient  funds  in  the  Police  Communications  Repair  and  Maintenance  Services 
budget to support this contract.  
 
BUDGET IMPACT 
 
       FUND(S)                 ACCOUNT(S)            PROJECT        AMOUNT               AMOUNT 
                                                        #(S)       BUDGETED             AVAILABLE 
    General Fund           010‐2306‐731.40‐08           N/A          $208,100            $182,650 
 
LEGAL IMPACT 
 
The proposed agreement requires an exception to the procurement ordinance which requires 
approval by two thirds of the members of the city council. 
 
ALTERNATIVES 
 
The city council may elect not to approve the agreement with Motorola Solutions, Inc. and di‐
rect staff to seek alternative support methods. 
 
 



                                                                                                          
                                                    2 
 
 




 
NEXT STEPS 
 
Execute Maintenance Agreements with Motorola Solutions for RFP’s submitted.  
 
 
Originators:         Michael Bayard, Public Safety System Specialist 
                     Ana Lalley, Commander 
                     Jeffrey Swoboda, Chief of Police 
 
Final Review:        Debra Nawrocki, Chief Financial Officer 
                     William A. Cogley, Corporation Counsel/Chief Development Officer 
                     Richard G. Kozal, Assistant City Manager/Chief Operating Officer 
                     Sean R. Stegall, City Manager 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
A.     Motorola Solutions Inc., Maintenance Service Agreement 
B.     Ten Year Spreadsheet from RFP 12‐053 
 
 




                                                                                          
                                              3 
 
                                                                                       SERVICES AGREEMENT

Attn: National Service Support/4th fl                                                 Contract Number: S00001025108
1301 East Algonquin Road                                                              Contract Modifier:
(800) 247-2346

                                 Date: 02/13/2015

       Company Name:             City of Elgin                                           Required P.O.: No
                    Attn:                                                                 Customer # : 1000260737
        Billing Address:         151 Douglas                                              Bill to Tag # : 0004
        City, State, Zip:        Elgin, IL 60120                                    Contract Start Date: 02/01/2015
      Customer Contact:          Public Safety Systems Specialist                    Contract End Date: 01/31/2016
                 Phone:          (847) 289-2574                                    Anniversary Day: Jan 31st
                                                                                        Payment Cycle: ANNUAL
                                                                                                  PO # :



  QTY        MODEL/OPTION               SERVICES DESCRIPTION                                               MONTHLY           EXTENDED
                                                                                                           EXT               AMT
                                        ***** Recurring Services *****
             SVC01SVC1101C              INFRASTRUCTURE REPAIR WITH ADV REPL                                     $192.50             $2,310.00
     2         SVC060AD                   INTRADO 911 SITE
             SVC01SVC1102C              DISPATCH SERVICE                                                          $72.50             $870.00
     2         SVC084AD                   INTRADO 911 SITE
             SVC01SVC1405C              NETWORK PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE A                                        $74.06             $888.72
     2         SVC126AD                   INTRADO 911 SITE
             SVC01SVC1410C              ONSITE INFRASTRUCTURE                                                      INCLUDED BELOW
                                        RESPONSE-STANDARD - FSO SUPPORT
     2         SVC093AD                   INTRADO 911 SITE
             SVC01SVC1420C              SP - LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE REPAIR                                        $553.85             $6,646.20
     2                                    INTRADO 911 SITE
             SVC02SVC0447A              SP-INTRADO ONSITE SUPPORT                                            $3,759.84             $45,118.08
    18                                     911 CALL TAKER POSITION
             SVC02SVC0449A              SP-INTRADO SOFTWARE SUBSCRIPTION                                     $3,358.97             $40,307.64
     2                                     INTRADO 911 SITE
             SVC02SVC0450A              SP-INTRADO SOFTWARE PROTECTION & TECH                                   $830.77             $9,969.24
                                        SUPPORT
     2                                     INTRADO 911 SITE

  SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS -           ATTACH                       Subtotal - Recurring Services                $8,842.49            $106,109.88
  STATEMENT OF WORK FOR PERFORMANCE DESCRIPTIONS
                                                                     Subtotal - One-Time Event
                                                                                      Services                      $ .00               $ .00
                                                                                                 Total       $8,842.49            $106,109.88
                                                                                             Taxes                   -                      -
  Intrado Site IDs:
                                                                                        Grand Total          $8,842.49            $106,109.88
  INTRD01401D33 - 911 MAIN DISPATCH                                  THIS SERVICE AMOUNT IS SUBJECT TO STATE AND LOCAL TAXING
                                                                    JURISDICTIONS WHERE APPLICABLE, TO BE VERIFIED BY MOTOROLA.
  CENTER
  INTRD01401D34 - 911 BACKUP DISPATCH
  CENTER
                                                    Subcontractor(s)                                       City              State
                                                    MOTOROLA SYSTEM SUPPORT CENTER                         ELGIN             IL
                                          MOTOROLA - STARCOM 21 (DO999)             SCHAUMBU      IL
                                                                                    RG
                                          MOTOROLA SYSTEM SUPPORT CTR-CALL          SCHAUMBU      IL
                                          CENTER DO066                              RG
                                          INTRADO INC                               LONGMONT      CO
I received Statements of Work that describe the services provided on this Agreement. Motorola's Service Terms
and Conditions, a copy of which is attached to this Service Agreement, is incorporated herein by this reference.


AUTHORIZED CUSTOMER SIGNATURE                             TITLE                           DATE


CUSTOMER (PRINT NAME)


MOTOROLA REPRESENTATIVE(SIGNATURE)                        TITLE                           DATE

PATTY BLOCKER                                             847-683-9560
MOTOROLA REPRESENTATIVE(PRINT NAME)                       PHONE

Company Name:          City of Elgin
Contract Number:       S00001025108
Contract Modifier:
Contract Start Date:   02/01/2015
Contract End Date:     01/31/2016
                                               Service Terms and Conditions

Motorola, I nc. ( “Motorola”) an d t he c ustomer nam ed i n t his Agreement ( “Customer”) her eby agree as
follows:

Section 1         APPLICABILITY

These Service Terms and Conditions apply to service contracts whereby Motorola will provide to
Customer either (1) maintenance, support, or other services under a Motorola Service Agreement, or (2)
installation services under a Motorola Installation Agreement.

Section 2         DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION

2.1.    “Agreement” means these Service Terms and Conditions; the cover page for the Service
Agreement or t he I nstallation A greement, as ap plicable; and any ot her at tachments, al l of w hich ar e
incorporated herein by this reference. In interpreting this Agreement and resolving any ambiguities, these
Service Terms and Conditions take precedence over any cover page, and the cover page takes
precedence over any attachments, unless the cover page or attachment states otherwise.

2.2.     “Equipment” means the equipment that is specified in the attachments or is subsequently added
to this Agreement.

2.3.     “Services” means those installation, maintenance, support, training, and other services described
in this Agreement.

Section 3         ACCEPTANCE

Customer ac cepts t hese S ervice T erms and C onditions and a grees t o p ay t he pr ices s et f orth i n t he
Agreement. This Agreement becomes binding only when accepted in writing by Motorola. The term of
this Agreement begins on the “Start Date” indicated in this Agreement.

Section 4         SCOPE OF SERVICES

4.1.    Motorola will provide the Services described in this Agreement or in a more detailed statement of
work or other document attached to this Agreement. At Customer’s request, Motorola may also provide
additional services at Motorola’s then-applicable rates for the services.

4.2.     If Motorola is pr oviding S ervices f or E quipment, M otorola parts or par ts of equ al q uality will be
used; t he E quipment will be serviced a t l evels s et forth i n t he m anufacturer’s pr oduct m anuals; and
routine service procedures that are prescribed by Motorola will be followed.

4.3.      If C ustomer pur chases f rom Mot orola ad ditional equipment t hat bec omes par t of t he s ame
system as the i nitial E quipment, t he addi tional e quipment may b e ad ded t o this A greement and will b e
billed at the applicable rates after the warranty for that additional equipment expires.

4.4.    All Equipment must be in good working order on the Start Date or when additional equipment is
added to the Agreement. Upon reasonable request by Motorola, Customer will provide a complete serial
and m odel number list of t he Equipment. Customer m ust promptly notify Motorola in writing when any
Equipment is lost, damaged, stolen or taken out of service. Customer’s obligation to pay Service fees for
this Equipment will terminate at the end of the month in which Motorola receives the written notice.

4.5.   Customer must s pecifically identify a ny Equipment t hat i s l abeled intrinsically s afe for us e i n
hazardous environments.




Service Terms and Conditions   City of Elgin    March 6, 2013
4.6.   If Equipment cannot, in Motorola’s reasonable opinion, be properly or economically serviced for
any reason, Motorola may modify the scope of Services related to that Equipment; remove that
Equipment from the Agreement; or increase the price to Service that Equipment.

4.7.  Customer must promptly not ify Mo torola of any E quipment f ailure. Motorola will r espond to
Customer's not ification in a m anner c onsistent with t he l evel of S ervice pur chased as i ndicated in t his
Agreement.

Section 5         EXCLUDED SERVICES

5.1.    Service excludes the repair or replacement of Equipment that has become defective or damaged
from use in other than the normal, customary, intended, and authorized manner; use not in compliance
with applicable industry standards; excessive wear and tear; or accident, liquids, power surges, neglect,
acts of God or other force majeure events.

5.2.     Unless specifically included in this Agreement, Service excludes items that are consumed in the
normal oper ation of t he Equipment, s uch as b atteries or magnetic t apes.; upgrading or r eprogramming
Equipment; ac cessories, belt c lips, b attery c hargers, c ustom or s pecial products, m odified un its, or
software; and r epair or maintenance of an y transmission line, antenna, microwave equipment, tower or
tower l ighting, du plexer, c ombiner, or multicoupler. Mot orola h as no ob ligations f or an y t ransmission
medium, such as telephone lines, computer networks, the internet or the worldwide web, or for Equipment
malfunction caused by the transmission medium.

Section 6         TIME AND PLACE OF SERVICE

Service will be provided at the location specified in this Agreement. When Motorola performs service at
Customer’s l ocation, C ustomer w ill pr ovide M otorola, at no charge, a no n-hazardous work env ironment
with adequate shelter, heat, light, and power and with full and free access to the Equipment. Waivers of
liability from Motorola or its subcontractors will not be imposed as a site access requirement. Customer
will provide all information pertaining to the hardware and software elements of any system with which the
Equipment i s i nterfacing s o t hat M otorola m ay per form i ts S ervices. U nless otherwise s tated in t his
Agreement, t he hours of S ervice will be 8:30 a. m. t o 4: 30 p.m., l ocal t ime, e xcluding weekends an d
holidays. Unless otherwise stated in this Agreement, the price for the Services exclude any charges or
expenses associated with helicopter or other unusual access requirements; if these charges or expenses
are reasonably incurred by Motorola in rendering the Services, Customer agrees to reimburse Motorola
for those charges and expenses.

Section 7         CUSTOMER CONTACT

Customer will provide Motorola with designated points of contact (list of names and phone numbers) that
will be available twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week, and an escalation procedure to
enable Customer’s personnel to maintain contact, as needed, with Motorola.

Section 8         PAYMENT

Unless alternative payment terms are stated in this Agreement, Motorola will invoice Customer in
advance for each payment period. All other charges will be billed monthly, and Customer must pay each
invoice in U.S. dollars within twenty (20) days of the invoice date. Customer will reimburse Motorola for
all property taxes, sales and use taxes, excise taxes, and other taxes or assessments that are levied as a
result of Services rendered under this Agreement (except income, profit, and franchise taxes of Motorola)
by any governmental entity.




Service Terms and Conditions   City of Elgin   March 6, 2013
Section 9         WARRANTY

Motorola warrants that its Services under this Agreement will be free of defects in materials and
workmanship for a period of ninety (90) days from the date the performance of the Services are
completed. In the event of a breach of this warranty, Customer’s sole remedy is to require Motorola to re-
perform the non-conforming Service or to refund, on a pro-rata basis, the fees paid for the non-
conforming S ervice. MO TOROLA D ISCLAIMS A LL O THER WARRANTIES, EX PRESS O R I MPLIED,
INCLUDING T HE I MPLIED WARRANTIES O F M ERCHANTABILITY A ND F ITNESS F OR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Section 10        DEFAULT/TERMINATION

10.1. If either party defaults in the performance of this Agreement, the other party will give to the non-
performing par ty a written and d etailed no tice of t he default. T he no n-performing par ty will have t hirty
(30) days thereafter to provide a written plan to cure the default that is acceptable to the other party and
begin i mplementing t he c ure pl an i mmediately af ter plan appr oval. I f t he n on-performing par ty f ails t o
provide or i mplement t he c ure plan, then the i njured party, i n addition to any other rights a vailable t o it
under law, may immediately terminate this Agreement effective upon giving a written notice of termination
to the defaulting party.

10.2. Any termination of t his Agreement will not relieve either party of obligations previously incurred
pursuant to this Agreement, including payments which may be due and owing at the time of termination.
All sums owed by Customer to Motorola will become due and payable immediately upon termination of
this Agreement. Upon the effective date of termination, Motorola will have no further obligation to provide
Services.

10.3     Customer may terminate this Agreement (in whole or in part) at any time. To exercise this right,
Customer must pr ovide t o Mot orola f ormal written notice at least thirty ( 30) d ays i n a dvance of t he
effective date of the termination. The notice must explicitly state the effective date of the termination and
whether the c ontract t ermination is i n whole or in part, and i f in par t, which part is being t erminated. I f
Customer ex ercises t his r ight t o t erminate f or c onvenience, i t will be l iable t o pay M otorola f or: 1) t he
portion of t he C ontract Price at tributable to t he E quipment and/ or Software d elivered, and all s ervices
performed, on or bef ore t he ef fective dat e of t he t ermination; 2) f or r easonable pr oposal or c ontract
preparation c osts and ex penses; and 3) c osts and ex penses t hat Mot orola i ncurs as a r esult of t he
termination of t he A greement, i ncluding b ut not limited t o c osts and ex penses as sociated with
cancellation of subcontracts, restocking fees, and removal of installation or test equipment. If the portion
of t he C ontract P rice and /or t he r ecoverable c osts and ex penses at tributable t o t he t ermination of t he
Agreement are not readily ascertainable, Customer will be liable to pay Motorola for the reasonable value
of such Equipment, Software, services, costs and expenses. Notwithstanding the above, Customer shall
have no right to terminate this Agreement for the purpose of procuring any of the same or substantially
similar Equipment, Software, or services from another vendor, or if Motorola has given Customer a notice
of default and such default has not been cured.

Section 11        LIMITATION OF LIABILITY

Except f or per sonal i njury or deat h, Mo torola's t otal l iability, whether f or br each of c ontract, w arranty,
negligence, strict liability in tort, or otherwise, will be limited to the direct damages recoverable under law,
but not to exceed the price of twelve (12) months of Service provided under this Agreement. ALTHOUGH
THE PARTIES ACKNOWLEDGE THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH LOSSES OR DAMAGES, THEY AGREE
THAT MOTOROLA WILL NOT BE LIABLE FOR ANY COMMERCIAL LOSS; INCONVENIENCE; LOSS
OF U SE, T IME, D ATA, GOOD W ILL, REVENUES, PROFITS O R SAVINGS; OR O THER S PECIAL,
INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES IN ANY WAY RELATED TO OR ARISING
FROM THIS AGREEMENT OR THE PERFORMANCE OF SERVICES BY MOTOROLA PURSUANT TO
THIS AGREEMENT. No action for contract breach or otherwise relating to the transactions contemplated
by this Agreement may be brought more than one (1) year after the accrual of the cause of action, except



Service Terms and Conditions   City of Elgin   March 6, 2013
for money due upon an open account. This limitation of liability will survive the expiration or termination
of this Agreement and applies notwithstanding any contrary provision.

Section 12        EXCLUSIVE TERMS AND CONDITIONS

12.1. This A greement s upersedes al l pr ior and c oncurrent agr eements and und erstandings bet ween
the par ties, whether written or or al, r elated t o t he S ervices, and t here a re no agr eements or
representations concerning the subject matter of this Agreement except for those expressed herein. The
Agreement m ay n ot b e a mended or m odified ex cept b y a written agreement s igned b y aut horized
representatives of both parties.

12.2. Customer agrees to reference this Agreement on any purchase order issued in furtherance of this
Agreement, however, an omission of the reference to this Agreement will not affect its applicability. In no
event will either par ty be bo und by an y t erms contained in a C ustomer purchase or der,
acknowledgement, or other w ritings u nless: the purchase or der, ac knowledgement, or ot her writing
specifically refers to this Agreement; clearly indicate the intention of both parties to override and modify
this A greement; and the purchase or der, ac knowledgement, or ot her writing is s igned b y au thorized
representatives of both parties.

Section 13        PROPRIETARY INFORMATION; CONFIDENTIALITY; INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
RIGHTS

13.1. Any information or data in the form of specifications, drawings, reprints, technical information or
otherwise f urnished t o C ustomer under this A greement will r emain Mot orola’s p roperty, will b e deem ed
proprietary, will be kept confidential, and will be promptly returned at Motorola's request. Customer may
not disclose, without Motorola's written permission or as required by law, any confidential information or
data to a ny person, or us e confidential information or dat a f or an y purpose o ther t han performing i ts
obligations u nder t his Agreement. T he o bligations set f orth i n t his Section s urvive t he ex piration or
termination of this Agreement.

13.2. Unless otherwise agreed in writing, no commercial, financial or technical information disclosed in
any manner or at any time by Customer to Motorola will be deemed secret or confidential. Motorola will
have no obligation t o pr ovide C ustomer w ith access t o i ts c onfidential and proprietary information,
including cost and pricing data.

13.3. This Agreement does not grant directly or by implication, estoppel, or otherwise, any ownership
right or license under any Motorola patent, copyright, trade secret, or other intellectual property, including
any intellectual pr operty c reated as a r esult of or r elated t o t he Equipment s old or S ervices per formed
under this Agreement.

Section 14        FCC LICENSES AND OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS

Customer i s solely r esponsible f or obt aining l icenses or ot her aut horizations r equired b y t he F ederal
Communications Commission or any other federal, state, or local government agency and for complying
with a ll r ules and r egulations r equired b y governmental agencies. N either Motorola n or an y of i ts
employees is an agent or representative of Customer in any governmental matters.

Section 15        COVENANT NOT TO EMPLOY

During the term of this Agreement and continuing for a period of two (2) years thereafter, Customer will
not hire, engage on contract, solicit the employment of, or recommend employment to any third party of
any employee of Motorola or its subcontractors without the prior written authorization of Motorola. This
provision a pplies only to those em ployees of Mot orola or its s ubcontractors who are r esponsible f or
rendering services under t his A greement. If this pr ovision i s found t o be o verly broad u nder ap plicable
law, it will be modified as necessary to conform to applicable law.



Service Terms and Conditions   City of Elgin   March 6, 2013
Section 16        MATERIALS, TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT

All tools, equipment, dies, gauges, models, drawings or other materials paid for or furnished by Motorola
for t he pu rpose of t his A greement w ill be an d r emain t he s ole pr operty of Mot orola. C ustomer w ill
safeguard all such property while it is in Customer’s custody or control, be liable for any loss or damage
to this property, an d return i t t o Motorola upon r equest. This property will b e hel d b y C ustomer f or
Motorola’s use without charge and may be removed from Customer’s premises by Motorola at any time
without restriction.

Section 17        GENERAL TERMS

17.1. If an y c ourt r enders an y portion of t his Agreement unenf orceable, the r emaining t erms w ill
continue in full force and effect.

17.2. This A greement a nd the r ights and d uties of t he p arties will b e g overned a nd i nterpreted in
accordance with the laws of the State in which the Services are performed.

17.3.    Failure to exercise any right will not operate as a waiver of that right, power, or privilege.

17.4. Neither party is liable for delays or lack of performance resulting from any causes that are beyond
that party’s reasonable control, such as strikes, material shortages, or acts of God.

17.5. Motorola m ay as sign i ts r ights and ob ligations, and m ay s ubcontract a ny portion of i ts
performance, under this Agreement.

17.6. This agr eement s hall t erminate upon the ef fective date of t he warranty c overage r elated to t he
City of Elgin contract # 12-23241/CR.




Service Terms and Conditions   City of Elgin   March 6, 2013
TCO for Ten Year Model:
                                                                                                 Elgin TCO for 10 Year model STARCOM Integrated Solution


$11,687,441.00                      2012                 2013          2014           2015           2016           2017          2018          2019             2020             2021           2022                2023            10 Yr. TCO

Payment Terms                   $                 - $11,371,432.00 $   316,009.00 $           - $            - $            - $           - $              - $           -    $          - $               -                         $ 11,687,441.00
Console/NICE
Maintenance                                         Install       Warranty       Warranty       Warranty        Warranty     Warranty       $   210,935.86 $     214,002.94   $ 217,244.03   $   220,561.35 $ 223,857.19 $ 1,086,601.37
Subscriber                                                                                                                   $                                                $
Maintenance                                         Warranty      Warranty       Warranty       Warranty        Warranty     51,100.00      $   52,513.00 $       54,088.39   55,711.04      $   57,382.37 $         59,103.84 $             329,898.64
                                                                                                                                                                              $
Microwave                                           Install       Warranty       Warranty      Warranty       Warranty       Warranty     $      11,559.95 $      11,906.75   12,263.95      $    12,631.87 $ 13,010.83 $     61,373.35
Intrado 911                                         Install       Warranty       $ 117,272.52 $    120,790.70 $ 124,414.42   $ 128,146.85 $     131,991.26 $     135,951.00   $ 140,029.53   $   144,230.41 $ 148,557.32 $ 1,191,384.00
Fire Station                                                                                                  $              $                                                $
Alerting                                            Install       Warranty       $   43,358.15 $    45,418.99 47,574.02      49,834.17    $     52,205.73 $       54,693.49   57,300.67      $   60,029.00     $     62,894.80 $             473,309.02
STARCOM Air
Time: 700 units                                     $           - Incentive      Incentive      $    273,120.00 $ 273,120.00 $ 273,120.00 $     273,120.00 $     273,120.00   $ 273,120.00 $     273,120.00 $ 273,120.00 $ 2,184,960.00
Total Annual
Investment                      $                 - $11,371,432.00 $   316,009.00 $   160,630.68 $   439,329.69 $ 445,108.44 $ 502,201.02 $     732,325.80 $     743,762.56 $ 755,669.22 $       767,955.00 $ 780,543.98 $ 17,014,967.39




RFP 12-053                                                                                                                                                                                            Use or disclosure of this proposal is subject to
RFP 12-053                                                                                                                                                                                                     to the restrictions on the cover page.
     Motorola Solutions Confidential Restricted                                                                                                                                                                                 Section 10 - Pricing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGENDA ITEM:       F 
MEETING DATE:  July 8, 2015 
 
      ITEM: 
      Amend the 50/50 and 75/25 Historic Architectural Rehabilitation Grant Programs to Combine 
      Funding From Both Programs into One Grant Program and Approve the List of Selected Recipi‐
      ents  to  Participate  in  the  2015  Round  of  the  Combined  Grant  Program  (50/50  Program: 
      $97,721; 75/25 Program: $144,000; Total Available funding: $241,721) 
       
      OBJECTIVE: 
      Increase the effectiveness of the use of historic grant program funds and award a grant to own‐
      ers of historic landmark properties or those located within the city’s historic districts for exteri‐
      or rehabilitation and restoration work to their residential properties. 
       
      RECOMMENDATION: 
      Amend the city’s Historic Architectural Rehabilitation Grant Programs to combine funding from 
      the 50/50 and 75/25 programs into one grant fund and award grants to eleven eligible selected 
      recipients in a total amount of $241,721. 
       
       
      The Historic Architectural Rehabilitation Grant program uses Riverboat proceeds to provide in‐
      centives to owners of residential property to offset the costs of exterior rehabilitation work. The 
      “50/50”  component  of  the  program  covers  half  of  the  costs  of  exterior  work  done  to  eligible 
      properties up to $20,000. The “75/25” component covers 75 percent of the costs of such work 
      up to $20,000 to low‐ and moderate‐income residential property owners. 
       
      The  incidence  of  applicants  seeking  grants  under  the  “75/25”  program  component  has  been 
      substantially decreasing over the years. For this grant funding round, there is only one applicant 
      and an award in the amount of $4,801 is being recommended.  
       
      A change in the manner in which funding is allocated under the Historic Architectural Rehabilita‐
      tion Grant program’s “50/50” and “75/25” components is being recommended to allow the staff 
      to  reallocate  the  available  funding  consistent  with  the  market  demand  for  the  two  program 
      components. 
       
      Five properties are being recommended for participation in the “50/50” program component for 
      a total of $97,721 in awards. 
       
       
 




 
BACKGROUND 
 
The  city  established  the  50/50  Historic  Architectural  Rehabilitation  Grant  program  in  1995  to 
provide incentives to owners of residential property to offset the costs of exterior rehabilitation 
work. Eligible properties either are in a locally designated historic district or designated as an 
individual  Elgin  landmark.  In  1998,  and  following  the  designation  of  the  Elgin  National  Watch 
Historic District which contained a larger low‐ to moderate income demographic, city of Elgin 
established  the  75/25  Historic  Architectural  Rehabilitation  Grant  Program  to  prioritize  incen‐
tives to low‐ to moderate‐income owners of residential property to offset their cost of exterior 
rehabilitation work. 
 
Each  program  currently  covers  either  50  percent  or  75  percent  of  the  costs  of  exterior  work 
done  to  eligible  properties  up  to  $20,000.  The  programs  are  now  in  their  nineteenth  funded 
year (funds were not allocated in 2012) with the city having allocated over $3.3 million in grant 
funds, resulting in a total investment of over $6.2 million in exterior rehabilitation costs. Since 
their inception, over 320 properties have participated in both programs, contributing to the re‐
vitalization of the city’s four historic districts and individual landmarks. 
 
Availability of the 2015 round of both programs was announced on February 6, 2015, with an 
application deadline of April 3, 2015. An email notification was sent to several preservation her‐
itage organizations as well as neighborhood groups. The grant program was also announced at 
various  meetings  and  through  a  press  release,  the  city’s  website,  Facebook  webpage  and 
Neighbor Newsletter. Applications were also made available at the city’s community develop‐
ment department office and mailed to those who inquired. 
 
Following  the  call  for  applications,  ten  applications  were  received  for  grants  from  the  50/50 
Program and only one application was received for a grant from the 75/25 Program. 
 
Challenges of the 75/25 Grant Program 
 
The 50/50 program is a very popular program and often quickly exhausts it’s allocated funding, 
resulting in many qualified projects remaining unfunded.  
 
In contrast, the 75/25 program does not receive as great a response as the 50/50 program and 
often results in excess unallocated or unused funding. In the past five years, the 50/50 Program 
has  received  74  applications  for  a  funding  whereas  the  75/25  Program  has  only  received  23. 
Based on availability of funding separately under each program, only 32 of 74 (43 percent) qual‐
ified projects in the 50/50 Program were funded. Specifically, following the announcements of 
the availability of funds during the last three years, the 75/25 Program received a total of five 
applications submitted for funding.  
 
                                   




                                                                                                           
                                                    2 
 
 




The following table summarizes a comparison of applications received between the two grant 
programs. 
 
Year                50/50 Grant Program                      75/25 Grant Program 
             Applications Received    Applications Funded    Applications Received     Applications Funded
2010                   33                       8                      10                      10 
2011                   14                       5                       8                       8 
2012                                            Program was not funded 
2013                   10                       9                       3                       3 
2014                    7                       5                       1                       1 
2015                   10                       5                       1                       1 
Totals                 74                      32                      23                      23 
 
As currently structured, each program is individually allocated funding through the city’s annual 
budget and the ordinance governing the 75/25 Program requires that excess unallocated or un‐
used funds remain in such program for the first nine months after which they may be reallocat‐
ed to qualified projects in the 50/50 program. Chapter 20.16.080 of the Elgin Municipal Code 
entitled “Use of Any Excess Funding,” provides for the following as it relates to the time frame 
for reallocating funds: 
 
        During the first nine (9) months of each calendar year any funds budgeted for the 75/25 
        historic/architectural rehabilitation grant program shall be utilized for such purpose. Af‐
        ter  such  initial  nine  (9) months  in  any  calendar  year  any  remaining  unallocated  or  un‐
        used funds for the 75/25 historic/architectural rehabilitation grant program may be real‐
        located  for  qualifying  properties  under  the  50/50  historic/architectural  rehabilitation 
        grant program. (Ord. G22‐05 § 1, 2005) 
 
Due to the separate budget allocation and the greater demand for grants in the 50/50 program, 
not all qualified 50/50 projects receive funds to begin improvements on their historic proper‐
ties. The current time frame for reallocation of excess funds requires unfunded 50/50 projects 
to wait nine months for funds to be reallocated, thereby, missing a whole construction season 
to be able to start work. 
 
To  address  these  challenges,  the  staff  and  the  Elgin  Heritage  Commission  are  recommending 
that  funding  from  the  75/25  and  50/50  programs  be  combined  into  a  single  histor‐
ic/architectural  rehabilitation  grant  fund.  The  staff  will  analyze  the  number  of  applications  it 
receives  for  the  75/25  and  50/50  programs  and  recommend  awards  for  those  programs  at  a 
level commensurate to the market demand evinced in the application pool. 
 
This change will make funding immediately available to all qualified projects within the summer 
months.  If  unallocated  or  unused  funds  still  continue  to  remain  after  the  first  round  of  grant 
awards, subsequent rounds of the grant will then be advertised to solicit additional participa‐
tion in the program. Applications submitted by low‐ to moderate‐income property owners will 




                                                                                                              
                                                     3 
 
 




continue to be reviewed based on the current criteria for selection and be eligible to receive 75 
percent of the eligible cost of exterior rehabilitation up to a maximum of $20,000.  
 
OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS 
 
Eligible properties must be residential or at least contain a primary residence on the property, if 
used for more than one land use. Additionally, applicants for the 75/25 Program must meet the 
current federal guidelines to qualify as low to moderate household income; and own and reside 
on the premises. A property nominated as a local landmark may also apply for the grant contin‐
gent  upon  the  approval  of  landmark  designation  prior  to  signing  of  the  grant  agreement.  A 
property cannot receive more than two grants in a five‐year period. However, there is no re‐
striction on the number of properties for which an individual property owner may have partici‐
pated in the program in any given year. Members of the Elgin Heritage Commission or the De‐
sign  Review  Subcommittee  may  apply  for  the  grant  if  they  meet  all  of  the  eligibility  require‐
ments. However, they cannot participate in the selection of grant recipients in that given year. 
 
The grant program guidelines allow a homeowner to either hire a contractor or to complete the 
grant project on his or her own. Each program reimbursement policy allows for a 50 or 75 per‐
cent reimbursement of the project costs up to $20,000, with the stipulation that material costs 
only will be reimbursed for the grantee who elects to do the work on his or her own. 
 
Historic Rehabilitation Grant Fund Program Overview 
 
     The programs each provide a 50 percent or 75 percent reimbursement grant of up to 
        $20,000 maximum.  
     Qualified applicants for the 75/25 Program must meet the current federal guidelines for 
        low to moderate household income and must own and occupy either an individual 
        landmark or residential property located within the historic district. 
     The minimum total project cost to qualify is $5,000 for the 50/50 Program and $2,500 
        for the 75/25 Program.  
     The grant funding covers exterior residential building rehabilitation projects. Detailed el‐
        igibility qualifications can be found in Attachment A, “2015 Historic Architectural Reha‐
        bilitation Grant Program Guideline”, pp. 4‐5. The 75/25 grant program additionally in‐
        cludes an exterior paint program wherein paint colors are subject to review. 
     Proposed projects require a minimum of two estimates from contractors who have the 
        following credentials: Renovation, Repair and Painting (RRP) Certification, Insurance 
        Certificate, and Contractor Letter of Warranty – three year minimum. Material costs on‐
        ly are reimbursed for projects performed by the property owner. 
     Properties must be fully code compliant on the exterior of the property with all applica‐
        ble codes prior to final payment. 
     Grants awarded to low‐ to moderate income property owners are non‐taxable. 
     The grant project completion time is eighteen months from the date of signing the 
        agreement. 




                                                                                                            
                                                    4 
 
 




 
Applicants must receive a minimum score of 40 points (the minimum threshold) out of a possi‐
ble 100 to qualify for the program. The following criteria were used to evaluate and score the 
applications that were submitted for the 2015 funding cycle. The maximum allowable points for 
a specific criterion are indicated in parenthesis as follows: 
 
     1.     Current historic significance of the structure (maximum of 15 points). This category 
            is based on existing professional surveys of the historic districts. Note:  An additional 
            10  points  are  granted  to  a  property  if  its  significance  rating  has  the  potential  to 
            change from non‐contributing to contributing, or contributing to significant after the 
            grant project is completed. 
 
     2.     Proposed work to the structure (maximum of 50 points). Reconstruction of missing 
            structures  and  restoration  work  on  primary  facades  score  higher  (50  points)  than 
            continuing maintenance (10 points). 
 
     3.     Evaluation of relative visual public benefit or impact to the streetscape (maximum of 
            30 points). Issues such as visibility and location within the neighborhood and antici‐
            pated change in appearance after completion of work are considered. This criterion 
            is evaluated solely by the Elgin Heritage Commission’s Grant Review Subcommittee. 
 
     4.     a.  50/50 Grant program: Occupancy (maximum of 5 points). Owner occupied hous‐
                 es score higher than non‐owner occupied rental properties 
            b.  75/25 Program: Property owner income – Low income (20 points); Moderate in‐
                 come (10 points) 
 
Before final disbursement of funds, recipients are required to sign an agreement with the city 
and complete all work. Additionally, the properties must be brought into exterior code compli‐
ance to fulfill the requirements of the program. If any of the grant recipients are unable to fulfill 
the requirements of the program, the next eligible applicant on the recommended list will be 
awarded a grant.  
 
Combining 75/25 and 50/50 Program Grant Funds  
 
Given the better response and limited funding available in the 50/50 program, staff is seeking 
council approval to combine funding from the 75/25 and 50/50 program into one historic reha‐
bilitation grant fund. A summary of qualified projects in both programs is as follows: 
                                 




                                                                                                              
                                                     5 
 
 




 
             2015 50/50 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL REHABILITATION GRANT APPLICANTS 
                                      Qualified Applicants 
                                                          Total 
          Owner                      Address                      Lowest Bid     Grant Amount 
                                                          Points 
    1.    Jim and Kelly            582 Park Street        87.33      $40,750.00           $20,000.00
          Langenberg 
          (Owner Occupied) 
          Proposed Project:  Complete reconstruction of missing features such as porch half‐round roof 
          extension, torch design above west side attic window; Exterior restoration; Scrape, prep and 
          paint entire house. 
    2.    Will and Maureen         625 Lillie Street     83.17         $40,550.00                     $20,000
          Alexander 
          (Owner Occupied) 
          Proposed Project:  Removal of aluminum siding at east side of house; Restoration of missing 
          architectural elements; Restore front and rear porch; Strip, prep and paint entire building. 
    3.    Renate Adams             612 N. Spring         75.17         $35,605.00                 $17,802.50
          (Owner Occupied)         Street                                             
          Proposed Project:  Reconstruction of new porch with architectural elements that are more 
          appropriate for when the house was built. 
    4.    Tim Ramseyer             211‐213 Michigan  71.50             $44.600.00                 $20,000.00
          (Non‐ Owner              Street 
          Occupied) 
          Proposed Project:  Reconstruction of front porch and rear porch; replacement of all windows 
          with aluminum clad wood windows to match existing in size and configuration; restore cor‐
          nice molding; installation of new 1st floor doors (2) to match original doors; repair 2nd floor 
          front door; scrape, remove existing exterior paint to expose original brick on façade. 
    5.    John and Dawn            711 Douglas Ave.  66.00             $46,100.00                 $19,918.50
          Laskey                                                                       (eligible for $20,000)
          (Owner occupied)                                                                Shortfall of $81.50
          Proposed Project:  Restore missing window hoods; Restore 16 original double hung windows; 
          Replace existing aluminum storm windows with wood storm windows; Replace existing 
          1960’s era casement windows with new aluminum clad wood casement windows. 
                                                         Total Amount Requested                       $97,721
                                                                                        
                                                            Grant Funds Remaining                       $0.00
                                                                                        
                                  




                                                                                                                 
                                                     6 
 
 




              Applicants That Qualified but Funds Are Currently Unavailable in the 50/50 Program 
          6.  James Stendler and  821 Brook Street         63.50           $20,950.00           $10,475.00
               Scott Metlicka 
               (Owner Occupied) 
               Proposed Project:  Removal of existing asphalt shingles and replacement with new cedar 
               shingles. 
          7.  John Boline             162 College Street  57.88            $14,130.00            $7,065.00
               (Owner Occupied) 
               Proposed Project:  Removal of aluminum storm windows and replace with wood storm win‐
               dows. 
          8.  Zhixian Guo             305‐307 North        56.25          $36,277.23            $18,138.62
               (Non‐owner occu‐       Street 
               pied) 
                Proposed Project:  Installation of new wood doors and wood windows; construction of new 
                front porch and restoration of rear porches; paint entire building 
          9.    Rosalia and Joaquin  372 N. Spring           52.13          $17,800.00          $8,900.00
                Cornejo                 Street 
                (Owner occupied) 

                Proposed Project:  Restoration of smaller porch attached to house, restoration of side porch 
          10.  Roy and Evelyn         705 W. Highland        47.25          $28,000.00             $14,000.00
               Chapman                Avenue 
               (Owner Occupied) 
               Proposed Project:  Repair integral gutters, repair deteriorated elements on porch, jack up 
               porte‐cochere to secure column brackets and straighten columns, repair failing rubble stone 
               foundation. 
                                       Shortfall of Project #5 at 711 Douglas Avenue                   $81.50
                          Total Shortfall Needed to Fund all qualified 50/50 Projects             $58,660.12
 
The  only  75/25  project  recommended  by  the  Elgin  Heritage  Commission’s  Grant  Review  Sub‐
committee to be funded by the grant program is listed in the table below. The funding is pro‐
posed to amend an on‐going selected 75/25 project awarded in 2013 for a total amount not to 
exceed $20,000. 
 
                  2015 75/25 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL REHABILITATION GRANT APPLICANTS 
                                               Qualified Applicants 
                                                                       Material Esti‐
               Owner               Address          Total Points                            Grant Amount 
                                                                            mate 
     1     Rich Hirschberg      109 Hill Avenue         45.50          $6,401.14                   $4,800.86
          Proposed Project: Rehabilitate front porch, additional funds for garage work to be added to previ‐
          ous grant funding of garage 
            Amount funded to project in 2013                                                      $14,137.50
            Total proposed amended project funds (not to exceed $20,000)                          $18,938.36
 




                                                                                                                 
                                                         7 
 
 




As  noted  in  the  preceding  summary  table,  the  50/50  Program  has  a  shortfall  of  $58,660.12, 
based on the number of qualified applications received. The total request for funding from the 
50/50 Program is $156,381.12 with only $97,721 allocated to the program. However, the total 
request for funds from the 75/25 Program is $4,800.86 with $144,000 allocated to the program. 
Combining the funding from the two programs will help cover shortfall in the 50/50 Program 
allowing funding in a total amount of $161,181.98 for eleven qualified projects to immediately 
receive funding and begin work on their projects. 
 
INTERESTED PERSONS CONTACTED 
 
A call for applications was announced on February 6, 2015, with an application deadline of April 
3, 2015. An email notification was sent to several preservation heritage organizations as well as 
neighborhood groups. The grant program was also announced at various meetings and through 
a  press  release,  the  city’s  website,  Facebook  webpage  and  Neighbor  Newsletter.  Applications 
were  also  made  available  at  the  city’s  community  development  department  and  mailed  to 
those who inquired. 
 
The  Elgin  Heritage  Commission’s  Grant  Review  Subcommittee  (consisting  of  members  of  the 
Design Review Subcommittee) convened to consider and score all applications received for the 
first round of grants on May 12, 2015.  
 
Additionally, the recommendation to combine 50/50 and 75/25 program funds was considered 
and recommended by the Elgin Heritage Commission in consultation with members of the De‐
sign Review Subcommittee at their June 2, 2015 meeting.  
 
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS  
 
Historic  Architectural  Rehabilitation  Grants  require  either  a  50‐50  or  a  75‐25  match  of  actual 
material and/or contractor project costs up to a maximum of $20,000. The city’s grant invest‐
ments  are  a  private/public  partnership  that  results  in  improvements  to  city  neighborhoods 
which might not otherwise be completed due to the financial burden placed on the homeown‐
er. 
 
The Historic Architectural Rehabilitation Grant programs have been traditionally viewed as criti‐
cal neighborhood‐related projects. These grants have been vital for continuing to maintain the 
city’s older housing stock and removing barriers and competitive disadvantage when compared 
to other housing options in the city and region. 
 
The city council allocated $50,000 to the 50/50 program in its 2015 budget. This amount and a 
remaining balance of $47,721 from the 2014 round of the program provide for an amount of 
$97,721 available for funding in 2015. The city council similarly allocated $50,000 to the 75/25 
program  in  its  2015  budget.  This  amount  and  a  remaining  balance  of  $94,000  from  the  2014 
round of the program provide for an amount of $144,000 available for funding in 2015. Com‐
bining both programs will make funding available in a total amount of $241,721. 



                                                                                                            
                                                    8 
 
 




 
BUDGET IMPACT 
 
   FUND(S)             ACCOUNT(S)          PROJECT #(S)          AMOUNT             AMOUNT 
                                                                BUDGETED            AVAILABLE 
    Riverboat      275‐0000‐791.78‐99           N/A              $144,000            $144,000 
    Riverboat      275‐0000‐791.78‐99           N/A               $97,721             $97,721 
                                                                   Total             $241,721 
 
LEGAL IMPACT 
 
Each grant recipient will be required to sign an agreement before work can begin. 
 
An ordinance providing for the combination of the 50/50 and 75/25 programs will need to be 
prepared.  
 
ALTERNATIVES 
 
1.     The city council may choose not to combine the 50/50 and 75/25 Historic Architectural 
       Rehabilitation Grant Programs. 
        
2.     The city council may choose not to award the grants to the selected recipients. 
        
NEXT STEPS  
 
1.     Prepare the ordinance providing for the recommended changes to combine funding of 
       the 75/25 and 50/50 Historic/Architectural Rehabilitation Grant programs. 
        
2.     Announce availability of funding to the qualified unfunded projects. 
        
3.     Notify all grant recipients of the final list of selected recipients via mail. 
        
4.     Execute  agreement  with  each  recipient  selected  to  participate  in  the  program  before 
       work can begin.  
        
5.     Complete initial inspection of the exterior of the property to identify any exterior code 
       violations that will need to be rectified prior to final disbursement of the grants. 
        
6.     Review and approval of the Certificate of Appropriateness and building permits by staff 
       and/or the Elgin Heritage Commission's Design Review Subcommittee before work be‐
       gins. 
        
7.     Request quarterly progress reports by grant recipients. 
        


                                                                                                      
                                                  9 
 
 




8.     Conduct site visits during construction. 
        
9.     Complete project within eighteen months from the date of signing the agreements. 
 
 
Originators:         Christen Sundquist, Historic Preservation Planner  
                     Sarosh Saher, Senior Planner 
                     Marc Mylott, Community Development Director 
 
Final Review:        Debra Nawrocki, Chief Financial Officer 
                     William A. Cogley, Corporation Counsel/Chief Development Officer 
                     Richard G. Kozal, Assistant City Manager/Chief Operating Officer 
                     Sean R. Stegall, City Manager 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
 
A.   2015 Historic Architectural Rehabilitation Grant Program Guidelines 
B.   Instructions to Grant Review Subcommittee Members 
C.   Sample Score Sheet (Note: the final scores of the Commission are contained in the table 
     within this memo) 
D.   Photographs of Submitted Grant Project Applications 




                                                                                             
                                             10 
 
                                                                               ATTACHMENT B

                     HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM
                               Grant Review Instructions

A packet has been provided for each grant application to be reviewed. The packets include the
following material:

      An initial staff evaluation sheet
      A scoring criteria sheet with the staff evaluation included
      Inventory Form showing property when district was formed (If Available)
      Other documentation if provided by the applicant
      Photo(s) of the property.

The initial evaluation sheet includes the preliminary staff score and the high and low qualified
bids as determined by staff. The grant amount is based on the low qualified bid.

Section 1 of the scoring criteria sheet is compiled by staff from the inventory forms and/or
district nomination form.

Section 2 of the scoring criteria sheet is determined by staff and the subcommittee members.
Each subcommittee member should review the information provided and determine a score for
“Proposed Work to the Structure.” You may issue partial points in more then one category. The
total points allotted under section 2 cannot exceed 50 points. As in the past, all subcommittee
members’ scores in this section will be added together and then divided by the number of
attendees. This average score will be added to staff’s score and divided by two.

Section 3 of the scoring criteria is determined by the members of the subcommittee only. Each
subcommittee member should assign a score for the “Evaluation of relative visual public benefit
or impact to the streetscape” category. This number should be between 1 and 30, the higher the
visual impact, the higher the score.

Section 4 of the scoring criteria is determined by staff based on rental license records and
applicant’s address.

During the grant review portion of the meeting, each application will be reviewed and a final
point total will be determined. The projects will be listed in order of total points received and a
recommendation list will be established. This list will be forwarded to the City Council for
formal approval.

Grant applications must receive a minimum point total of 40 to be eligible for a grant.
                                                                   ATTACHMENT C-1



        2015 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL REHABILITATION GRANT
                            50/50 Program



Property Address: ____________________________________ Total Points: ________

CITY OF ELGIN HERITAGE COMMISSION/STAFF USE ONLY
1. Current Historic Significance of the Structure                                     Points
Historically/Architecturally Significant property                                          9
Contributing                                                                               6
Non-contributing                                                                           3

The following points will be granted to a property if changed from:
Non-contributing to significant                                                          12
Non-contributing to contributing                                                         10
Contributing to significant                                                               9
Notes: points not to exceed 15 total for the Section.


2. Proposed Work to the Structure
Partial points may be given in more than one category; however, the total
points allotted under Section 2 cannot exceed 50 points.

Complete reconstruction of missing structures/features using original
documentation like photographs, maps, etc., using materials to match original:
(Examples: Front/side porches, parade porches, towers, turrets and carriage
houses based on original evidence and designs.)
0 ……………………………………………..50



Removal of multiple non-original inappropriate features and restoring all with
original details and materials on significant elevations.
(Example: More than one of the following: Removal of non-original
aluminum/vinyl siding to restore the original underlying cladding, while
restoring any original window openings and ornamental features; opening an
enclosed porch or replacement of concrete stoop/porch with original materials
and detail; siding restoration with appropriate trim detailing; replacing
inappropriate asphalt shingle with cedar, metal or tile; installation of half round
gutters and round downspouts, installation of original material storm windows
and screens; or replacing an exterior or storm door with one of the correct period
and style design.)
0 ……………………………………………..40
Removal of individual non-original inappropriate features and restoring to
original detail and material:
(Example: Removal of vinyl or aluminum windows and replacement with wood
windows.)

0 ……………………………………………..30

Repairing/stabilizing deteriorated existing features and reusing existing
architectural elements.
(Example: Porch overhaul utilizing new structural lumber and decking but
conserving column/posts, spindles/balusters, and brackets, using epoxy
consolidates or other methods; window overhaul using epoxy consolidates or
other methods.)

0 ……………………………………………..20

Upgrade deteriorated materials with new appropriate materials
(Example: New wood windows, new wood door, roof upgrade to wood, slate,
tile shingles as appropriate to the style of the house.)

0 ……………………………………………..10

Continuing Maintenance: Continuing Maintenance items will not be considered
unless included with other comprehensive rehabilitation or restoration projects.
(Example: Cleaning, re-pointing, scraping and painting, porch handrail repair,
glazing and glass replacement while retaining original sashes, replacing
deteriorated materials with new appropriate materials different from the original,
use of architectural composition asphalt shingles)

0 ……………………………………………..5

3. Evaluation of relative visual public benefit or impact to the streetscape
Issues such as visibility and location within the neighborhood, and anticipated
change in appearance after completion of work will be considered.
The item will be evaluated on a scale of 1 to 30.

(low impact) 1…………………15……………………..30 (high impact)

4. Occupancy
Owner Occupied                                                                        5
Rental Property                                                                       3


Minimum points required to qualify for grant award                                   40
                                                                           Attachment C-2


                                  2015
           HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL REHABILITATION GRANT
                           75/25 PROGRAM


Property Address: ____________________________________ Total Points: ________


CITY OF ELGIN STAFF/HERITAGE COMMISSION USE ONLY
1. Current Historic Significance of the Structure                                     Points
Historically/Architecturally Significant property                                          9
Contributing                                                                               6
Non-contributing                                                                           3

The following points will be granted to a property if changed from:
Non-contributing to significant                                                          12
Non-contributing to contributing                                                         10
Contributing to significant                                                               9
Notes: points not to exceed 15 total for the Section.

2. Proposed Work to the Structure
Partial points may be given in more than one category; however, the total
points allotted under Section 2 cannot exceed 50 points.

Complete reconstruction of missing structures/features using original
documentation like photographs, maps, etc., using materials to match original:
(Examples: Front/side porches, parade porches, towers, turrets and carriage
houses based on original evidence and designs.)

0 ……………………………………………..50


Removal of multiple non-original inappropriate features and restoring all with
original details and materials on significant elevations.
(Example: More than one of the following: Removal of non-original
aluminum/vinyl siding to restore the original underlying cladding, while
restoring any original window openings and ornamental features; opening an
enclosed porch or replacement of concrete stoop/porch with original materials
and detail; siding restoration with appropriate trim detailing; replacing
inappropriate asphalt shingle with cedar, metal or tile; installation of half round
gutters and round downspouts, installation of original material storm windows
and screens; or replacing an exterior or storm door with one of the correct period
and style design.)
0 ……………………………………………..40
Removal of individual non-original inappropriate features and restoring to
original detail and material:
(Example: Removal of vinyl or aluminum windows and replacement with wood
windows.)

0 ……………………………………………..30

Repairing/stabilizing deteriorated existing features and reusing existing
architectural elements.
(Example: Porch overhaul utilizing new structural lumber and decking but
conserving column/posts, spindles/balusters, and brackets, using epoxy
consolidates or other methods; window overhaul using epoxy consolidates or
other methods.)

0 ……………………………………………..20

Upgrade deteriorated materials with new appropriate materials
(Example: New wood windows, new wood door, roof upgrade to wood, slate,
tile shingles as appropriate to the style of the house.)

0 ……………………………………………..10

Continuing Maintenance: Continuing Maintenance items will not be considered
unless included with other comprehensive rehabilitation or restoration projects.
(Example: Cleaning, re-pointing, scraping and painting, porch handrail repair,
glazing and glass replacement while retaining original sashes, replacing
deteriorated materials with new appropriate materials different from the original,
use of architectural composition asphalt shingles)

0 ……………………………………………..5

3. Evaluation of relative visual public benefit or impact to the streetscape
Issues such as visibility and location within the neighborhood, and anticipated
change in appearance after completion of work will be considered.
The item will be evaluated on a scale of 1 to 30.
(low impact) 1…………………10…………………………..30 (high impact)

4. Property owner income
For applicants whose income levels fall within the following categories, as an
incentive, the following bonus points will be added to their total evaluated score.

Low income                                                                            20
Moderate income                                                                       10
Above moderate income                                                                  0

Minimum points required to qualify for grant award                                    40
                     ATTACHMENT D




           2015
         HISTORIC 
   ARCHITECTURAL GRANT
50/50 PROGRAM APPLICATIONS
2015 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 50/50 
                           Applicant #1                Score:  87.33

                           Jim and Kelly Langenberg    582 Park Street
                           Proposed Project: Complete reconstruction of 
                           missing features such as porch half‐round roof 
                           extension, torch design above west side attic 
                           window; Exterior restoration; Scrape, prep and 
                           prime entire house.
                           Total Project Cost:        Eligible Funding Amount: 
               EXISTING
                           $40,750.00                               $20,000.00




                EXISTING                                               PROPOSED
2015 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 50/50 
                     Applicant #2               Score:  83.17
                     Will and Maureen Alexander 625 Lillie Street

                     Proposed Project:  Removal of aluminum siding at east 
                     side of house; Restoration of missing architectural 
                     elements; Restore front and rear porch; Strip, prep and 
                     paint entire building.
                     Total Project Cost:             Eligible Funding Amount: 
                     $40,550.00                                    $20,000.00
2015 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 50/50 
                        Applicant #3                 Score:  75.17
                        Renate Adams                 612 N. Spring Street
                        Proposed Project:  Reconstruction of new porch 
                        with architectural elements that are more 
                        appropriate for when the house was built.
                        Total Project Cost:                  Eligible Funding 
                        $35,605.00                                   Amount: 
                                                                  $17,802.50
2015 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 50/50 

                         Applicant #4                   Score:  71.50

                         Tim Ramseyer                   211‐213 Michigan St.
                         Proposed Project:  
                         Reconstruction of front porch and rear porch; 
                         replacement of all windows with aluminum clad wood 
                         windows to match existing in size and configuration; 
                         restore cornice molding; installation of new 1st floor 
                         doors (2) to match original doors; repair 2nd floor front 
              EXISTING   door; scrape, prep and paint entire building.
                         Total Project Cost:             Eligible Funding Amount: 
                         $44,600.00                                    $20,000.00




              PROPOSED
2015 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 50/50 

                     Applicant #5                     Score: 66.00

                     John and Dawn Laskey             711 Douglas Avenue
                     Proposed Project:  Restore missing window hoods; 
                     Restore 16 original double hung windows; Replace 
                     existing aluminum storm windows with wood storm 
                     windows; Replace existing 1960’s era casement windows 
                     with new aluminum clad wood casement windows.
                     Total Project Cost:   Eligible Funding Amount (not able to 
                     $46,100.00            receive full funding due to exhausted 
                                                               funding): $20,000
2015 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 50/50 
                         Applicant #6                 Score:  63.50
                         James Stendler and Scott      821 Brook STreet
                         Metlicak
                         Proposed Project:  Removal of existing asphalt 
                         shingles and replacement with new cedar shingles.
                         Total Project Cost:       Eligible Funding Amount: 
                         $20,950.00                               $10,475.00
2014 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 50/50 

                      Applicant #7                   Score:  57.88

                      John Boline                    162 College Street
                      Proposed Project:  Removal of aluminum storm 
                      windows and replace with wood storm windows.
                      Total Project Cost:           Eligible Funding Amount: 
                      $14,130.00                                   $7,065.00
       2014 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 50/50 

                             Applicant #8                    Score:  56.25

                             Zhixian Guo                     305‐307 North Street
                             Proposed Project:  Installation of new wood doors and 
                             wood windows; construction of new front porch and 
                             restoration of rear porches; paint entire building
                             Total Project Cost:             Eligible Funding Amount: 
                             $36,277.23                                    $18,138.62
EXISTING




                                                                    PROPOSED
2014 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 50/50 

                      Applicant #9                    Score:  52.13

                      Rosalia and Joaquin Cornejo     372 N. Spring Street
                      Proposed Project:  Restoration of smaller porch 
                      attached to house, restoration of side porch
                      Total Project Cost:            Eligible Funding Amount: 
                      $17,800.00                                    $8,900.00
2014 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 50/50 

                      Applicant #10                   Score:  47.25

                      Roy and Evelyn Chapman          705 W. Highland Ave.
                      Proposed Project:  Repair integral gutters, repair 
                      deteriorated elements on porch, jack up porte‐cochere 
                      to secure column brackets and straighten columns, 
                      repair failing rubble stone foundation.
                      Total Project Cost:             Eligible Funding Amount: 
                      $28,000.00                                    $14,000.00
       2015 HISTORIC 
   ARCHITECTURAL GRANT
75/25 PROGRAM APPLICATION
2015 HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL GRANT PROGRAM ‐ 75/25 

                         Applicant #1                Score:  45.50
                         Rich Hirschberg             109 Hill Avenue
                         Proposed Project:  Restore front porch, cost over 
                         runs on garage (Funding amount for restoration 
                         proposed to be combined with existing grant 
                         funding amount for garage)
                         Total Project Cost:      Eligible Funding Amount:  
                         $6,401.14.00                             $4,800.86
