Traffic Analysis Report & Data


      Appendix D
                                                                                                    MOA Project # 09-004
                                                                Academy / Vanguard Area Traffic Circulation Improvements

The parcel numbers for Academy-Vanguard changed in August 2013 (per a request from MOA ROW).
Some reports had already been published with the old parcel numbers.
Below is a reference matrix of the old parcel numbers and the new parcel numbers.

                              Academy-Vanguard
                                Old Parcel #     New Parcel #
                                    101               1
                                    102               2
                                    103               3
                                    110               4
                                    111               5
                                    112               6
                                    134               7
                                    133               8
                                    132               9
                                    131              10
                                    130              11
                                    128              12
                                    124              13
                                    120              14
                                    159              15
                                    158              16
                                    157              17
                                    135              18
                                    129              19
                                    156              20
                                    136              21
                                    141              22
                                    140              23
                                    139              24
                                    155              25
                                    137              26
                                    142              27
                                     -               28
                                    154              29
                                    138              30
                                    143              31
                                    144              32
                                     -               33
                                    153              34
                                    145              35
                                     -               36
                                     -               37
                                    146              38
                                    147              39




Draft Design Study Report
September 2013
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements
 MOA Project #09-004
 Preliminary Transportation System Analysis



Date:          June 4, 2012                                                              Project #: 11789
To:            Bill Johnson, PE, CRW Engineering Group, LLC
From:          Robert Kniefel, PE and Andrew Ooms
cc:            Steve Gillette, PE, Municipality of Anchorage



INTRODUCTION
The Municipality of Anchorage (MOA) is planning future upgrades to Academy Drive and Vanguard
Drive to improve circulation in the area and to accommodate the future traffic patterns associated
with the Seward Highway/92nd Avenue Grade Separation Project. The project vicinity map is shown in
Figure 1. The project team has determined five proposed alternatives connecting Abbott Road with
the proposed 92nd Avenue interchange. This technical memorandum documents the preliminary
transportation system analysis findings related to intersection operations, traffic control, safety, and
pedestrian and bicycle facilities. The roadway conditions were analyzed under existing conditions and
in 2035 for each of the proposed alternatives.

The project team developed these proposed alternatives to serve the east-west connection from the
Seward Highway to Abbott Road while aiming to minimize impacts to adjacent properties. Conceptual
depictions of Alternatives A through D are shown in Figure 2. A summary of the proposed alternatives
follows:

            Alternative A maintains the existing Academy Drive and Vanguard Drive alignments.
            Alternative B realigns Academy Drive to connect with Abbott Road at the location of the
             existing Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive intersection.
            Alternative C utilizes a new alignment, connecting Academy Drive to Abbott Road at the
             existing medical office building driveway.
            Alternative D realigns Academy Drive to connect directly with Abbott Road at the location
             of the existing Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive intersection.




FILENAME: C:\USERS\AOOMS\DESKTOP\KAI PROJECTS\11789 ACADEMY-VANGUARD\DSR\FINAL\ACADEMY-VANGUARD
PRELIMINARY TRAFFIC OPERATIONS MEMO.DOCX
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                           Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                          Page 4


                Alternative E extends both Academy Drive and Hartzell Road to Abbott Road,
                 reconfiguring circulation such that the primary route from Abbott Road to Dimond
                 Boulevard would go through the Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection.
Several of the alternatives above have been broken out into sub-alternatives (e.g., Alternative A-1)
based on traffic control or geometric design options. These alternatives are described in greater detail
later in this report.

Alternatives A through D include the same basic Academy Drive cross section, which includes an 11-
foot travel lane in each direction, a 14-foot two-way left-turn lane, 3.5-foot shoulders, and curb and
gutter. The proposed cross-section also includes a 5-foot sidewalk on the north side of the street and
an 8-foot path on the south side. Alternative E would likely require additional travel lanes to
accommodate the increased demand on Academy Drive. Further design detail on each alternative is
presented in the Design Study Report.


EXISTING CONDITIONS

TRAFFIC OPERATIONS
Existing traffic peak hour and daily traffic volumes were assembled from a variety of sources for
analysis. Daily traffic volumes were extracted from the Alaska Department of Transportation and
Public Facilities (ADOT&PF) 2010 Central Region Traffic Volume Report (Reference 1) and from the
Municipality of Anchorage (MOA) transportation database. Peak hour traffic counts were extracted
from the MOA database and from counts conducted in 2008 and 2009 by Kinney Engineering, LLC as
presented in the 92nd Avenue Traffic Volume Forecasts and Operations Analysis Interim Report
(Reference 2). In addition, 12-hour counts were conducted at the Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive
intersection in February 2012. Existing daily traffic volumes are shown in Figure 3. Existing traffic
volume data are included in Appendix 1.

The assembled weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic volumes and the existing lane configurations
and traffic control, shown in Figure 4, were input into a traffic analysis model to determine the
existing traffic conditions. Intersection operations are chiefly assessed by volume-to-capacity ratio
and average vehicle delay, which is translated into level-of-service (LOS). Traffic operations for a
signalized intersection are reported for the intersection as a whole, while unsignalized intersection
operations are reported for the critical movement, typically a minor street movement. The MOA
intersection operation standard for urban areas is LOS D. The existing traffic volumes and operations
results are shown in Figures 5 and 6 for the weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hours, respectively. Existing
traffic operations worksheets are included in Appendix 2.

All existing study intersections were found to operate acceptably during the weekday a.m. and p.m.
peak hours with the exception of the Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive intersection during the p.m. peak


Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                              Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                           Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                          Page 9


hour, during which the eastbound Vanguard Drive approach operates at LOS F. The eastbound left-
turn movement at this intersection is particularly difficult during peak periods. Public input has
indicated that neighborhood residents avoid this intersection during peak periods, choosing instead
to use Brayton Drive to access Dimond Boulevard and the Seward Highway. Additional discussion of
the Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive intersection is presented below.


TRAFFIC CIRCULATION
The existing one-way northbound configuration of Brayton Drive, the absence of a secondary
connection across Seward Highway, and the lack of a neighborhood grid hinder traffic circulation and
neighborhood accessibility in the study area. These constraints create out-of-direction travel, increase
travel distances, and contribute to intersection delay. Specifically, the Moss Creek subdivision located
north of Academy Drive and the Southwood Manor Trailer Park located to the south of Academy
Drive have access only from Brayton Drive, requiring inbound trips to approach from the south and
outbound trips to exit to the north, regardless of destination.

Three circulation concepts were developed to relieve out-of-direction travel in the neighborhood and
are described below.


Two-Way Brayton Drive
A conversion of Brayton Drive from a one-way northbound to a two-way roadway between Dimond
Boulevard and Academy Drive would allow more direct access to the Moss Creek subdivision and
reduce out-of-direction travel. However, a southbound lane on Brayton Drive would conflict with the
northbound Seward Highway exit ramp. No other Seward Highway frontage road is two way, so this
configuration would not be consistent with driver expectation.


Southwood Manor Trailer Park Access
The Southwood Manor Trailer Park currently is only accessed by several driveways on Brayton Drive.
A new access from Academy Drive would allow for ingress to the site from the north, eliminating the
need for residents to access Brayton Drive via O’Malley Road. This second access point would
improve accessibility, reduce out-of-direction travel, and provide redundant emergency access. An
access to the reconstructed Academy Drive could likely be accommodated.


Moss Creek Subdivision Access
Access to the Moss Creek Subdivision currently is limited to several driveways on Brayton Drive. A
new access drive connecting the subdivision to the roadway network to the north, east, or south
would provide circulation and emergency access benefits. However, such an access would impact
neighboring industrial uses. Future subdivision connections could be considered as neighboring
parcels redevelop.
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                              Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                                                  Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                                               Page 10



TRAFFIC SAFETY CONDITIONS
The project team reviewed the crash histories of the study intersections to quantify and assess safety
performance. The MOA provided crash records for the period from January 2006 through December
2010 for crashes along the study corridor. Table 1 shows intersection crashes by collision type and
severity—classified by fatal, injury, and property-damage only (PDO) crashes.

Table 1 Intersection Crash History (January 2006 – December 2010)

                                                    Collision Type                               Severity

                                           Side-    Rear     Head    Fixed    Ped/         Minor      Major                 Total
           Intersection           Angle    Swipe    End       On     Object   Bike   PDO   Injury     Injury    Fatality   Crashes

  Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive       22        0       3         0       1       0     15      9              1      1         26

 Hartzell Road/Vanguard Drive       0        0       0         1       1       0      0      2              0      0          2

 Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive       3        0       0         0       1       0      3      1              0      0          4

 Academy Drive/Brayton Drive        1        0       0         0       0       1      0      1              0      0          1



In addition to these intersection crashes, several crashes occurred on the study roadways that were
not related to intersections. Two PDO crashes—a rear end and a sideswipe—occurred on Academy
Drive between Brayton Drive and Vanguard Drive. Three crashes—a rear end, a head on, and a snow
berm crash—occurred on Vanguard between Academy Drive and Abbott Road. Two of these crashes
involved injuries, one minor and one major. The assembled crash data are included in Appendix 3.

ADOT&PF provided statewide average crash rates at a variety of intersection configurations based on
number of approaches and traffic control types. The average crash rate represents the approximate
number of crashes that are “expected” at a study intersection. However, this average does not
account for factors such as sight distance, speed, and number of lanes. This average crash rate was
used to calculate the critical crash rate for each study intersection, based on the ADOT&PF Highway
Safety Improvement Program (HSIP) Manual methodology (Reference 3).

Per the ADOT&PF HSIP Manual, intersections are flagged for further review when the safety index,
calculated by the observed crash rate over the critical crash rate, is greater than or equal to 0.9, or if
the intersection has experienced one fatal or two major injuries in the past five years.

The summary crash data in Table 2 includes the observed crashes, million entering vehicles (MEV),
the observed crash rate per MEV, the statewide average crash rate, critical crash rate, and safety
index for each study intersection.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                    Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                                                      Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                                                   Page 11


Table 2 Intersection Crash Rate Analysis (January 2006 – December 2010)

                                                     Annual Million
                                     Total                              Crash Rate   ADOT Average Crash   Critical Crash      Safety
           Intersection                             Entering Vehicles
                                    Crashes                             (per MEV)      Rate (per MEV)          Rate           Index
                                                         (MEV)

  Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive           26                 37.3             0.70             0.66              0.89             0.78

  Hartzell Road/Vanguard Drive         2                   6.2             0.32             0.54              1.11             0.29

 Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive          4                   5.4             0.74             0.54              1.15             0.64

  Academy Drive/Brayton Drive          1                   6.1             0.16             0.59              1.18             0.14



Table 2 shows the safety indices of the study intersections are below the 0.90 ADOT&PF threshold,
though the Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive and Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive intersections
experienced crash rates greater than the statewide average. In addition, the Abbott Road/Vanguard
Drive intersection did experience one fatal crash during the study period, thus this intersection would
meet ADOT&PF’s criteria for further analysis. As Abbott Road and Vanguard Drive are MOA facilities,
this intersection is not subject to ADOT&PF’s standards, though this criteria remains useful.


ABBOTT ROAD/VANGUARD DRIVE INTERSECTION
As shown in Table 1, 22 of the 26 crashes that occurred at the Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive
intersection during the five-year study period were angle crashes. Of those 22 angle crashes, 18
occurred on the Vanguard Drive approach with the following distribution:

                10 left turn movements,
                6 straight movements, and
                2 right-turn movements.
Of these 18 angle crashes reported on the Vanguard Road approach, 9 were PDO, 8 were minor
injury, and one crash resulted in a fatality. The fatal crash occurred on August 27, 2007 when a vehicle
turning left from Vanguard Drive onto northbound Abbott Road collided with a vehicle traveling
southbound on Abbott Road. The posted speed limit on Abbott Road is 40 miles-per-hour. The crash
diagram for this intersection is shown in Exhibit 1.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                         Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                          Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                       Page 12




           Exhibit 1           2005-2010 Crash Diagram

Of the 18 Vanguard Road angle crashes, 15 involved vehicles traveling eastbound on Abbott Road and
northbound on Vanguard Drive. The occurrence of 15 angle crashes involving two approaches out of
26 total intersection crashes represents a pattern.

The crash records for the 18 Vanguard Road angle crashes were reviewed to identify any crash
patterns that demonstrate contributing factors to these crashes. The resulting charts are shown in
Exhibit 2. The majority of the crashes occurred during daylight, offpeak periods. Additionally, 13 of
the 18 crashes occurred in the 6 winter months (November through April), under snow or icy
conditions. However, only two of these crashes involved vehicles described as skidding. Fifteen of the
crashes were attributed to failure to yeild or stop sign violations. These 18 crashes resulted in 9
possible or non-incapacitating injuries and 1 fatality among the 50 participants.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                             Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                                                                                                                        Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                                                                                                                     Page 13



                                        Crashes By Time of Day                                                                       Crashes By Lighting Condition
                       6                                                                                                        14

                       5                                                                                                        12
   Number of Crashes




                                                                                                        Number of Crashes
                       4                                                                                                        10
                       3                                                                                                        8
                       2                                                                                                        6
                       1
                                                                                                                                4
                       0
                                                                                                                                2
                                1:00 AM
                                2:00 AM
                                3:00 AM
                                4:00 AM
                                5:00 AM
                                6:00 AM
                                7:00 AM
                                8:00 AM
                                9:00 AM


                               12:00 PM




                               10:00 PM
                               11:00 PM
                                1:00 PM
                                2:00 PM
                                3:00 PM
                                4:00 PM
                                5:00 PM
                                6:00 PM
                                7:00 PM
                                8:00 PM
                                9:00 PM
                               12:00 AM




                               10:00 AM
                               11:00 AM
                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                      Dark, Lighted Roadway                        Daylight



                                             Crashes By Month                                                                        Crashes By Roadway Condition
                       4                                                                                                        12

                                                                                                                                10
   Number of Crashes




                       3




                                                                                                        Number of Crashes
                                                                                                                                8
                       2
                                                                                                                                6
                       1
                                                                                                                                4

                       0                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                            Dry                   Snow                        Ice



                               Crashes By Human Circumstances                                                                               Crash Injury Occurence
                       12                                                                                                       45
                                                                                                                                40
                       10
                                                                                                        Number of Particpants




                                                                                                                                35
   Number of Crashes




                           8                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                25
                           6                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                15
                           4
                                                                                                                                10
                           2                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                0
                           0                                                                                                         None         Possible        Non-       Incapacitating         Fatal
                               Failure to yield Stop sign violation Driver inattention   Unsafe speed                                                         incapacitating




                               Exhibit 2                   Vanguard Angle Crash Patterns

The intersection sight distance is not restricted, as shown in Exhibit 3(a). However, the curvature of
the road leads to upstream southbound traffic being obscured by vehicles slowing to turn right on the
Vanguard Drive, as shown in Exhibit 3(b). In addition, the curvature of the roadway may make
determining approaching vehicle speed and accepting gaps more difficult. Furthermore, high degrees
of delay contribute to drivers accepting smaller gaps than under low delay situtations (Reference 4).
These circumstances may contribute to the observed crashes, though the additional detailed included
in the police crash reports was not available to make that determination.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                                                                                          Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                              Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                           Page 14




                               (a)                                              (b)
           Exhibit 3           Vanguard Drive at Abbott Road (looking north)

As the Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive intersection does not meet the MOA operational standards as a
two-way stop-controlled intersection and has experienced a pattern of angle crashes, alternate
intersection control was considered to reduce crashes and approach delay.

Installing a traffic signal at this intersection would improve the traffic operations and safety
conditions for Vanguard Drive, but a signal would impact Abbott Road as well. The ADOT&PF HSIP
Manual indicates that installing a traffic signal is expected to reduce angle crashes by 60 percent, but
increase rear end crashes by 25 percent. A signal warrant analysis was conducted to determine the
appropriateness of a traffic signal at this location. The signal warrant, specified in Chapter 4B of the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), includes nine warrants, considering traffic
volume, crash history, pedestrians, and other factors. Four warrants are primarily applicable at this
location. Based on the 12 hours of traffic data collected at this intersection, a traffic signal is not
warranted by the eight-hour, four-hour, or peak hour warrants at the 100 percent threshold. The
intersection meets the criteria of the crash experience warrant (Warrant 7) for crash history and
traffic volume; however, the crash experience warrant specifies that alternative treatments and
targeted enforcement should first be implemented and evaluated, which has not yet occurred.

In addition to evaluating the feasibility of installing a traffic signal at this location, the project team
explored a variety of options including a roundabout and lane restrictions. The project team deemed
a roundabout to be inappropriate at this location due to close proximity to the signalized
intersections at 88th Avenue and Independence Drive/Toloff Street. Prohibiting left-turns from
Vanguard Drive was also considered as a mitigation alternative to reduce angle crashes, but includes
the following challenges:

                This regulation would require enforcement and physical reinforcement, such as a
                 “porkchop” median, as a sign alone is likely to be ineffective to prevent left-turn
                 maneuvers.


Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                 Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                              Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                           Page 15


                Left-turn prohibition would only reduce angle crashes associated with eastbound left-turn
                 movements (10 of the 19 reported angle crashes).
                Left-turn prohibition (or requiring indirect left turns) would encourage additional
                 diversion to alternate routes and out-of-direction travel.
Based on this assessment and conversations with MOA staff, although a traffic signal is not warranted
at this time, signalizing the Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive intersection is likely the most favorable
improvement. As such, as this project proceeds with a recommended alternative, near-term
signalization will be considered based on project timeline, future Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive
intersection location, and future traffic volumes.


NON-MOTORIZED CONDITIONS
No sidewalks or paths are currently provided along Academy Drive or Vanguard Drive in the study
area. This condition forces pedestrians and bicyclists to share the roadway with motor vehicles,
particularly in winter conditions when the adjacent grass is covered in snow. In addition, the
pedestrian crossing across Abbott Road at Vanguard Drive is not marked or signal-controlled and can
be difficult to find acceptable gaps to cross during peak periods. Traffic counts collected in February
2012 show that 22 pedestrians crossed Abbott Road at this location between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m.
Pedestrians travel between residential and retail districts on opposite sides of Abbott Road. In
addition, the People Mover bus route #1 – Crosstown serves stops on both sides of Abbott Road in
the vicinity of Vanguard Drive.


FUTURE TRANSPORTATION ANALYSIS
Each proposed alternative was evaluated for traffic operations, safety performance, pedestrian and
bicycle treatments, neighborhood circulation, and access management to differentiate each
alternative’s performance. As Alternative E would change the function of Academy Drive and
Vanguard Drive and the corresponding traffic flows, a detailed analysis of that alternative is beyond
the scope of this study. However, a qualitative assessment was conducted for Alternative E and is
presented below.


FUTURE TRAFFIC OPERATIONS
The alternatives were evaluated with the completion of all phases of the ADOT&PF 92nd Avenue
Grade Separation project. To be consistent with the 2035 Metropolitan Transportation Plan (MTP)
and other planning documents, and to reflect the uncertainty of the 92nd Avenue project completion,
2035 was chosen as the future analysis year.

The project team applied the Anchorage Metropolitan Area Transportation Solutions (AMATS) 2035
regional travel demand model to determine the forecasted future daily traffic volumes for the study
roadways. Though this model includes all of the projects in the current MTP, small adjustments were
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                 Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                             Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                          Page 16


made to the model to better reflect the local roadway network in the regional model and to capture
the proposed 92nd Avenue project improvements. The following modifications were made to the
AMATS model:

                ADOT&PT 92nd Avenue Grade Separation project improvements
                       o Completion of the connection between Academy Drive and 92nd Avenue west of
                         the Seward Highway
                       o Southbound on- and off-ramps and a northbound off-ramp at the 92nd Avenue
                         interchange
                Vanguard Road was added to the model between Academy Drive and Independence
                 Drive. The associated centroid connectors were modified.
                A new connection from Academy Drive to the Southwood Manor Trailer Park.
                An extraneous connection between Academy Drive and Abbott Road was removed.
These model modifications are shown in Exhibit 4.




           Exhibit 4           AMATS Model Refinements

In addition, post-processing of the raw model outputs was conducted to better reflect existing travel
patterns, to adjust for the regional level of detail in the model, and to be reasonably consistent with
modeling efforts conducted as a part of the 92nd Avenue project.

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                               Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                            Page 17


The adjusted 2035 MTP model output daily traffic volumes are shown in Figure 3. To conduct traffic
operations analysis, the project team converted these daily volumes to peak hour volumes for each
link by applying a design hour factor of 10 percent, which is consistent with the nearby ADOT&PF
permanent traffic counters cited in the 92nd Avenue Connector DSR Draft Traffic Report. These peak
hour link volumes were then converted into intersection approach volumes by applying directional
factors from the existing p.m. peak hour counts. The approach volumes were then transformed into
turning movement volumes by applying methods from the National Cooperative Highway Research
Program (NCHRP) 255 report (Reference 5). This methodology uses an iterative process to balance
changes to inflow and outflow intersection volumes based on predicted turning movement
proportions. The resulting peak hour turning movement volumes were then used to calculate the
future traffic operations of the study intersections for each alternative.

The 2035 traffic volumes were analyzed under existing lane configurations and traffic control devices
with the following exceptions:

                Based on these future volumes, the Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive intersection meets the
                 8-hour, 4-hour, and peak hour traffic volume warrants for signalization. As a result, this
                 intersection was analyzed under future conditions with signalized control with the
                 addition of an eastbound left-turn lane. This new traffic signal would be coordinated with
                 the adjacent traffic signals on Abbott Road to progress traffic along the main road.
                The Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection configuration varies across the
                 alternatives, thus the volumes and proposed traffic control devices were adjusted:
                       o Alternative A-1: all-way stop control with eastbound and southbound turn lanes
                       o Alternative A-2: single-lane roundabout
                       o Alternatives B and D: Vanguard Drive stop-controlled with turn lanes on all
                         approaches
                       o Alternative C: Vanguard Drive and Hartzell Road stop-controlled with eastbound
                         and westbound turn lanes
In addition, a southbound right-turn lane would likely provide an operational and safety benefit by
separating right-turning vehicles from the through travel lanes. The existing p.m. peak hour traffic
volumes exceed the NCHRP 457 guidelines for a major-street right turn lane (Reference 6). However,
the additional lane would increase pedestrian crossing distance and lengthen the required pedestrian
clearance time for Vanguard Drive. The project team will consider the addition of a right-turn lane in
greater detail as this project progresses.
The traffic volumes at remaining study intersections would not differ substantially across Alternatives
A through D, thus the same analysis results were applied to each alternative. The corresponding lane
configurations and traffic control devices are shown in Figure 7.
The 2035 peak hour traffic volumes and traffic operations are shown in Figure 8. As shown in the
figure, all study intersections are forecast to operate at LOS D or better for each alternative during
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                  Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                                  Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                               Page 18


the 2035 weekday peak hour. The Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive intersection is forecast to operate at
LOS B with signalized control and the addition of an eastbound left-turn lane. The Academy
Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection is forecast to operate as follows:

                Alternative A-1: LOS B under all-way stop control
                Alternative A-2: with 8.3 seconds of delay/vehicle as a single-lane roundabout1
                Alternatives B and D: LOC C with Vanguard Drive stop-controlled
                Alternative C: LOS D under two-way stop-control
This analysis indicates that all of the proposed alternatives are forecast to operate at LOS D or better
in 2035 under full buildout of the 92nd Avenue Grade Separation project. Future traffic operations
worksheets are included in Appendix 2.


FUTURE SAFETY PERFORMANCE
While crash experience can indicate the observed level of safety performance, historical crashes by
themselves are not reliable indicators of future crash frequency. KAI used crash prediction
methodology from the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials’ Highway
Safety Manual (HSM) (Reference 7) and crash modification factors (CMFs) to consider the potential
impacts increased traffic growth and the proposed corridor improvements could have on crash
frequency. KAI applied the Urban and Suburban Arterials methodology from Chapter 12 of the HSM,
under the existing conditions and the proposed alternatives.

The HSM methodology employs safety performance functions (SPFs) to predict the number of crashes
expected to occur at an intersection or on a roadway segment based on traffic volumes and site
characteristics. These SPFs are equations developed using data from US roadways. The HSM SPFs
have not been calibrated to Alaska roadways. As a result, per the HSM, the crash frequency prediction
from these SPFs can be used to compare the safety tradeoffs on a percentage basis between
intersection and roadway alternatives (e.g., Alternative Z is estimated to have 15% fewer crashes than
the no-build alternative). The HSM SPFs cannot be used to generate an absolute, precise prediction
for crashes on Alaska roadways (e.g., Alternative Z is estimated to experience 3 crashes per year).




1
    Roundabout LOS is not defined.

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                  Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                            Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                         Page 21


This HSM methodology can be applied to quantify the safety performance for comparison among
alternatives. However, the alternatives analyzed in this study largely consist of the same fundamental
configuration including segment lengths, traffic volumes, and intersection configurations, offering
little differentiation by the HSM methodology. As a result, the predicted safety performance of the
proposed alternatives was compared to the existing conditions. In addition, the safety performance of
the Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection was compared across alternatives as the only HSM
quantifiable factor that differs across alternatives. However, in addition to this quantitative analysis,
each alternative was subjected to a qualitative safety review of factors such as access management
and non-motorized facilities where the alternatives differ.

The HSM prediction methodology indicates that the forecast increase in traffic volumes on the study
roadways and the proposed intersection configurations could result in approximately 2.5 times
intersection and roadway segment crashes in 2035 than under the existing conditions.

The project team used crash modification factors (CMFs) from the HSM and the ADOT&PF Highway
Safety Improvement Program (HSIP) to estimate the safety trade-offs for the proposed Academy
Drive/Vanguard Drive configurations and traffic control, as follows:

                All-way stop control (Alternative A-1)
                Single-lane roundabout (Alternative A-2)
                Vanguard Drive stop control (Alternatives B, C, and D)
Table 3 summarizes the CMFs related to the proposed intersection controls listed above. The
Vanguard Drive stop control is shown as 1.00 as this is the base case for the CMFs (e.g., one CMF
shown below is “convert two-way stop control to a roundabout”).




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                               Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                                              Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                                           Page 22


Table 3 Relevant Crash Modification Factors

     Intersection Traffic Control          CMF      Standard Error         Applicable Crashes                  Source

    Vanguard Drive Stop Control            1.00           --                   All Crashes                Default Condition

                                           0.52         0.04              All Urban Roadways            Highway Safety Manual

                                           0.30         0.06                All Injury Crashes          Highway Safety Manual
        All-Way Stop Control
                                           0.57         0.15           Vehicle/Pedestrian Crashes       Highway Safety Manual

                                           0.30          N/A                 Angle Crashes                 ADOF&PF HSIP

                                           0.71         0.11          All Crashes, Urban Roadways       Highway Safety Manual

      Single-Lane Roundabout               0.19         0.09         Injury Crashes, Urban Roadways     Highway Safety Manual

                                           0.70          N/A         All Crashes, 3-leg Intersections      ADOF&PF HSIP

                                           0.33         0.06                 Angle Crashes              Highway Safety Manual

            Traffic Signal                 0.40          N/A                 Angle Crashes                 ADOF&PF HSIP

                                           1.25          N/A               Rear-End Crashes                ADOF&PF HSIP

                                                                       Injury Crashes at Signalized
    Major Street Right Turn Lane           0.91         0.04                                            Highway Safety Manual
                                                                               Intersection

                                                                     Rear-End and Sideswipe Crashes
                                           0.90          N/A          on Target Approach at Urban          ADOF&PF HSIP
                                                                         Signalized Intersection

                                                                     Rear-End and Sideswipe Crashes
                                           0.90          N/A          on Target Approach at Urban          ADOF&PF HSIP
                                                                        Unsignalized Intersection



KAI concluded the following:

                All-way stop control is predicted to result in a reduction of 40 percent or greater in total,
                 injury, pedestrian, and angle crashes.
                A single-lane roundabout is expected to reduce total crashes by 30 percent and reduce
                 the number of injury crashes by 80 percent.
                Converting the Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive intersection to a traffic signal is predicted to
                 reduce angle crashes by 60 percent or greater, but increase rear-end crashes by 25
                 percent.
                Installing a right-turn lane on Abbott Road at the Vanguard Drive intersection is expected
                 to reduce crashes by approximately 10 percent.
These expected crash reductions would apply to crashes that are forecast to occur at the Academy
Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection. Under existing conditions, this intersection experienced four
crashes in five years. The expected crash frequency is forecast to grow with the additional traffic from
the 92nd Avenue interchange.

In addition to this quantitative analysis, each alternative was subjected to a qualitative safety review
of factors such as access management and non-motorized facilities where the alternatives differ.

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                 Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                         Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                      Page 23


These safety factors need to be balanced by the project team considering the performance of the
various traffic control measures, non-motorized accommodation, cost-effectiveness, and applicability
to the Academy Drive corridor.


FUTURE NON-MOTORIZED EVALUATION
The roadway cross section for each analyzed alternative consists of the same basic cross section and
pedestrian/bicycle features. Under each alternative, the proposed traffic signal at the Abbott
Road/Vanguard Drive intersection would ease pedestrian/bicycle crossings at that location. Other
factors that affect non-motorized conditions are evaluated where they differ between alternatives.
Pedestrian crossing features, such as curb extensions and marked crosswalks will be considered as
the design process progresses.


ALTERNATIVES EVALUATION
As discussed above, the roadway alignments, intersection locations, and traffic control vary across
each alternative. Each alternative was qualitatively evaluated in addition to the quantitative
operations and safety analysis presented above. These results are presented below.


ALTERNATIVE A
Alternative A utilizes the existing Academy Drive and Vanguard Drive alignments, minimizing right-of-
way impacts. This alternative was split into two sub-alternatives with differing traffic control.


Alternative A-1
This alternative replaces the existing Academy Drive stop control at the Academy Drive/Vanguard
Drive intersection with all-way stop control, and thus is expected to experience fewer crashes. The
forecast peak hour traffic can be accommodated under all-way stop control, as shown in Figure 8. A
schematic design of this alternative is shown in Figure 9.


Alternative A-2
This alternative calls for a single-lane roundabout at the Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection,
as shown in Figure 10. A roundabout would reduce the number of expected crashes at this
intersection compared to a two-way stop control. A roundabout would impact adjacent properties,
likely requiring additional right-of-way. Although a roundabout at this location could serve the
forecasted traffic demand, unbalanced traffic flows and proximity to the proposed signal at the
Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive intersection makes a roundabout less desirable.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                            Anchorage, Alaska
        80.0'




80.0'
        80.0'




80.0'
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                           Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                        Page 26


A sidewalk and multi-use path would provide good pedestrian and bicycle circulation with minimal
conflicts from driveways for both alternatives. Pedestrians crossing at the Academy Drive/Vanguard
Drive intersection would be well served by both the proposed all-way stop control and a single-lane
roundabout.

The existing gas station driveway (Parcel 137) is located approximately 60 feet from Abbott
Road/Academy Drive intersection. Due to this close spacing and the resulting left-turn conflicts, the
project team recommends a raised median restricting left turns in and out of the gas station on
Academy Drive.

Both intersection traffic control devices in this alternative require vehicles to make a turn at the
Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection to proceed between Abbott Road and the 92 nd Avenue
interchange. This movement is not consistent with the minor arterial designation nor with driver
expectation, and thus was eliminated from further consideration.


ALTERNATIVE B
The project team developed this alternative to prioritize the east-west connection from the Seward
Highway to Abbott Road while aiming to minimize impacts to adjacent properties. The traffic
operations analysis indicates that all study intersections are forecast to operate acceptably with the
proposed intersection traffic control and lane configurations, including two-way stop control at the
Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection. A sidewalk and multi-use path would provide good
pedestrian and bicycle circulation with minimal conflicts from driveways.

This alternative was split into Alternatives B-1 and B-2, shown in Figures 11 and 12; however, the two
options vary only slightly by curve radius and the associated superelevation. As this variation is too
subtle to be evaluated by traffic operations and safety, these sub-alternatives were analyzed
together.

As with Alternative A, the close spacing of the existing gas station driveway to the Abbott
Road/Academy Drive intersection leads the project team to recommend a raised median restricting
left turns in and out of the gas station on Academy Drive.

No fatal flaws have been identified for this alternative. The right-of-way acquisition does affect one
property. Effective access can be provided to all properties along the proposed alignment.


ALTERNATIVE C
As with Alternative B, this alternative prioritizes the east-west connection from the Seward Highway
to Abbott Road and is shown in Figure 13. This alternative differs from Alternative B in the location of
the 92nd Avenue connector’s intersection with Abbott Road, the configuration of the Academy
Drive/Hartzell Road intersection, and the location and scope of property impacts.

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                              Anchorage, Alaska
        DESIGN  SPEED == 35
        DESIGN SPEED     35 MPH.
                            MPH.
        RADIUS == 340'
        RADIUS    340'
        SUPERELEVATION == 6%
        SUPERELEVATION      6%




80.0'
        DESIGN  SPEED == 35
        DESIGN SPEED     35 MPH
                            MPH
        RADIUS == 408'
        RADIUS    408'
        SUPERELEVATION == 2%
        SUPERELEVATION      2%




80.0'
APPROX. 40'
APPROX. 40'
RECONSTRUCTION
RECONSTRUCTION
REQUIRED
REQUIRED
FOR ADOT
FOR ADOT PROJECT
         PROJECT


                   80.0'




                     DESIGN  SPEED == 35
                     DESIGN SPEED     35 MPH
                                         MPH
                     RADIUS == 650
                     RADIUS    650
                     NO SUPERELEVATION.
                     NO SUPERELEVATION.
                     ROADWAY HAS
                     ROADWAY    HAS NORMAL
                                    NORMAL CROWN
                                             CROWN
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                             Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                          Page 30


The altered location of the Academy Drive/Abbott Road intersection is functionally very similar to the
configuration analyzed in Alternative B. The traffic volumes on Abbott Road and Academy Drive will
be essentially equal to those forecast for Alternative B. The reconfiguration of Hartzell Road forming
the fourth leg to the Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection did require a small modification to
the analysis at that location. This configuration combines the two existing Academy Drive
intersections at Vanguard Road and Hartzell Road into one intersection. All study intersections are
forecast to operate acceptably, as shown in Figure 8. The Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection
is forecast to operate at LOS D in 2035, which is acceptable.

The property impacts and removal of the existing Vanguard Drive east of Hartzell Road would shift
local circulation from the existing Vanguard Drive alignment, which would no longer connect Abbott
Road to Academy Drive or Hartzell Road. As currently proposed, full access to the gas station on
Parcel 137 from Abbott Road would be maintained via the existing Abbott Road/Vanguard Drive
intersection. Parcels 156 and 157 would no longer have access from Vanguard Drive, but from the
extended Hartzell Road. Parcel 129 would likely have full access to Academy Drive via a driveway
relocated to the west of the existing access.

No fatal flaws were found with this alternative and the primary differentiating factor would likely be
the cost of the right-of-way acquisition and neighborhood impacts of the revised traffic circulation.


ALTERNATIVE D
This alternative is a variation of Alternative B with a more direct Academy Drive alignment between
the 92nd Avenue interchange and Abbott Road. The Academy Drive intersections at Vanguard Drive
and Abbott Road have the same configurations at Alternative B, thus are functionally very similar to
Alternative B.

This alternative was split into Alternatives D-1 and D-2, shown in Figures 14 and 15; however, the two
options vary only slightly. Alternative D-1 includes three curves to minimize property impacts. These
curves may contribute to lower vehicles speeds, which may improve the safety and non-motorized
environment along the roadway. Alternative D-2 includes a straight roadway section which impacts
Parcels 155 and 159 slightly more than D-1. As this variation is too subtle to be evaluated by
quantitative traffic operations and safety analyses, these sub-alternatives were analyzed together.

The close spacing (approximately 100 feet) between the offset intersections of Vanguard Drive and
Hartzell Road on Academy Drive could lead to left-turn conflicts. As a result, this alternative includes a
raised median restricting left turns on Academy Drive between Abbott Road and Vanguard Drive.

The existing Academy Drive alignment will be maintained as a roadway stub between Vanguard Drive
and the Parcel 158 driveway to provide local access. The proposed alignment would require the
acquisition of Parcel 156 and bisects Parcel 158, though the existing buildings may be able to be



Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                Anchorage, Alaska
        DESIGN SPEED
        DESIGN  SPEED == 35
                         35 MPH
                            MPH
        RADIUS == 510'
        RADIUS    510'
        NO SUPERELEVATION.
        NO SUPERELEVATION.
        ROADWAY HAS
        ROADWAY    HAS NORMAL
                       NORMAL CROWN
                                CROWN




80.0'




        DESIGN SPEED
        DESIGN  SPEED == 35
                         35 MPH
                            MPH
        RADIUS == 510'
        RADIUS    510'
        NO SUPERELEVATION.
        NO SUPERELEVATION.
        ROADWAY HAS
        ROADWAY    HAS NORMAL
                       NORMAL CROWN
                                CROWN
                                DESIGN
                                DESIGN SPEED
                                        SPEED == 35
                                                 35 MPH
                                                    MPH
                                RADIUS
                                RADIUS == 510'
                                          510'
                                NO
                                NO SUPERELEVATION.
                                   SUPERELEVATION.
                                ROADWAY
                                ROADWAY HASHAS NORMAL
                                               NORMAL CROWN
                                                        CROWN




80.0'




DESIGN  SPEED == 35
DESIGN SPEED     35 MPH
                    MPH
RADIUS == 510'
RADIUS    510'
NO SUPERELEVATION.
NO SUPERELEVATION.
ROADWAY HAS
ROADWAY    HAS NORMAL
               NORMAL CROWN
                        CROWN
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                            Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                         Page 33


maintained. Access to all remaining properties can be accommodated. However, this alternative
includes areas of right-of-way not used for roadway facilities. The potential uses of these areas will be
determined.

The traffic operations analysis indicates that all study intersections are forecast to operate acceptably
with the proposed intersection traffic control and lane configurations, including two-way stop control
at the Academy Drive/Vanguard Drive intersection.

The safety performance is expected to be similar to Alternative B. The differences in roadway
curvature at low speeds are not expected to have a measurable impact on safety performance. The
proposed raised median will eliminate left-turn conflicts at Hartzell Road and Parcel 137. However,
this treatment will result in increased out-of-direction travel, possibly increasing crashes elsewhere.

The provided sidewalk and multi-use path would provide good pedestrian and bicycle circulation with
minimal conflicts from driveways. As with Alternative C, the reconstruction of Hartzell Road allows for
the provision of a sidewalk on that roadway.

No fatal flaws have been identified for this alternative.


ALTERNATIVE E
A conceptual depiction of Alternative E is shown in Figure 16. In this alternative, Academy Drive
extends east to intersect with Abbott Road at Independence Drive. Hartzell Road would connect
Abbott Road at 88th Avenue to Academy Drive. Abbott Road between 88th Avenue and Toloff Street
would be reconfigured as a local access roadway. Through traffic travelling between the Dimond
Boulevard interchange and Abbott Road east of Lake Otis Parkway would utilize Hartzell Road and
Academy Drive.

Additionally, this configuration would encourage drivers to/from east Abbott Road to use Academy
Drive/92nd Avenue instead of Dimond Boulevard. As a result, the proposed 92nd Avenue interchange
would like require a northbound on-ramp to serve the additional demand. This modification would
require the removal of the existing northbound off-ramp at Dimond Boulevard, diverting traffic from
that off-ramp to the proposed northbound off-ramp at 92nd Avenue.

The impacts of this alternative include modifications to the existing Dimond Boulevard interchange
with the Seward Highway and substantial traffic shifts beyond the scope of this alternative analysis.
As a result, this alternative was only subjected to a qualitative evaluation at this time. A thorough
evaluation of this alternative would likely require a subarea study. This study would require analysis
of both interchanges and additional travel demand modeling to forecast route choice for regional
Seward Highway access and east-to-west connectivity. Considerable coordination with ADOT&PF
would be required to pursue such an analysis. Additional preliminary factors to be addressed are as
follows:


Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                               Anchorage, Alaska
ACADEMY DR.
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                               Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                            Page 35


                This alternative impacts existing businesses on Abbott Road between 88th Avenue and
                 Toloff Street. Access would need to be provided to the existing Abbott Road corridor via
                 connections to the reconfigured Academy Drive and Hartzell Road. Though a signal could
                 be provided at the Academy Drive/Hartzell Road intersection, the available spacing would
                 likely prevent an additional traffic signal to provide this access.
                The substantial diversion from Dimond Boulevard to 92nd Avenue for regional east-west
                 trips and Seward Highway access would result in heavy demand at the proposed 92 nd
                 Avenue interchange roundabouts. In addition, the large number of expected southbound
                 left-turns at the Academy Drive/Hartzell Road intersection would likely be difficult to
                 accommodate.
                The alternative would increase the forecast traffic volumes on Academy Drive, changing
                 the character of the roadway. As a result, a two- or three-lane cross section would likely
                 be insufficient to serve the future demand.
If Alternative E garners sufficient support from project stakeholders, the impacts and mitigations of
that alternative will be studied in further detail. Preferred alternatives will be selected for future
evaluation and more detailed analysis and design.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                  Anchorage, Alaska
Academy/Vanguard Traffic Circulation Improvements                                          Project #: 11789
June 4, 2012                                                                                       Page 36



REFERENCES
           1. 2010 Central Region Traffic Volume Report. Alaska Department of Transportation and
              Public Facilities.
           2. 92nd Avenue Traffic Volume Forecasts and Operations Analysis Interim Report. Kinney
              Engineering, LLC. 2009.
           3. Alaska Highway Safety Improvement Program Handbook, 10th Edition. Alaska Department
              of Transportation and Public Facilities. 2011.
           4. Capacity and Level of Service at Unsignalized Intersections. NCHRP Web Document 5.
              Transportation Research Board. 1996.
           5. Highway Traffic Data for Urbanized Area Project Planning and Design. NCHRP 255.
              Transportation Research Board. 1982.
           6. Evaluating Intersection Improvements: An Engineering Study Guide. NCHRP 457.
              Transportation Research Board. 2001.
           7. Highway Safety Manual, 1st Edition. American Association of State Highway and
              Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 2010.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                             Anchorage, Alaska
Appendix 1 Traffic Volume Data
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Abbott Rd -- Vanguard Dr                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10714301
 CITY/STATE: Anchorage, AK                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Feb 14 2012
                    1137          787                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                 0.8        1.1

                     187 917 33
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                           0.0 1.0 0.0

       228   29                         77   81
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0
             1             0.94          0
                                                                                                                    0.0                       0.0
       85    55                          4   49
                                                                                                              1.2   1.8                       0.0      0.0

                        41 681 15
                                                                                                                           0.0 1.3 0.0

                     976          737
                                                                                                                           1.0        1.2



                            4                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                    0                          0

             1                           0                                                                          0                          0

                                                                                                                    0                          0


                            1                                                                                               0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                         NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count                 Abbott Rd                     Abbott Rd               Vanguard Dr                 Vanguard Dr
     Period                (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                  Left      Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:15 PM        2        55       3    0        5      58     10    0     2      0      2      0     0        0      1       0          138         1796
     4:20 PM        4        52       1    0        5      86      9    0     4      0      1      0     0        1     10       0          173         1812
     4:25 PM        4        54       1    0        1      77     18    0     4      0      5      0     0        0      8       0          172         1833
     4:30 PM        3        46       2    0        3      88     14    0     1      0      3      0     0        0      3       0          163         1840
     4:35 PM        2        75       1    0        0      78      5    0     2      0      3      0     1        0      3       0          170         1881
     4:40 PM        2        49       0    0        4      70     12    1     2      0      2      0     2        0      3       0          147         1882
     4:45 PM        4        59       2    0        3      85     15    0     2      0      0      0     1        0      4       0          175         1901
     4:50 PM        6        49       3    0        6      78     10    0     5      0      6      0     1        0      2       0          166         1903
     4:55 PM        5        54       0    0        3      69     16    0     0      0      5      0     2        0      2       0          156         1914
     5:00 PM        4        78       3    0        0      72      6    0     1      0     14      0     0        0      6       0          184         1968
     5:05 PM        4        57       0    0        3      92     13    0     3      0      5      0     0        0     15       0          192         1982
     5:10 PM        0        42       1    0        4      78     18    0     6      0      2      0     0        0     13       0          164         2000
     5:15 PM        6        52       1    0        1      76     19    0     4      1      4      0     0        0      6       0          170         2032
     5:20 PM        2        58       0    0        2      64     14    0     2      0      3      0     0        0      4       0          149         2008
     5:25 PM        5        59       1    0        6      63     22    0     0      0      5      0     0        0      5       0          166         2002
     5:30 PM        1        52       1    0        1      77     13    0     3      0      4      0     0        0      7       0          159         1998
     5:35 PM        3        56       1    0        3      87     16    0     2      0      4      0     0        0      4       0          176         2004
     5:40 PM        1        65       2    0        1      76     25    0     1      0      3      0     0        0      9       0          183         2040
     5:45 PM        3        63       0    0        3      71     13    0     1      0      6      0     0        0      2       0          162         2027
     5:50 PM        2        67       1    0        3      61     15    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      2       0          153         2014
     5:55 PM        3        46       1    0        3      69     20    0     1      0      6      0     0        0      4       0          153         2011
     6:00 PM        0        52       2    0        1      85     10    0     4      0      4      0     0        0      1       0          159         1986
     6:05 PM        0        44       0    0        4      70     13    0     1      1      7      0     0        0     16       0          156         1950
     6:10 PM        2        43       1    0        2      68     13    0     2      0      2      0     1        0      7       0          141         1927
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                   Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates       Left      Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     32       708      16    0       28     968    148    0    40      0     84      0     0        0   136        0                  2160
 Heavy Trucks       0        12       0             0      20      0          0      0      4            0        0      0                           36
  Pedestrians                 0                             0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles         0         0       0             0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: DVD for the same period (7am-7pm)
Report generated on 3/20/2012 12:32 PM                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
92nd Avenue
Traffic Volume Forecasts and Operations Analysis
Interim Report, August 7, 2009




Figure 22 - AM Peak Hour Turning Movement Counts (2008-2009)
Kinney Engineering, LLC
                                                   Page A-16
92nd Avenue
Traffic Volume Forecasts and Operations Analysis
Interim Report, August 7, 2009




Figure 24 - PM Peak Hour Turning Movement Counts (2008-2009)
Kinney Engineering, LLC
                                                   Page A-18
Appendix 2 Traffic Operations Worksheets
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
3: Abbott & Vanguard Dr                                                                                                          3/26/2012



Movement                            SEL     SET       SER      NWL         NWT     NWR        NEL     NET     NER    SWL     SWT     SWR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                        40     401        60       31         878       10        36       3     27       2       1      11
Sign Control                                Free                           Free                       Stop                   Stop
Grade                                        0%                             0%                         0%                     0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.91    0.91      0.91      0.91       0.91     0.91      0.91    0.91    0.91   0.91    0.91     0.91
Hourly flow rate (vph)                44     441        66        34        965       11        40       3      30      2       1       12
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)                                                                                                                  1
Median type                                 None                          None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)                         817                           1039
pX, platoon unblocked               0.91                                                       0.91    0.91           0.91    0.91    0.91
vC, conflicting volume               976                        507                           1119    1605    253    1378    1633      488
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   787                        507                            943    1475    253    1227    1506     254
tC, single (s)                        4.1                        4.1                            7.5     6.5    6.9     7.5     6.5     6.9
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                2.2                        2.2                            3.5     4.0    3.3     3.5     4.0     3.3
p0 queue free %                        94                         97                             78      97     96      98      99      98
cM capacity (veh/h)                  757                       1054                            180     104    746     107     100     682
Direction, Lane #                   SE 1    SE 2      SE 3     NW 1       NW 2     NW 3       NE 1    SW 1
Volume Total                           44     294       213       34        643      333        73       15
Volume Left                            44        0         0      34           0        0       40        2
Volume Right                            0        0        66       0           0       11       30       12
cSH                                  757    1700      1700     1054       1700     1700        250      490
Volume to Capacity                  0.06     0.17      0.13     0.03       0.38     0.20      0.29     0.03
Queue Length 95th (ft)                  4        0         0       2           0        0       23        2
Control Delay (s)                   10.0       0.0       0.0     8.5         0.0      0.0     25.2     16.8
Lane LOS                                B                          A                             D        C
Approach Delay (s)                    0.8                        0.3                          25.2     16.8
Approach LOS                                                                                     D        C
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                           1.7
Intersection Capacity Utilization                    49.2%             ICU Level of Service                     A
Analysis Period (min)                                    15




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing AM Peak Hour                                                         Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                                                    Page 1
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
4: Academy Dr & Vanguard Dr                                                                                                   3/26/2012



Movement                            EBL      EBT      EBR     WBL         WBT     WBR        NBL     NBT    NBR    SBL     SBT     SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                        47       8        22       2           1        0        13      51     1       1      30      31
Sign Control                                Stop                          Stop                       Free                  Free
Grade                                        0%                            0%                         0%                    0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.92    0.92      0.92    0.92        0.92     0.92      0.92    0.92   0.92   0.92    0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)                53       9        25       2           1        0        15      57      1      1      34      35
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                                                                          None                  None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume               141     141        51     169         157       58        68                    58
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   141     141        51     169         157        58       68                    58
tC, single (s)                        7.1     6.5      6.2      7.1         6.5      6.2      4.1                   4.1
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                3.5     4.0       3.3     3.5         4.0      3.3       2.2                   2.2
p0 queue free %                        94      99        98    100         100      100         99                  100
cM capacity (veh/h)                  822     743      1017     762         727     1008      1533                  1546
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1    WB 1      NB 1    SB 1
Volume Total                           86        3       73      69
Volume Left                            53        2       15       1
Volume Right                           25        0        1      35
cSH                                  860      750     1533    1546
Volume to Capacity                  0.10     0.00      0.01    0.00
Queue Length 95th (ft)                  7        0        1       0
Control Delay (s)                     9.7      9.8      1.5     0.1
Lane LOS                                A        A        A       A
Approach Delay (s)                    9.7      9.8      1.5     0.1
Approach LOS                            A        A
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                           4.3
Intersection Capacity Utilization                    22.2%            ICU Level of Service                    A
Analysis Period (min)                                    15




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing AM Peak Hour                                                       Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                                                  Page 2
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
6: Academy Dr & Brayton Dr                                                                                3/26/2012



Movement                            WBL      WBR       NBT      NBR        SBL      SBT
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                         0       41       221      66           0        0
Sign Control                        Stop               Free                         Free
Grade                                0%                 0%                           0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.92     0.92      0.92     0.92       0.92     0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)                 0       46       247       74          0        0
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                           None                         None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume               284      161                           321
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   284      161                           321
tC, single (s)                        6.8      6.9                           4.1
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                3.5      3.3                           2.2
p0 queue free %                      100        95                          100
cM capacity (veh/h)                  682      856                          1235
Direction, Lane #                   WB 1     NB 1      NB 2
Volume Total                            46     165       156
Volume Left                              0        0         0
Volume Right                            46        0        74
cSH                                   856    1700      1700
Volume to Capacity                   0.05     0.10      0.09
Queue Length 95th (ft)                   3        0         0
Control Delay (s)                      9.4      0.0       0.0
Lane LOS                                 A
Approach Delay (s)                     9.4     0.0
Approach LOS                             A
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                            1.2
Intersection Capacity Utilization                     18.7%            ICU Level of Service   A
Analysis Period (min)                                     15




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing AM Peak Hour                                   Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                              Page 3
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
7: Vanguard Dr & Independence Dr                                                                        3/26/2012



Movement                            SEL     SER       NEL     NET        SWT     SWR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                        30      32        23     202         43        7
Sign Control                        Stop                      Free       Free
Grade                                0%                        0%         0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.92    0.92      0.92    0.92       0.92     0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)                34      36        26     226         48        8
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                                   None      None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume               330      52        56
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   330       52       56
tC, single (s)                        6.4     6.2      4.1
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                3.5     3.3       2.2
p0 queue free %                        95      96        98
cM capacity (veh/h)                  654    1016      1549
Direction, Lane #                   SE 1    NE 1     SW 1
Volume Total                           69     252       56
Volume Left                            34       26       0
Volume Right                           36        0       8
cSH                                  801    1549     1700
Volume to Capacity                  0.09     0.02     0.03
Queue Length 95th (ft)                  6        1       0
Control Delay (s)                     9.9      0.9     0.0
Lane LOS                                A        A
Approach Delay (s)                    9.9      0.9     0.0
Approach LOS                            A
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                           2.4
Intersection Capacity Utilization                    29.8%           ICU Level of Service   A
Analysis Period (min)                                    15




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing AM Peak Hour                                 Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                            Page 4
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
1109: Abbott & Independence Dr                                                                                                        3/22/2012



Movement                            EBL     EBT       EBR      WBL       WBT       WBR       NBL       NBT      NBR      SBL      SBT     SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (vph)                           5      278       66          25      649      14        227         13     94        11       10      3
Ideal Flow (vphpl)                1850      1850      1850      1850      1850     1850      1850      1850     1850     1850     1850    1850
Total Lost time (s)                  5.5       5.6                 5.5       5.6                6.0       6.0              6.0      6.0
Lane Util. Factor                  1.00      0.95                1.00      0.95               1.00      1.00              1.00     1.00
Frt                                1.00      0.97                1.00      1.00               1.00      0.87              1.00     0.97
Flt Protected                      0.95      1.00                0.95      1.00               0.95      1.00              0.95     1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)                 1723      3346                1723      3435               1723      1575              1723     1755
Flt Permitted                      0.33      1.00                0.51      1.00               0.75      1.00              0.68     1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)                   605     3346                  926     3435               1357      1575              1232     1755
Peak-hour factor, PHF              0.92      0.92     0.92       0.92      0.92     0.92      0.92      0.92     0.92     0.92     0.92    0.92
Growth Factor (vph)              104%      104%      104%      104%      104%      104%     104%      104%      104%    104%     104%     104%
Adj. Flow (vph)                        6      314       75          28      734       16       257         15     106       12       11       3
RTOR Reduction (vph)                   0         0       0           0         0       0          0         0       0        0        0       0
Lane Group Flow (vph)                  6      389        0          28      750        0       257       121        0       12       14       0
Turn Type                       pm+pt                         pm+pt                         Perm                        Perm
Protected Phases                       1        6                    5        2                            4                         8
Permitted Phases                       6                             2                           4                           8
Actuated Green, G (s)              50.2     49.2                 52.4     50.3               21.6      21.6              21.6     21.6
Effective Green, g (s)             50.2     49.2                 52.4     50.3               21.6      21.6              21.6     21.6
Actuated g/C Ratio                 0.56     0.55                 0.58     0.56               0.24      0.24              0.24     0.24
Clearance Time (s)                   5.5     5.6                   5.5     5.6                 6.0       6.0               6.0      6.0
Vehicle Extension (s)                1.3     4.0                   1.3     4.0                 2.0       2.0               2.0      2.0
Lane Grp Cap (vph)                  350    1829                   558    1920                 326       378               296      421
v/s Ratio Prot                     0.00     0.12               c0.00     c0.22                         0.08                       0.01
v/s Ratio Perm                     0.01                          0.03                       c0.19                        0.01
v/c Ratio                          0.02     0.21                 0.05     0.39               0.79      0.32              0.04     0.03
Uniform Delay, d1                    8.9    10.5                   8.0    11.2               32.1      28.2              26.2     26.2
Progression Factor                 1.00     1.00                 1.00     1.00               1.00      1.00              1.00     1.00
Incremental Delay, d2                0.0     0.3                   0.0     0.6               11.1       0.2               0.0      0.0
Delay (s)                            8.9    10.7                   8.0    11.8               43.1      28.3              26.3     26.2
Level of Service                       A       B                     A       B                  D         C                 C        C
Approach Delay (s)                          10.7                          11.7                         38.4                       26.2
Approach LOS                                   B                             B                            D                          C
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                              18.1          HCM Level of Service                          B
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio                           0.47
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                              90.0          Sum of lost time (s)                        11.5
Intersection Capacity Utilization                    52.0%           ICU Level of Service                           A
Analysis Period (min)                                    15
c Critical Lane Group




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing AM Peak Hour                                                             Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                                                        Page 1
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
1114: 88th & Abbott                                                                                           3/22/2012



Movement                            WBL      WBR        NBT      NBR        SBL       SBT
Lane Configurations
Volume (vph)                            13      178       861      20         123       436
Ideal Flow (vphpl)                   1850     1850      1850     1850       1850      1850
Total Lost time (s)                    5.5       5.5       5.8                 5.8       5.8
Lane Util. Factor                     1.00     1.00      0.95                1.00      0.95
Frt                                   1.00     0.85      1.00                1.00      1.00
Flt Protected                         0.95     1.00      1.00                0.95      1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)                    1723     1542      3434                1723      3446
Flt Permitted                         0.95     1.00      1.00                0.25      1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)                    1723     1542      3434                  445     3446
Peak-hour factor, PHF                 0.92     0.92      0.92     0.92       0.92      0.92
Growth Factor (vph)                 104%     104%      104%      104%      104%      104%
Adj. Flow (vph)                         15      201       973       23        139       493
RTOR Reduction (vph)                     0      186          0       0           0         0
Lane Group Flow (vph)                   15        15      996        0        139       493
Turn Type                                    Perm                         pm+pt
Protected Phases                        4                   2                    1        6
Permitted Phases                                  4                              6
Actuated Green, G (s)                  8.7      8.7     86.7               100.0     100.0
Effective Green, g (s)                 8.7      8.7     86.7               100.0     100.0
Actuated g/C Ratio                   0.07     0.07      0.72                 0.83      0.83
Clearance Time (s)                     5.5      5.5      5.8                   5.8      5.8
Vehicle Extension (s)                  1.8      1.8      2.5                   1.5      2.5
Lane Grp Cap (vph)                    125      112     2481                   451     2872
v/s Ratio Prot                       0.01              c0.29               c0.02       0.14
v/s Ratio Perm                               c0.01                           0.24
v/c Ratio                            0.12     0.13      0.40                 0.31     0.17
Uniform Delay, d1                    52.1     52.1       6.5                   2.9     1.9
Progression Factor                   1.00     1.00      1.00                 1.00     1.00
Incremental Delay, d2                 0.2      0.2       0.5                   0.1     0.1
Delay (s)                            52.2     52.3       7.0                   3.0     2.1
Level of Service                        D        D         A                     A       A
Approach Delay (s)                   52.3                7.0                           2.3
Approach LOS                            D                  A                             A
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                                10.7           HCM Level of Service     B
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio                             0.37
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                               120.0           Sum of lost time (s)   17.1
Intersection Capacity Utilization                      54.3%            ICU Level of Service      A
Analysis Period (min)                                      15
c Critical Lane Group




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing AM Peak Hour                                       Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                                  Page 2
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
3: Abbott Road & Vanguard Dr                                                                                                     3/26/2012



Movement                            SEL     SET       SER      NWL         NWT     NWR        NEL     NET     NER    SWL     SWT     SWR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                        33     917       187        41        681       15        29       1     55       4       1      77
Sign Control                                Free                           Free                       Stop                   Stop
Grade                                        0%                             0%                         0%                     0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.94    0.94      0.94      0.94       0.94     0.94      0.94    0.94    0.94   0.94    0.94     0.94
Hourly flow rate (vph)                35     976       199        44        724       16        31       1      59      4       1       82
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)                                                                                                                  1
Median type                                 None                          None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)                         813                           1034
pX, platoon unblocked               0.98                        0.92                           0.93    0.93   0.92    0.93    0.93    0.98
vC, conflicting volume               740                       1174                           1636    1973     587   1437    2064      370
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   695                       1025                           1445    1805    389    1231    1903     317
tC, single (s)                        4.1                        4.1                            7.5     6.5    6.9     7.5     6.5     6.9
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                2.2                        2.2                           3.5      4.0    3.3     3.5    4.0      3.3
p0 queue free %                        96                         93                            55       98     90      96     98       88
cM capacity (veh/h)                  879                        622                             69       65   563     101      57     665
Direction, Lane #                   SE 1    SE 2      SE 3     NW 1       NW 2     NW 3       NE 1    SW 1
Volume Total                           35     650       524        44       483      257        90       87
Volume Left                            35        0         0       44          0        0       31        4
Volume Right                            0        0      199         0          0       16       59       82
cSH                                  879    1700      1700       622      1700     1700        159      708
Volume to Capacity                  0.04     0.38      0.31     0.07       0.28     0.15      0.57     0.12
Queue Length 95th (ft)                  2        0         0        5          0        0       59        8
Control Delay (s)                     9.3      0.0       0.0    11.2         0.0      0.0     54.1     13.3
Lane LOS                                A                           B                            F        B
Approach Delay (s)                    0.3                         0.6                         54.1     13.3
Approach LOS                                                                                     F        B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                           3.2
Intersection Capacity Utilization                    53.5%             ICU Level of Service                     A
Analysis Period (min)                                    15




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing PM Peak Hour                                                         Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                                                    Page 1
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
4: Academy Dr & Vanguard Dr                                                                                                 3/26/2012



Movement                            EBL     EBT     EBR     WBL         WBT     WBR        NBL     NBT    NBR    SBL     SBT     SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                       45       0       29        2          5        0        21      32     0       0     109      61
Sign Control                               Stop                         Stop                       Free                  Free
Grade                                       0%                           0%                         0%                    0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.96   0.96     0.96    0.96        0.96     0.96      0.96    0.96   0.96   0.96    0.96    0.96
Hourly flow rate (vph)                48      0       31       2           5        0        23      34      0      0     117      65
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                                                                        None                  None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume              232     229      150     260         262       34       182                    34
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                  232     229      150     260         262        34      182                    34
tC, single (s)                       7.1     6.5      6.2     7.1         6.5      6.2       4.1                  4.1
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                               3.5     4.0      3.3     3.5         4.0      3.3       2.2                   2.2
p0 queue free %                       93    100        97    100           99     100         98                  100
cM capacity (veh/h)                 710     660      897     660         633     1039      1393                  1577
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1   WB 1     NB 1    SB 1
Volume Total                          79       8       57     182
Volume Left                           48       2       23        0
Volume Right                          31       0        0       65
cSH                                  773     640    1393    1577
Volume to Capacity                  0.10    0.01     0.02    0.00
Queue Length 95th (ft)                 7       1        1        0
Control Delay (s)                   10.2    10.7      3.1      0.0
Lane LOS                               B       B        A
Approach Delay (s)                  10.2    10.7      3.1     0.0
Approach LOS                           B       B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                         3.3
Intersection Capacity Utilization                  32.2%            ICU Level of Service                    A
Analysis Period (min)                                  15




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing PM Peak Hour                                                     Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                                                Page 2
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
6: Academy Dr & Brayton Dr                                                                                3/26/2012



Movement                            WBL      WBR       NBT      NBR        SBL      SBT
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                         0       79       183      72           0        0
Sign Control                        Stop               Free                         Free
Grade                                0%                 0%                           0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.96     0.96      0.96     0.96       0.96     0.96
Hourly flow rate (vph)                 0       85       196       77          0        0
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                           None                         None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume               235      137                           274
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   235      137                           274
tC, single (s)                        6.8      6.9                           4.1
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                3.5      3.3                           2.2
p0 queue free %                      100        90                          100
cM capacity (veh/h)                  732      887                          1287
Direction, Lane #                   WB 1     NB 1      NB 2
Volume Total                            85     131       143
Volume Left                              0        0         0
Volume Right                            85        0        77
cSH                                   887    1700      1700
Volume to Capacity                   0.10     0.08      0.08
Queue Length 95th (ft)                   6        0         0
Control Delay (s)                      9.5      0.0       0.0
Lane LOS                                 A
Approach Delay (s)                     9.5     0.0
Approach LOS                             A
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                            2.2
Intersection Capacity Utilization                     19.6%            ICU Level of Service   A
Analysis Period (min)                                     15




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing PM Peak Hour                                   Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                              Page 3
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
7: Vanguard Dr & Independence Dr                                                                       3/26/2012



Movement                            SEL    SER       NEL     NET        SWT     SWR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                        20    114        23     176        297       25
Sign Control                        Stop                     Free       Free
Grade                                0%                       0%         0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.96   0.96      0.96    0.96       0.96     0.96
Hourly flow rate (vph)                21    122        25     189        319       27
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                                  None      None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume              570     332       345
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                  570     332       345
tC, single (s)                       6.4     6.2       4.1
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                               3.5     3.3       2.2
p0 queue free %                       95      83        98
cM capacity (veh/h)                 473     710      1213
Direction, Lane #                   SE 1   NE 1     SW 1
Volume Total                         144     214      345
Volume Left                           21       25        0
Volume Right                         122        0       27
cSH                                  660   1213     1700
Volume to Capacity                  0.22    0.02     0.20
Queue Length 95th (ft)                16        1        0
Control Delay (s)                   12.0      1.1      0.0
Lane LOS                               B        A
Approach Delay (s)                  12.0      1.1     0.0
Approach LOS                           B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                          2.8
Intersection Capacity Utilization                   45.5%           ICU Level of Service   A
Analysis Period (min)                                   15




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing PM Peak Hour                                Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                           Page 4
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
1109: Abbott Road & Independence Dr                                                                                                   3/22/2012



Movement                            EBL     EBT       EBR      WBL       WBT       WBR       NBL       NBT      NBR      SBL      SBT     SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (vph)                          18      945      174        104       509      21        214         52    106        14       75      4
Ideal Flow (vphpl)                1850      1850      1850      1850      1850     1850      1850      1850     1850     1850     1850    1850
Total Lost time (s)                  5.5       5.6                 5.5       5.6                6.0       6.0              6.0      6.0
Lane Util. Factor                  1.00      0.95                1.00      0.95               1.00      1.00              1.00     1.00
Frt                                1.00      0.98                1.00      0.99               1.00      0.90              1.00     0.99
Flt Protected                      0.95      1.00                0.95      1.00               0.95      1.00              0.95     1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)                 1723      3366                1723      3425               1723      1631              1723     1801
Flt Permitted                      0.44      1.00                0.12      1.00               0.70      1.00              0.63     1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)                   791     3366                  226     3425               1273      1631              1149     1801
Peak-hour factor, PHF              0.96      0.96     0.96       0.96      0.96     0.96      0.96      0.96     0.96     0.96     0.96    0.96
Growth Factor (vph)              104%      104%      104%      104%      104%      104%     104%      104%      104%    104%     104%     104%
Adj. Flow (vph)                       20    1024       188        113       551       23       232         56     115       15       81       4
RTOR Reduction (vph)                   0         0       0           0         0       0          0         0       0        0        0       0
Lane Group Flow (vph)                 20    1212         0        113       574        0       232       171        0       15       85       0
Turn Type                       pm+pt                         pm+pt                         Perm                        Perm
Protected Phases                       1        6                    5        2                            4                         8
Permitted Phases                       6                             2                           4                           8
Actuated Green, G (s)              41.4     39.4                 47.2     42.3               18.6      18.6              18.6     18.6
Effective Green, g (s)             41.4     39.4                 47.2     42.3               18.6      18.6              18.6     18.6
Actuated g/C Ratio                 0.52     0.49                 0.59     0.53               0.23      0.23              0.23     0.23
Clearance Time (s)                   5.5     5.6                   5.5     5.6                 6.0       6.0               6.0      6.0
Vehicle Extension (s)                1.3     4.0                   1.3     4.0                 2.0       2.0               2.0      2.0
Lane Grp Cap (vph)                  433    1658                   225    1811                 296       379               267      419
v/s Ratio Prot                     0.00    c0.36               c0.03      0.17                         0.10                       0.05
v/s Ratio Perm                     0.02                        c0.27                        c0.18                        0.01
v/c Ratio                          0.05     0.73                 0.50     0.32               0.78      0.45              0.06     0.20
Uniform Delay, d1                    9.4    16.1                 10.5     10.7               28.8      26.3              23.9     24.7
Progression Factor                 1.09     1.27                 1.00     1.00               1.00      1.00              1.00     1.00
Incremental Delay, d2                0.0     2.7                   0.6     0.5               11.8       0.3               0.0      0.1
Delay (s)                          10.3     23.2                 11.1     11.1               40.6      26.6              23.9     24.8
Level of Service                       B       C                     B       B                  D         C                 C        C
Approach Delay (s)                          23.0                          11.1                         34.7                       24.7
Approach LOS                                   C                             B                            C                          C
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                              21.6          HCM Level of Service                          C
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio                           0.80
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                              80.0          Sum of lost time (s)                        22.6
Intersection Capacity Utilization                    73.6%           ICU Level of Service                          D
Analysis Period (min)                                    15
c Critical Lane Group




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing PM Peak Hour                                                             Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                                                        Page 1
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
1114: 88th & Abbott Road                                                                                      3/22/2012



Movement                            WBL      WBR        NBT      NBR        SBL       SBT
Lane Configurations
Volume (vph)                            80      260       787      48         327     1332
Ideal Flow (vphpl)                   1850     1850      1850     1850       1850      1850
Total Lost time (s)                    5.5       5.5       5.8                 5.8      5.8
Lane Util. Factor                     1.00     1.00      0.95                1.00      0.95
Frt                                   1.00     0.85      0.99                1.00      1.00
Flt Protected                         0.95     1.00      1.00                0.95      1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)                    1723     1542      3416                1723      3446
Flt Permitted                         0.95     1.00      1.00                0.26      1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)                    1723     1542      3416                  464     3446
Peak-hour factor, PHF                 0.96     0.96      0.96     0.96       0.96      0.96
Growth Factor (vph)                 104%     104%      104%      104%      104%      104%
Adj. Flow (vph)                         87      282       853       52        354     1443
RTOR Reduction (vph)                     0      261          0       0           0        0
Lane Group Flow (vph)                   87        21      905        0        354     1443
Turn Type                                    Perm                         pm+pt
Protected Phases                        4                   2                    1       6
Permitted Phases                                  4                              6
Actuated Green, G (s)                12.1     12.1     103.2               136.6     136.6
Effective Green, g (s)               12.1     12.1     103.2               136.6     136.6
Actuated g/C Ratio                   0.08     0.08       0.65                0.85      0.85
Clearance Time (s)                     5.5      5.5       5.8                  5.8      5.8
Vehicle Extension (s)                  1.8      1.8       2.5                  1.5      2.5
Lane Grp Cap (vph)                    130      117      2203                  613     2942
v/s Ratio Prot                      c0.05                0.26              c0.10       0.42
v/s Ratio Perm                                0.01                         c0.39
v/c Ratio                            0.67     0.18      0.41                 0.58     0.49
Uniform Delay, d1                    72.0     69.3      13.7                   5.6     2.9
Progression Factor                   1.00     1.00      0.99                 1.00     1.00
Incremental Delay, d2                 9.7      0.3       0.6                   0.8     0.6
Delay (s)                            81.7     69.6      14.1                   6.4     3.5
Level of Service                        F        E         B                     A       A
Approach Delay (s)                   72.4               14.1                           4.1
Approach LOS                            E                  B                             A
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                                15.3           HCM Level of Service     B
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio                             0.58
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                               160.0           Sum of lost time (s)   11.3
Intersection Capacity Utilization                      65.1%            ICU Level of Service     C
Analysis Period (min)                                      15
c Critical Lane Group




Academy/Vanguard Area 12:15 am 10/20/2011 Existing PM Peak Hour                                       Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                                  Page 2
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
4: Academy Dr & Vanguard Dr                                                                                                      6/5/2012



Movement                            EBL     EBT       EBR     WBL        WBT     WBR        NBL    NBT     NBR    SBL     SBT       SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                                Yield                        Yield                     Yield                 Yield
Volume (vph)                         200        2      221       2           5       2        92     20       2      2     69         421
Peak Hour Factor                    0.96    0.96      0.96    0.96       0.96     0.96      0.96   0.96    0.96   0.96   0.96        0.96
Hourly flow rate (vph)               208        2      230       2           5       2        96     21       2      2     72        439
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1    EB 2     WB 1     NB 1       SB 1     SB 2
Volume Total (vph)                   210      230         9    119          74      439
Volume Left (vph)                    208         0        2      96          2         0
Volume Right (vph)                      0     230         2       2          0      439
Hadj (s)                            0.53    -0.67    -0.05    0.18       0.05     -0.67
Departure Headway (s)                 6.7      5.5      6.9     6.6        6.0       5.3
Degree Utilization, x               0.39     0.35     0.02    0.22       0.12      0.65
Capacity (veh/h)                     512      618      461     515        571       662
Control Delay (s)                   12.8     10.3     10.0    11.4         8.7     16.2
Approach Delay (s)                  11.5              10.0    11.4       15.1
Approach LOS                            B                 A       B          C
Intersection Summary
Delay                                                  13.2
HCM Level of Service                                      B
Intersection Capacity Utilization                    46.5%           ICU Level of Service                    A
Analysis Period (min)                                    15




Academy/Vanguard Area 4/24/2012 2035 PM Peak Hour: Alt A-1                                                           Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                                                 Page 1
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
7: Vanguard Dr & Independence Dr                                                                        6/5/2012



Movement                            SEL    SER       NEL     NET        SWT     SWR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                        59    171        69      55        149       41
Sign Control                        Stop                     Free       Free
Grade                                0%                       0%         0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.96   0.96      0.96    0.96       0.96     0.96
Hourly flow rate (vph)                61    178        72      57        155       43
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                                  None      None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume              378     177       198
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                  378     177       198
tC, single (s)                       6.4     6.2       4.1
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                               3.5     3.3       2.2
p0 queue free %                       90      79        95
cM capacity (veh/h)                 591     867      1375
Direction, Lane #                   SE 1   NE 1     SW 1
Volume Total                         240     129      198
Volume Left                           61       72        0
Volume Right                         178        0       43
cSH                                  774   1375     1700
Volume to Capacity                  0.31    0.05     0.12
Queue Length 95th (ft)                26        3        0
Control Delay (s)                   11.7      4.5      0.0
Lane LOS                               B        A
Approach Delay (s)                  11.7      4.5     0.0
Approach LOS                           B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                          6.0
Intersection Capacity Utilization                   41.7%           ICU Level of Service   A
Analysis Period (min)                                   15




Academy/Vanguard Area 4/24/2012 2035 PM Peak Hour: Alt A-1                                     Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                           Page 2
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
3: Abbott Road &                                                                                                                     6/5/2012



Movement                            SEL    SET      SER     NWL          NWT      NWR        NEL     NET     NER    SWL     SWT         SWR
Lane Configurations
Volume (vph)                         22     750      266      192          577      32         76        8    136     15       22          63
Ideal Flow (vphpl)               1850     1850      1850    1850         1850     1850      1850     1850    1850   1850    1850        1850
Total Lost time (s)                 4.0      4.0               4.0          4.0               4.0      4.0                    4.0         4.0
Lane Util. Factor                 1.00     0.95              1.00         0.95               1.00     1.00                   1.00        1.00
Frt                               1.00     0.96              1.00         0.99               1.00     0.86                   1.00        0.85
Flt Protected                     0.95     1.00              0.95         1.00               0.95     1.00                   0.98        1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)                1723     3311              1723         3419               1723     1556                   1777        1542
Flt Permitted                     0.41     1.00              0.95         1.00               0.73     1.00                   0.85        1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)                  746    3311              1723         3419               1327     1556                   1539        1542
Peak-hour factor, PHF             0.96     0.96     0.96     0.96         0.96    0.96       0.96     0.96   0.96    0.96    0.96        0.96
Adj. Flow (vph)                      23     781      277      200          601      33         79        8    142      16      23          66
RTOR Reduction (vph)                  0       31       0         0            3      0          0      124      0       0       0          58
Lane Group Flow (vph)                23   1027         0      200          631       0         79       26      0       0      39           8
Turn Type                       pm+pt                        Prot                           Perm                    Perm                Perm
Protected Phases                      1       6                  5                                      4                       8
Permitted Phases                      6                                      2                   4                     8                     8
Actuated Green, G (s)             46.6     43.8              14.0         55.0               10.2    10.2                    10.2        10.2
Effective Green, g (s)            46.6     43.8              14.0         55.0               10.2    10.2                    10.2        10.2
Actuated g/C Ratio                0.58     0.55              0.18         0.69               0.13    0.13                    0.13        0.13
Clearance Time (s)                  4.0     4.0                4.0         4.0                 4.0     4.0                     4.0         4.0
Vehicle Extension (s)               2.5     2.5                2.5         2.5                 2.5     2.5                     2.5         2.5
Lane Grp Cap (vph)                 469    1813                302        2351                 169     198                     196         197
v/s Ratio Prot                    0.00    c0.31             c0.12                                    0.02
v/s Ratio Perm                    0.03                                   0.18               c0.06                            0.03        0.01
v/c Ratio                         0.05     0.57              0.66        0.27                0.47    0.13                    0.20        0.04
Uniform Delay, d1                   7.1    11.9              30.8         4.8                32.4    31.0                    31.2        30.6
Progression Factor                0.84     0.98              0.95        1.63                1.00    1.00                    1.00        1.00
Incremental Delay, d2               0.0     1.1               4.7         0.3                 1.5     0.2                     0.4         0.1
Delay (s)                           6.0    12.8              34.1         8.1                33.9    31.2                    31.6        30.7
Level of Service                      A       B                 C           A                   C       C                       C           C
Approach Delay (s)                         12.6                          14.3                        32.1                    31.0
Approach LOS                                  B                             B                           C                       C
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                            16.1            HCM Level of Service                      B
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio                         0.57
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                            80.0            Sum of lost time (s)                    12.0
Intersection Capacity Utilization                  65.9%             ICU Level of Service                      C
Analysis Period (min)                                  15
c Critical Lane Group




Academy/Vanguard Area 4/24/2012 2035 PM Peak Hour: Alt A-1                                                              Synchro 7 - Report
                                                                                                                                    Page 1
