MEMORANDUM

Date:           May 24, 2012                                                            Project #: 12396
To:             Heather Richards, PCED, and James Lewis
                City of Redmond
From:           Joe Bessman, PE, PTOE, Matt Kittelson & Julia Kuhn, PE
Project:        Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension
Subject:        Transportation Planning Rule Analysis and Findings




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This technical memorandum addresses Transportation Planning Rule findings related to the proposed
Quarry Avenue extension from US 97 to 19th Street. This proposal would extend the roadway from its
current terminus near the Juniper Golf Course south and west to connect into US 97 at Quarry Avenue.
The road would be located within the City of Redmond Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) and urban fringe
(Deschutes County).

The need for this roadway connection was identified within Deschutes County's adopted 1998
Transportation System Plan and also within the City of Redmond's 2008 Transportation System Plan (TSP).
The City's plan identifies the roadway only within the City's UGB, with discussion of the futur e extension
south of City boundaries.

An extension of Quarry Avenue will serve as a Collector Roadway throughout its length from US 97 to
Airport Way, providing connectivity and an alternative emergency route to Roberts Field (herein referred
to as "the airport"), the Fairgrounds and to OR 126. The proposal would include an interchange on US 97
and a grade-separated crossing of the Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) rail line.

As summarized within this memorandum, the proposed connection and designation of this facility as a
Collector roadway will serve several purposes:

           The grade-separated BNSF overcrossing will provide a critical emergency connection to the
           Redmond Airport and the Deschutes County Fairgrounds and Exposition Center (herein referred to
           as the "fairgrounds") via the only grade-separated rail crossing in southern Redmond.
           A new interchange at US 97 will improve the connectivity of eastern Redmond to regional traffic
           to and from the south. This will also provide a relief valve to address forecast congestion at the
           existing BNSF and US 97 portals.
           Regional events at the fairgrounds will be provided an additional access route to alleviate event
           congestion, particularly to and from the highly populated Bend area south of Redmond.




FILENAME: 12396DRAFT
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                            Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


          A new interchange at Quarry Avenue at US 97 would build toward the adopted plans for a
          Helmholtz Road extension along the west side of Redmond (Westside Arterial). As envisioned, an
          interchange at Quarry Avenue would serve as the southern terminal to this new connection.

The relevant criteria to amend a Transportation System Plan are contained within the Transportation
Planning Rule (TPR), OAR 660-12. The TPR requires land use and transportation coordination between
ODOT, Deschutes County, and City plans related to the proposed extension. As discussed in this
memorandum, the Quarry Avenue extension meets these criteria for the reasons outlined below.

          The Redmond TSP identifies the portion of this connection (19th Street) within the Redmond city
          limits as a Minor Arterial and includes discussion of the future extension to Quarry Avenue.
          Forecast travel demand data shows that without land use changes or congestion along the US 97
          to Yew Avenue/Airport Way route (traffic congestion, incidents, or rail blockages), the corridor
          would not carry volumes typical of an arterial facility and would be more appropriately designated
          as a Major Collector. This designation would continue to allow the three-lane section envisioned
          (and constructed within the UGB) for this corridor.
          The Deschutes County TSP identifies a future interchange at/near Quarry Avenue as a high priority
          project and the County has agreed to partially fund the improvement.
          ODOT and Deschutes County prepared the Yew Avenue to Deschutes Market Road plan in 2002
          that identified the connection and a new US 97 interchange at Quarry Road.
          The Bureau of Land Management Upper Deschutes Plan identifies as an allowable use the
          designation of a ½ mile wide corridor from 19th Street south to the Deschutes Junction, citing "This
          includes a corridor connection to Quarry Avenue that will allow for a future Federal Highway
          Interchange."
          The Department of State Lands prepared a tract plan (South Redmond Tract Land Use and
          Management Plan, 2008) that includes a concept plan for the long-term development of 945 acres
          of large-lot industrial/employment development with a rail spur connection. The plan identifies a
          future roadway corridor extending from 19th Street south through these properties.

The Quarry Avenue extension is already identified in ODOT, Deschutes County, City, and local tract plans
(including both DSL and BLM who would be affected by the alignment) and as such the purpose and need
for the connection has already been established. Amending the City's TSP to designate the Quarry Avenue
extension as a Major Collector roadway provides a consistent vision between the City, County, and ODOT.
The assessment included herein seeks to further align the vision for this connection between various
agencies and establish design parameters for this connection to inform future funding needs.

Additional details on the relevant plan and policies, existing and future transportation system conditions,
and compliance with the Transportation Planning Rule are summarized herein.




                                                                                                           Page 2
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                                           Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


PROJECT LITERATURE REVIEW
The Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) mandates that the State develop a comprehensive plan and
policies for its facilities, and that counties and cities also prepare TSPs that comply with State policies and
goals. To ensure this coordination and compliance, a literature review was completed summarizing
relevant elements of Statewide, regional, and local plans. For this project literature review, the following
plans and their relevance to this extension are summarized in Table 1.

                                                   Table 1
                                         Summary of Relevant Literature

                    Plan                                                 How the Plan Pertains

                                                     Statewide Plans
Transportation Planning Rule (TPR)       Provides the relevant State goals, intent, and criteria for preparing and amending a
                                         Transportation System Plan. This provides the applicable review criteria for the
                                         Quarry Avenue Extension as it will require an amendment to the City and County TSP.
Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP)         The OTP is the State TSP; this document provides Statewide goals and policies. The
                                         TPR requires that TSP amendments coordinate with State and Regional plans.
Oregon Highway Plan (OHP)                The OHP is the roadway element of the OTP. This document contains applicable goals
                                         and objectives for US 97 related to access, performance, and management.
Oregon Rail Plan                         This plan identifies Statewide goals related to the management of the State's rail
                                         system.
                                                      Regional Plans
Deschutes County Transportation System   The Deschutes County TSP provides the long-range system needs to support growth
Plan (1998)                              and economic development throughout the County. The Quarry Avenue extension is
                                         primarily within Deschutes County, and this is the applicable plan to assess
                                         consistency with as part of the amendment.
Upper Deschutes Resource Management      This is a regional plan prepared by BLM that identifies the management strategies for
Plan (2005)                              land assets throughout the tri-county region. This plan identifies allowable uses and
                                         long-range transportation corridors for the region, and includes discussion of the 19th
                                         Street extension to Deschutes Junction along with the connection to Quarry Avenue.
City of Redmond Transportation System    This document contains the goals and policies related to the management of the
Plan (2008)                              City's transportation infrastructure within its UGB. The proposed amendment will
                                         affect the City portion of 19th Street between the south edge of Juniper Golf Course
                                         and the connection to Airport Way.
Central Oregon Rail Plan (2008)          This plan takes a closer look at the priorities and needs along the BNSF line, one of
                                         the key constraints in the area.
                                                        Local Plans
Yew Avenue to Deschutes Market Road      This effort was led by ODOT in collaboration with Deschutes County and identifies the
(2002)                                   Quarry Avenue to 19th Street extension along with needed improvements to the Yew
                                         Avenue interchange.
South Redmond Tract Plan (2008)          This plan was prepared by DSL and other economic interests to provide a long-range
                                         master plan for the 945 acres south of the UGB. The plan identifies roadway corridor
                                         siting that would most benefit the parcels' future development if and when
                                         incorporated into the UGB.




                                                                                                                          Page 3
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                          Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


Transportation Planning Rule
The Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) outlines the required Transportation elements of a community's
Comprehensive Plan. The relevant criteria are found within Oregon Administrative Rule 660-12. As
described within the Purpose section, the TPR is intended to provide and encourage a safe, convenient,
and economic transportation system.

The Transportation Planning Rule integrates the transportation system with other rural and urban land
use planning goals. It requires coordination between State, regional, and local plans that build toward a
unified vision and set of goals. This is accomplished through the State's Transportation System Plan (TSP)
goals and objectives (as identified within the Oregon Transportation Plan) guiding the development of the
Deschutes County TSP, which in turn provides guidance to the City of Redmond TSP.

The TPR outlines the various elements of a Transportation System Plan and includes the following
elements:

          Purpose: the overall purpose of the Transportation Planning Rule and goals
          Transportation Planning: Distinction between system planning and project development,
          allowance of incorporation of plans by reference, and a statement on the goal of accommodating
          pedestrian, bicycle, and transit circulation and access.
          Preparation and Coordination of Transportation System Plans: Requires a TSP be developed for all
          Cities, Counties, MPOs, and the State, and should be coordinated with other agencies.
          Elements of Transportation System Plans: outlines the required multi-modal elements of a
          transportation system plan.
          Complying with the Goals in Preparing Transportation System Plans and Refinement Plans: states
          that TSPs shall include statements identifying how the TSP complies with statewide planning goals
          and defines a TSP as a land use decision.
          Determination of Transportation Needs: Describes how the system needs should be based on
          population and employment forecasts, accessibility goals, facilitating goods movements to
          support commercial and industrial development, and other elements identified in state and
          regional plans.
          Evaluation and Selection of Transportation System Alternatives: This section describes the process
          of assessing various improvement options including management, infrastructure, and policies.
          Transportation Financing Program: Outlines the process of determining costs, priorities/timing
          needs, and allowance of phasing to allow infill.
          Implementation of the Transportation System Plan: describes the amendment of land use
          regulations to implement the TSP and how this is applied.
          Development of projects: Outlines the process relevant to designing specific improvements
          identified within a TSP.
          Timing of Adoption and Update of Transportation System Plans and Exemptions: Describes the
          initial adoption of a TSP, periodic updates, and exemptions to this policy.
          Plan and Land Use Regulation Amendments: Describes the process of amending a TSP while
          maintaining consistency with the required plan elements as described above.




                                                                                                         Page 4
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                                  Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


          Transportation Improvements on Rural Lands: Describes the types of transportation facilities,
          services, and improvements that can be constructed on rural land while avoiding a Goal Exception
          process.
          Exceptions for Transportation Improvements on Rural Land: Outlines facilities that are exempt
          from the prior section.


Oregon Transportation Plan
     The Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) is the Statewide Transportation System Plan as required by
     OAR 660-12. The OTP provides the multi-modal system plan for the State's highway and interstate
     system, and provides goals and policies that guide regional and local plans. The OTP provides an
     overall framework that interconnects the various travel modes within the State; individual modal
     plans provide additional details and strategies. The following modal plans comprise the OTP:

                Oregon Highway Plan
                Oregon Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan
                Oregon Freight Plan
                Oregon Rail Plan
Originally adopted in 1992, the Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) is a policy document developed by ODOT
in response to federal and state mandates for systematic planning for the future of Oregon's transportation
system. The OTP is intended to meet statutory requirements from ORS 184.618(1) to develop a state
transportation policy and comprehensive long-range plan for a multi-modal transportation system that
addresses economic efficiency, orderly economic development, safety, and environmental quality.

The OTP builds on the original policy objectives of the 1992 plan, with an emphasis on maintaining assets in
place, optimizing existing system performance through technology and better system integration, creating
sustainable funding, and investing in strategic capacity enhancements.1 Goals in the OTP include: Mobility
and Accessibility; Management of the System; Economic Vitality; Sustainability; Safety and Security; Funding
the Transportation System; and Coordination, Communication and Cooperation. Policies and strategies
under many of these goals emphasize increasing coordination and cooperation among federal and state
agencies, regional and local governments and private entities to achieve these goals.

The Implementation Framework section of the OTP describes how state modal and facility plans and local
TSPs are expected to refine the OTP's broad policies and investment levels. The State Agency Coordination
Program defines a facility plan as: "a plan for individual transportation facilities that includes identification
of needs for using the facility, an overall plan for improving the system and policies for operating the



1
  The OTP defines "asset management" as a "systematic process of maintaining, upgrading and operating physical
assets cost-effectively. It combines engineering principles with sound business practices and economic theory, and it
provides tools to facilitate a more organized, logical approach to decision-making. Asset management provides a
framework for handling both short- and long-range planning."

                                                                                                                 Page 5
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                          Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


facility." Facility plans must be developed with public involvement, are intended to implement the OTP
and the applicable modal/topic plan goals, policies, implementation strategies, and broad investment
scenario, and, ultimately, must be adopted by the Oregon Transportation Commission (OTC).


Oregon Highway Plan
The Oregon Highway Plan (OHP), an element and modal plan of the state's comprehensive transportation
plan (OTP), guides the planning, operations, and financing of ODOT's Highway Div ision. Policies in the OHP
emphasize the efficient management of the highway system to increase safety and to extend highway
capacity, partnerships with other agencies and local governments, and the use of new techniques to
improve road safety and capacity. These policies also link land use and transportation, set standards for
highway performance and access management, and emphasize the relationship between state highways
and local road, bicycle, pedestrian, transit, rail, and air systems.

The relevant policies found within the OHP that apply to the Quarry Avenue extension include:

                Policy 1A: State Highway Classification System;
                Policy 1B: Land Use and Transportation;
                Policy 1C: State Highway Freight System;
                Policy 1F: Highway Mobility Standards;
                Policy 1G: Major Improvements;
                Policy 2B: Off-System Improvements;
                Policy 2E: Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS);
                Policy 2F: Traffic Safety;
                Policy 3A: Classification and Spacing Standards;
                Policy 3B: Medians;
                Policy 3D: Deviations;
                Policy 4A: Efficiency of Freight Movement;
                Policy 4B: Alternative Passenger Modes;
                Policy 4D: Transportation Demand Management;
                Policy 4E: Park-and-Ride Facilities; and
                Policy 5A: Environmental Resources.


Policy 1A: State Highway Classification System
The state highway classification system includes five classifications: Interstate, Statewide, Regional,
District, and Local Interest Roads. In addition, there are four special purpose categories that overlay the
basic classifications: special land use areas, statewide freight routes, scenic byways, and lifeline routes.

                                                                                                         Page 6
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                            Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


These special designations supplement the highway classification system and are used to guide
management, needs analysis, and investment decisions on the highway system.

In the vicinity of Quarry Avenue, US 97 is classified as a Statewide Highway and Freight Route, and is
considered a part of the National Highway System. The federal Intermodal Surface Transportation
Efficiency Act of 1991 required the establishment of a National Highway System to provide an
interconnected system of principal arterial routes that will serve "interstate and inter -regional travel."
ODOT has an obligation to ensure that the National Highway System in Oregon adequately performs this
function of serving a larger geographic area.


According to Policy 1A, Statewide Highways (NHS):
     "...typically provide inter-urban and inter-regional mobility and provide connections to larger urban
     areas, ports, and major recreation areas that are not directly served by Interstate Highways. A
     secondary function is to provide connections for intra-urban and intra-regional trips. The
     management objective is to provide safe and efficient, high-speed, continuous-flow operation. In
     constrained and urban areas, interruptions to flow should be minimal. Inside Special
     Transportation Areas (STAs), local access may also be a priority."

Within the OHP, US 97 is also classified as an Expressway north beyond Quarry Avenue to the Yew Avenue
interchange. As defined in the OHP, expressways are intended to provide "safe and efficient high speed
and high volume traffic movements." The primary function of an expressway is to provide for interurban
travel and connections to ports and major recreation areas with minimal interruptions; a secondary
function is to provide for long distance intra-urban travel in metropolitan areas. The OHP makes a
distinction between urban and rural areas, with speeds on expressways moderate to high in urban areas
and high speeds in rural areas, where there are typically no pedestrian facilities and bikeways may be
separated from the roadway.


Policy 1B: Land Use and Transportation
This policy recognizes the role of both the State and local governments related to the state highway
system and calls for a coordinated approach to land use and transportation planning. This coordination
must support highway mobility and safety as well as local comprehensive plans, compact development,
transportation options, economic vitality, and overall livability for the communities through which state
roads travel. This policy also recognizes that state highways serve as the main streets of many
communities and strives to maintain a balance between serving local communities (accessibility) and the
through traveler (mobility).


Policy 1C: State Highway Freight System
This policy recognizes the need for the efficient movement of freight through the state and principally
applies to designated Freight Routes such as US 97 within the Study Area. This policy recognizes that
improving and maintaining the efficiency of highway operations requires balancing the needs of freight


                                                                                                           Page 7
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                             Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


movement with the needs of other users of the highway system. Highways included in this designation
have higher highway mobility standards than other Statewide Highways (see Policy 1F).


Policy 1F: Highway Mobility Targets
This policy addresses state highway performance expectations when planning for state facilities or
implementing a facility plan, and provides guidance for managing access and traffic control systems.
Action 1F.1 states that highway mobility targets apply to all state highway sections and are used as the
basis for assessing compliance with the Transportation Planning Rule.

The applicable performance targets for the study area intersections are summarized in Table 2. US 97 is
defined as a Statewide Expressway south of the Yew Avenue interchange.

                                                        Table 2
                                         Relevant ODOT Highway Mobility Targets

     Intersection                           ODOT Mobility Target                           Basis
US 97/                         0.85 (stop-controlled approaches)             Unsignalized local/interest road
Quarry Avenue                  0.70 (mainline US 97)                         intersecting with a Statewide
                                                                             Expressway in a rural area.
US 97/                         0.85 (signalized ramp terminals)              Ramp terminal intersection (1F.1)
Yew Avenue Ramps
US 97/                         0.80 (signalized intersection)                On a Statewide Highway and
Veteran's Way                                                                Freight Route within the UGB
                                                                             where the posted speed is 45
                                                                             mph.

Where the volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratio within a corridor is worse than the identified mobility targets in
the OHP, and identified transportation improvements cannot bring performance to mobility targets within
the planning horizon, the performance standard for the highway will need to improve performance as
much as feasible and to avoid further degradation of performance (Action 1F.5). The policy allows for the
adoption of alternative highway mobility targets in cases such as metropolitan areas trying to strictly
manage their growth, STA's, and in areas with unique environmental and land use constraints.


Policy 1G: Major Improvements
This policy requires maintaining performance and improving safety by improving efficiency and
management before adding capacity.


Policy 2B: Off-System Improvements
This policy recognizes that the state may provide financial assistance to local jurisdictions to make
improvements to local transportation systems if the improvements would provide a cost-effective means
of improving the operations of the state highway system.
                                                                                                            Page 8
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                          Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


Policy 2E: Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS)
This policy seeks to improve the safety and efficiency of transportation facilities, and to generally
maximize operations in a cost-effective way. The policy requires coordination with the Oregon Intelligent
Transportation Systems Strategic Plan.


Policy 2F: Traffic Safety
This policy emphasizes the state's efforts to improve safety for all users of the highway system. Action
2F.4 addresses the development and implementation of the Safety Management System to target
resources to sites with the most significant safety issues. This policy includes solutions involving
engineering, education, enforcement, and emergency medical services.


Policy 2G: Rail and Highway Compatibility
This policy seeks to reduce conflicts between highways and rail users through elimination of at-grade
crossings, coordination with ODOT's rail division, and integrating pedestrian and bicycle considerations
where relevant.


Policy 3A: Classification and Spacing Standards
This policy addresses the location, spacing, and type of road and street intersections and approach roads
on state highways. The primary function of Expressways is to provide connections to larger urban areas,
ports and major recreation areas with minimal interruptions. Consistent with this function, the access
management objectives for Statewide Highways that are also expressways include:

                Provide for safe and efficient high speed and high volume traffic movements.
                Discourage private access.
                Eliminate, over time, existing approach roads as opportunities occur or alternate access
                becomes available.
                Purchase access rights and develop a local road network consistent with the function of the
                roadway.
                Control and appropriately space public road connections.
                Future grade separations (interchanges) may be considered.
                Include necessary compatible land use actions in local comprehensive plans.
                Discourage traffic signals.
                Prohibit parking.
                Construct nonreversible medians in the modernization of all multi-lane Expressways that have
                traversable medians.



                                                                                                         Page 9
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                           Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


The policy includes standards for each highway classification. Access spacing standards are identified
within OAR 734-051 (referred to as Division 51), and were recently amended with the passage of Senate
Bill 264. ODOT is currently operating with Temporary Access Management Rules while final rules are being
prepared to implement the bill's provisions. For US 97, these rules specify a one-mile spacing requirement
between interchange taper areas (end of taper to start of taper) or two miles between interchanges
within rural areas with a posted speed of 55 miles per hour.


Policy 3D: Deviations
This policy provides the foundation for requests for state highway approach permits that require
deviation(s) from access management standards. Procedures for requesting deviations are included in
OAR 734-051. Action 3D.5 identifies conditions to consider in evaluating requests for deviations: queuing
that increases delays and unsafe operations, pedestrian and bicycle circulation, traffic controls, local road
system requirements, improving connectivity to adjacent properties or local road system, potential use of
channelization, or potential use of non-traversable medians.


Policy 4A: Efficiency of Freight Movement
This policy emphasizes the need to maintain and improve the efficiency of freight movement on the state
highway system. Action 4A.3 generally supports Intelligent Transportation System Commercial Vehicle
Operation technology in facilitating efficient freight movement.


Policy 4B: Alternative Passenger Modes
This policy encourages the development of alternative passenger services and systems as part of broader
corridor strategies and promotes the development of alternative passenger transportation services
located off the highway system to help preserve the performance and function of the state highway
system.


Oregon Rail Plan, 2001
The Oregon Rail Study was reviewed to understand the needs related to the BNSF mainline crossing. The
Oregon Rail Plan provides Statewide management goals related to rail, the Central Oregon Rail Plan
provides a more detailed assessment of the specific considerations, priorities, and needs within Central
Oregon.


Central Oregon Rail Plan, 2009
The Central Oregon Rail Study completed in 2009 and was prepared by representatives of the Central
Oregon Area Commission on Transportation (COACT). The study purpose was to establish a common
regional vision for the rail system within the tri-County area including Crook, Deschutes, and Jefferson
Counties.



                                                                                                        Page 10
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                          Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


The study assessed the feasibility of realigning the BNSF line with two alternative options that would 1)
bypass Bend and Redmond, or 2) bypass only Redmond. The study concluded that neither of the
realignment options were viable given the capital costs, socio-economic impacts, and environmental
issues. Therefore, priorities (20 or less years and 50-70 year long-term) were established to improve the
safety and function, and to identify the needed improvements to the at-grade rail connections.

Within the Central Oregon Rail Plan, comments from the panel noted "serious challenges in providing
adequate access to regional facilities such as the Deschutes County Fairgrounds, the Redmond Airport,
large employment areas, and other
potential regional facilities." The plan     "serious challenges in providing adequate
also noted the public safety benefit         access to regional facilities such as the
provided     through     grade-separated Deschutes County Fairgrounds, the Redmond
crossings that would "eliminate delays in    Airport, large employment areas, and other
responses by emergency services due to       potential regional facilities."
blockages at crossings."

Further details were provided on Airport Way/Yew Avenue rail crossing, which was identified as a high
priority for grade separation particularly related to crossing safety benefits, emergency services benefits,
economic opportunity benefits, railway operator priority, and local jurisdiction priority. Due to the low
grades at the interchange undercrossing, an undercrossing of the rail (retaining the current elevation of
the railway) was proposed. Engineering estimates identified that grade separation of this route would cost
approximately $11.6 million, and would require reconstruction of 21st Place (lowered 11.6 feet), 19th
Street (lowered 13.2 feet), and Mountain Way (lowered 4.0 feet). The plan notes that there would be
additional business impacts associated with the construction efforts (as this route provides the only access
to several businesses) which were not accounted for, and right-of-way costs were also excluded.




                                                                                                       Page 11
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                                 Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


Bureau of Land Management Upper Deschutes Plan, 2005
This plan directs the management of BLM
administered lands in Crook, Deschutes, and
Jefferson, and Klamath Counties. To this end, the
plan identifies management direction for a variety
of functions, including transportation. This plan
specifically identifies the Quarry Avenue extension
as an allowable BLM use. Exhibit 1 illustrates the
general transportation corridor alignment.

Objective TU ­ 5 of the Transportation and Utilities
section is stated as follows:

Consolidate transportation and utility systems with
consideration for ecological and recreational values,
while providing for regional transportation systems
and meeting regional objectives.

Allocations/Allowable Uses:
2.    Designate    a    transportation     corridor, Exhibit 1. BLM Upper Deschutes Resource Management Plan
                                                                      th
approximately ½ mile wide and extending from illustrating the 19 Street extension and connection to Quarry
approximately the end of 19th Street in Redmond to Avenue.
Deschutes Market Road. This includes a corridor
connection to Quarry Avenue that will allow for a future Federal Highway interchange.


Deschutes County Transportation System Plan, 1998
The adopted Deschutes County
Transportation System Plan was
adopted in 1998 and is currently in
the process of being updated. For
this TPR review the adopted TSP is
the relevant reference document.
The draft TSP Update also indicates
the County's plans related to the
Quarry Avenue extension and
demonstrates an intention to remain
consistent with the previously
adopted vision.

The Deschutes County TSP is
relevant to portions of the roadway
extension outside of the City's          Exhibit 2. Deschutes County TSP Figure showing the projected interchange at
current Urban Growth Boundary;           Quarry Avenue, highlighted by the arrow within the exhibit.


                                                                                                              Page 12
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                            Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


this includes the junction with US 97, the BNSF mainline junction, and the portion of the alignment
generally south of Juniper Golf Course where the road currently transitions to a gravel alignment.

The County Transportation System Plan does not provide any classification for 19th Street or Quarry
Avenue, indicating a classification as a Local Road by default. It does, however, identify the priority for an
interchange in the vicinity of Quarry Avenue, and notes that this is an ODOT high-priority interchange
location within Figure 5.2F2, as shown in Exhibit 2.

In addition to materials contained within the adopted TSP, coordination has been on-going with Deschutes
County regarding the proposed Quarry Avenue extension. The County has previously agreed to contribute
funding toward the construction of the Quarry Avenue interchange.

There has been on-going coordination between the City of Redmond and Deschutes County regarding
incorporating the Quarry Avenue extension as a collector in the County's TSP revisions to acknowledge the
plans in the Redmond TSP. In addition to coordination meetings in held in October 2011, a formal project
kick-off meeting in April 2012 occurred with the County, DLCD, and ODOT, and a letter of request for
continued support within the on-going TSP update was submitted to the County.


City of Redmond Transportation System Plan
Redmond updated its Transportation System Plan in 2008. This update contained significant provisions to
account for the Redmond Reroute, changes to its downtown, and significant growth within the western
portions of the City.

Related to the Quarry Avenue extension, the following text is provided within the Executive Summary of
the adopted TSP:

          In addition, two conceptual roadway extensions are indicated for lands outside the city limit and
          urban planning area to guide future roadway planning. The first is located in the northwest corner
          of the map, which would provide a more direct route for the Westside Arterial corridor. The second
          is in the southeast corner of the map, and it provides guidance for a southerly extension of SE 19th
          Avenue to an ultimate connection near Quarry Avenue, and extension south to Deschutes-Market
          Road. Since these concept areas are outside the influence area of the city, they are only guides if
          and when the urban growth boundary (or an urban reserve area) is extended beyond its present
          boundary.

Within the TSP, several intersections (largely along state facilities) were noted to exceed performance
standards in the horizon period. The alternatives analysis considered a variety of projects that were
bundled together as Alternative 1 (providing the highest level of system improvements), Alternative 2, and
Alternative 3 to address these needs. An extension of 19th Street south to the Deschutes Junction was
identified as an Alternative 1 project due to the ability to offload US 97 and by providing the secondary
benefit of better accommodating events within the Fairgrounds. The connection of the 19th Street
extension to a new interchange with US 97 at Quarry Avenue was considered a second-level priority, along
with the second phase of the Redmond Reroute.



                                                                                                         Page 13
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                           Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


No analysis was conducted showing the system needs without the 19th Street extension south to
Deschutes Junction as this was considered a likely project at the time of the TSP preparation. It was noted
that this connection was expected to carry up to 500 peak hour vehicles based on the Redmond urban
area travel demand model projections, thereby helping to reduce projected travel demands on the Airport
Way interchange and US 97.

Further references to the Quarry Avenue extension are made in Table 1-5 of the TSP, which provides a
summary of the motor vehicle master plan improvements. This table references the Quarry Avenue
extension as Project #18 as "Connect US 97 to 19th Street Extension," with a total cost of $2,730,000. The
TSP notes further that this connection was a component of the "Yew Avenue to Deschutes Market Road"
project that was prepared by ODOT. In addition, Table 1-6 in the TSP summarizes the motor vehicle
master plan improvements on ODOT facilities. This identifies the Quarry Avenue/US 97 interchange as
Action Plan Project #13 with an additional cost of $11,250,000.


Yew Avenue to Deschutes Market Road (ODOT, 2002)
This plan was not located, text from the literature review contained within the City's adopted
Transportation System Plan is provided below:

          The "Yew Avenue to Deschutes Market Road" project was originated to determine the needs and
          evaluate both long-term and short-term solutions for the area from the Yew Avenue interchange
          to the Deschutes Market Road interchange. The preferred short-term build alternative included
          installing traffic signals at several intersections including the northbound and southbound Yew
          Avenue interchange ramp terminals, as well as improvements to the signalized intersections on US
          97 at Sisters Avenue and Odem Medo Road. The preferred long-term build alternative included a
          rebuild of the Yew Avenue interchange with a five-lane cross-section on Yew Avenue under US 97
          and traffic signal installations at the Yew Avenue interchange ramp terminals and the intersection
          on Airport Way at 21st Street. It also included an extension of 19th Street south to a proposed
          interchange at the US 97/Quarry Avenue intersection and then approximately another four miles
          to the south to the existing US 97/Deschutes Market Road interchange.

As summarized, this plan was prepared by ODOT and identified additional widening needs at the Yew
Avenue interchange, the planned signalization project, and a southern extension of 19th Street.


South Redmond Tract Plan, 2008
The South Redmond Tract Plan outlines land use planning details for 945 acres of land located
immediately south of the Deschutes County Fairgrounds and immediately south and east of the Juniper
Golf Club. The land, which was acquired from BLM and is managed by DSL, is currently outside of the UGB,
but has been identified as a preferred alternative to serve large lot industrial uses in the future, which is
an identified need for the region. Unique to this land is its mile-long frontage of the BNSF line, which could
accommodate an entire freight train. However, it should be noted that no specific timeline for this land to
be included within the Redmond UGB has been set. An illustration of the proposed alignment is shown in



                                                                                                        Page 14
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                          Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


Exhibit 3. This alignment was intentionally retained within a concept form that would allow the roadway
network to adapt depending on the ultimate use.



                                         19th Street




                                    Quarry Avenue



Exhibit 3. South Redmond Tract Plan roadway alignment concept.


The plan identifies access to the tract being provided from an extension of 19th Street as the second phase
of the Reroute was not expected to provide access to these parcels from an access spacing perspective.


Literature Review Findings
Related to the proposed extension of Quarry Avenue, the following are key findings from the project
literature review:

          ODOT designates US 97 as a Statewide Highway, Freight Route, and Expressway in the vicinity of
          Quarry Avenue. The primary function of the highway in this area is to provide high-speed regional
          connectivity.
          The US 97 intersection with Quarry Avenue was previously identified as a high priority interchange
          location by ODOT.
          An interchange at Quarry Road will require one-mile spacing between merge and diverge lane
          transitions and two miles between cross-streets.
          The Yew Avenue to Deschutes Market Road Plan prepared by ODOT and Deschutes County
          identified this connection between 19th Street and Quarry Avenue as a component of an overall



                                                                                                       Page 15
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                           Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


          plan that would link the Deschutes Junction with south Redmond. This plan also noted a need to
          provide a five-lane cross-section along Yew Avenue to meet long-term needs.
          Any new roadway crossing the BNSF mainline should plan for grade-separation. As trains are
          expected to increase in speed, length, and frequency a grade-separated crossing can provide a
          critical emergency connection to the Deschutes County Fairgrounds and the Redmond Airport
          should other crossings to the north be blocked. Grade separation will provide a safer crossing as
          compared to at-grade crossings, and alleviate vehicular queuing concerns. Rail plans identify
          closure and grade-separation of at-grade crossings throughout Central Oregon.
          The Central Oregon Rail Plan developed a unified regional vision for rail throughout the tri-County
          area. Concerns noted by the panel within the report state "serious challenges in providing
          adequate access to regional facilities such as the Deschutes County Fairgrounds, the Redmond
          Airport, large employment areas, and other potential regional facilities." The plan also noted the
          public safety benefit provided through grade-separated crossings that would "eliminate delays in
          responses by emergency services due to blockages at crossings."
          The grade separation of the Yew Avenue/Airport way railroad crossing was identified as a high
          priority project by the Central Oregon Rail Study. Engineering cost estimates identify that grade
          separation of this route (with Airport Way designed as an undercrossing) would cost
          approximately $12 million excluding business impacts and right-of-way. This plan did not account
          for the five-lane section identified within the 2002 ODOT plans. Grade separation would affect the
          grade of adjacent connections to Airport Way requiring reconstruction of the approaches between
          the Northbound US 97 ramps and Mountain Way.
          Within the Redmond TSP portions of the Quarry Avenue extension within the UGB are included in
          the plan and the overall connection was identified as beneficial to the City for the following
          reasons:
               o Provides a key emergency route to the fairgrounds and airport;
               o Alleviates congestion along the highly constrained BNSF crossing locations at OR 126,
                   Veteran's Way, and Airport Way;
               o Supports Redmond's plans for a Westside Arterial connection that would improve access
                   to the west side of the City and reduce pressure on US 97 to serve local travel demand.
          The BLM Regional Management Plan and South Redmond Tract Plan specifically identify the
          designation of a ½ mile transportation corridor connecting Redmond and the Deschutes Junction.
          This transportation corridor specifically includes the identification of a future alignment between
          19th Street and US 97 at Quarry Avenue.
          The South Redmond Tract Plan prepared by DSL considers long-term development of lands south
          of the UGB. The extension of Quarry Avenue is consistent with the alignment and connectivity
          goals identified within this plan. Overcrossing plans should be developed to retain the opportunity
          to take advantage of the property's BNSF frontage.

Based on review of these materials, amending the City's TSP and Deschutes County TSP to include a new
connection between 19th Street and Quarry Avenue, a BNSF undercrossing and an interchange with US 97
at Quarry Avenue will provide consistency with adopted State, County, City, and tract plans.




                                                                                                        Page 16
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                        Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


EXISTING SYSTEM CONDITIONS
The existing system conditions section of this report was prepared to identify the current needs,
opportunities, and priorities associated with the future extension of Quarry Avenue. This section
summarizes the current operational performance of the surrounding roadways and presents a review of
the most recent five-years of crash data to understand system needs and priorities.


Study Facilities
For the purposes of this analysis, five study intersections were identified with City staff to show the
system benefits and needs provided by the Quarry Avenue extension. These locations include:
                US 97/Veteran's Way;
                Veterans Avenue & Airport Way;
                Yew Avenue & US 97 Southbound Ramps;
                Yew Avenue & US 97 Northbound Ramps;
                Airport Way & 19th Street; and,
                US 97 & Quarry Avenue.


Existing Traffic Operations
Base information on the performance of the surrounding roadway system was obtained through manual
turning movement counts that were collected during the weekday p.m. peak period (4:00 to 6:00 p.m. on
Tuesday, April 3, 2012). This period coincides with the commute period assessed in ODOT's travel demand
models and forming the basis of the adopted Transportation System Plan. Review of the counts showed
that the critical hour within the evening commute period occurred between 4:30 and 5:30 p.m.
Attachment "A" includes the traffic count sheets.

The existing lane configurations, traffic control devices, and peak hourly volumes for the study
intersections are shown in Figure 1. The April traffic counts were factored to reflect 30th highest hourly
conditions for compliance with the Oregon Highway Plan. Seasonal adjustment factors are described
within Attachment "B."

At the non-highway intersections, vehicular demand was observed to be relatively light during the evening
commute period. As such, the operational analysis showed that these intersections operate acceptably
and with ample reserve capacity available along Airport Way.




                                                                                                     Page 17
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                           Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


The intersection of US 97/Quarry Avenue is an at-grade intersection along the four-lane section of US 97
located outside of the urban growth boundary south of Redmond. Although this intersection currently
meets ODOT mobility targets (due to the low demand), field observations revealed that high travel speeds
and heavy through volumes on the highway result in long delays for side-street vehicles attempting to
turn onto the highway. Very low volumes of traffic utilize this intersection to turn left during the peak
periods, reflective of the system connectivity that allows motorists to travel to Redmond along the Canal ­
Old Redmond/Bend Highway alignment.

A grade-separated interchange is in place at the US 97/Yew Avenue junction. The interchange carries US
97 traffic over Yew Avenue. The US 97 ramp terminal intersections at Yew Avenue/Airport Way were
recently improved and signalized. These improvements provide for ample reserve capacity, and the
intersections operate with low delays. Yew Avenue serves as the transition from an Expressway facility as
the highway enters the City. North of Yew Avenue US 97 continues as a signalized arterial north to
Evergreen Avenue where the Redmond Reroute begins.

The signalized intersection of US
97/Veteran's Way is a major                                    COID
connection within the City as it                               Canal
serves the northern loop to the
airport and fairgrounds, provides
access to retail to the west, serves
the US 97 mainline, and provides a
more direct connection to OR 126
westbound for northbound US 97
traffic. The intersection is bordered
by the BNSF line to the east and the
COID canal to the west, and is
                                                                                             BNSF
surrounding by retail uses, as shown
in Exhibit 4. Operational analysis Exhibit 4. US 97/Veteran's Way intersection
shows that with the recent
intersection reconstruction the intersection meets ODOT mobility targets, with a volume-to-capacity ratio
of 0.68 and Level of Service "C". It was noted that 95th percentile northbound and southbound queues
were identified as extending beyond 500 feet (which would block the southbound left-turn lane and
accesses along the highway). As shown in the aerial imagery in Exhibit 4, train blockages can create
eastbound queues backing up onto the highway. Attachment "C" contains the level-of-service worksheets
used in the existing conditions analysis.


Network Connectivity
The roadway network in the vicinity of the proposed roadway extension is limited. In addition to limited
highway access points, the area in the vicinity of the proposed roadway extension is further isolated by
the lack of railroad crossings over the Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) rail line that runs parallel to US
97 just east of the highway alignment. This route currently serves approximately 8 to 12 trains per day and
is expected to have approximately 8 percent annual growth in demand into the future. A Central Oregon

                                                                                                        Page 19
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                           Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


Irrigation District canal is located west of the highway, forming another barrier and further isolating this
area.

Due to the connectivity constraints imposed by the canal, rail, and highway, there are three general east-
west connections available:

          Yew Avenue interchange with US 97 (southern connection of the Airport Way loop roadway)
          Veteran's Way intersection with US 97 (northern connection of the Airport Way loop roadway)
          OR 126 ­ Evergreen connection (connects to downtown Redmond)

These three connections serve Roberts Field, Deschutes County Fairgrounds and Exposition Center,
Juniper Golf Club, Central Oregon Community College (COCC), and various other employment uses.
However, the reliance on these routes, and constraints posed by the at-grade rail crossing widths and
bridge abutment widths limit the available cross-sections and roadway carrying capacity. No grade-
separated rail crossings are available in this area. The only grade-separation over the BNSF line is provided
near the northern boundary of the Reroute at the Canal interchange and the Maple Avenue overcrossing.

The Central Oregon Rail Study completed in 2009 identified the Airport Way/Yew Avenue rail crossing as a
high priority for grade separation although the cost to do so was estimated at approximately $12 million
excluding right-of-way and business impacts. This plan assumed the current three-lane section as this
would fit within the current bridge abutments, though interchange reconstruction to provide a five-lane
Yew Avenue cross-section was envisioned within the 2002 ODOT study. Maintaining the grade from the
Yew Avenue undercrossing ramps would require significant changes in elevation at 21 st Place, 19th Street,
and Mountain Way. The grade changes would be impactful on businesses that are reliant on these
connections, particularly as limited to no alternative options are available.

Plans for grade separation at Veteran's Way are further complicated by the surrounding land uses and
proximity to the canal. The rail study notes that while an undercrossing would be desirable based on the
grades, the location of the canal renders this option infeasible. An overcrossing at this location is expected
to cost $33.5 million excluding right-of-way, and the extent of the overcrossing would extend from west of
Canal Boulevard approximately to Lake Road, with all local connections closed with cul-de-sacs within this
influence area. Attachment "D" includes engineering cost estimates for these rail crossings.


Intersection Safety
An analysis of the surrounding intersections was conducted based on information provided by ODOT
Crash Analysis and Reporting Unit. The purpose of the safety assessment was to identify existing system
deficiencies to inform the need, timing, and priority of improvements.




                                                                                                        Page 20
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                           Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


US 97/Veteran's Way
The signalized intersection of US 97/Veteran's Way was
recently modified with the addition of a westbound
right-turn lane and other signal phasing and network
changes. The City's 2008 TSP identified the safety
performance of the intersection within ODOT's top
10% of most critical locations list (Safety Priority Index
System, SPIS) based on crash frequency, severity, and
rate.

ODOT provided updated crash data (2006 ­ 2010) to Exhibit 5. Crashes by year at the US 97/Veteran's Way
                                                            intersection.
enable a review of recent crash patterns; this is
reflected in Exhibit 5. This crash data showed a total of 32 crashes at the intersection that involved 66
vehicles and 69 occupants. Of these crashes there were a total of eight non-incapacitating injuries and
four possible injuries, suggesting a relatively low percentage of injuries for a 45 mph facility. The majority
of reported crashes were coded as rear-end collisions (19 of 32), seven were turning movement crashes,
and there was a single pedestrian crash.

The pedestrian-involved crash occurred in May 2006 at 2:00 PM and involved a northbound right-turn
driver. The crash resulted in moderate injuries ("non-incapacitating") to the pedestrian and cited the
teenage pedestrian as at-fault.

Nearly all of the reported crashes occurred with clear weather (24 of 32), dry roadway conditions (24 of
32), and during daylight hours (26 of 32). Drugs and alcohol were not listed as a factor in any of the
crashes. The crash records show that other than passenger cars there were four trucks with trailers and a
motorcycle involved in the reported crashes.


US 97/Quarry Avenue
In the most recent five years there has only been a single fixed object crash in the vicinity of the Quarry
Avenue intersection. Based on the limited crash experience, further review was not conducted.


US 97 Yew Avenue Ramps
Review of crash records at the Yew Avenue ramps showed very low levels of crashes at the northbound
off/on-ramps (two) and relatively low crash levels (five) at the northbound off/on-ramps. The low level of
crashes and limited injuries (two possible injuries and two non-incapacitating injuries) indicate a relatively
good safety performance. One pedestrian-involved collision was noted on the southbound ramps in July
2009 and occurred within the marked crosswalks. The crash resulted in a possible injury to the pedestrian.

In reviewing this crash data, note that the Yew Avenue ramps were signalized in the middle of this analysis
period significantly reducing the delays for motorists entering Yew Avenue.




                                                                                                        Page 21
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                            Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


Yew Avenue/Canal Boulevard
The Yew Avenue/Canal Boulevard is currently under construction and will be a single-lane roundabout
when complete. Due to the on-going construction, the prior crash history no longer reflects the current or
planned conditions, and further review was not compiled.


Crash Review Summary
The crash review shows relatively low levels of crashes throughout the study area with exception of the
higher-volume US 97/Veteran's Way intersection. While a high number of crashes have been reported the
crash type (primarily rear-end) resulted in a lower-severity crash type. Crash data was obtained from
ODOT's crash analysis unit in delimited text file format; crash data can be provided for review upon
request.


FUTURE CONDITIONS
The following future conditions analysis presents transportation conditions in the City of Redmond
horizon year of 2028. This horizon year exceeds the rolling 15-year planning horizon identified within
Action 1F.2 of the Oregon Highway Plan (OHP), ODOT's roadway element of the State TSP.


Travel Demand Forecasting
Future travel demand within the vicinity was analyzed under two scenarios: with and without the
extension of Quarry Avenue. As part of this analysis, the proposed roadway extension was assumed as a
three-lane section with grade separation at the BNSF crossing and an interchange at US 97. This roadway
configuration and an assumed 35 mile per hour travel speed were based on the City's Major Collector
standard cross-section and are consistent with the built portion of the facility within Redmond City limits.
No modifications to the forecast population, employment, or land use assumptions were made with either
model scenario.

This analysis revealed limited use of the Quarry Avenue extension under typical evening conditions due to
the following:

          The proposed extension is parallel to US 97 and does not serve urban land uses that would require
          access. As such, the US 97 route to the Yew Avenue interchange appears to be a faster alternative
          based on its higher posted speed (55 miles per hour).
          Typical weekday conditions don't reflect the reliability of the travel routes. As a key component of
          this connection is a grade-separated BNSF crossing and connection to US 97, it is expected that
          this new roadway extension will serve as a key emergency route to southeast Redmond. The
          addition of delay along US 97 (from fairgrounds events, train blockages, or incidents) increases the
          use on this facility.
          Typical weekday conditions also do not reflect temporal or event-related demand associated with
          any of the three major generators potentially served by the proposed roadway extension. These
          include Roberts Field, the Deschutes County Fairgrounds, and Juniper Golf Club. A significant
          event at any of the three, particularly a major event at the Deschutes County Fairgrounds, would
                                                                                                         Page 22
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                           Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


          result in increased use of the proposed roadway extension and can provide event traffic control
          options.
          The isolated travel demand model run did not include other planned or potential system
          connections such as the TSP-identified or a more direct connection to the Westside Arterial.
          Further development of this connection to improve the roadway grid network can further increase
          demands on the local roadway and reduce highway reliance.

Generally, the future transportation system review revealed limited travel along this proposed alignment
under typical conditions due to the generally low forecast delay along the US 97 to Yew Avenue route and
the higher operating speeds. With congestion or train delays added to Yew Avenue, approximately 100 to
200 vehicles during the peak hour could reroute to utilize this alignment. The new connection provides
some operational benefit to the highway by reducing reliance on the State system and improving traffic
operations at the Yew Avenue ramps. More significant improvements include the potential safety benefits
of the highway and railway grade separation that can serve rural uses outside of the state highway
system. Attachment "E" includes travel demand model information.


FUTURE ROADWAY CONDITIONS AND NEEDS
Future year 2030 traffic conditions were assessed based on review of the Redmond Transportation System
Plan. The City's TSP shows the following system needs within the study area:

          US 97/Veteran's Way: this signalized intersection is projected to operate beyond a v/c ratio of 1.0
          and with high delays under a no-build scenario. It was also noted that the US 97 connection to
          Highland and Evergreen are also projected to exceed capacity.
          The Airport Way/Veteran's Way intersection is projected to exceed City operational standards
          operating at Level of Service "F".
          The US 97/Yew Avenue northbound and southbound ramps were projected to exceed ODOT
          mobility standards with Level of Service "F".
          The southern portion of US 97 between Quarry Road and the Reroute is also noted as an area of
          deficiency.

Since the TSP was prepared, several changes and improvements occurred within the City of Redmond.
These have included the signalization of the Yew Avenue interchange ramps and improvements at US
97/Veteran's Way, implementation of adaptive traffic signal control, completion of the Reroute, and
redevelopment of the City's downtown area.

A significant improvement to US 97 in southern Redmond was the Westside Arterial developed through a
Helmholtz extension to US 97. This new three- to five-lane arterial was identified to enhance the
connectivity between OR 126 and US 97 and provide a local roadway alternative to the highway. This
connection was projected to carry between 250 and 1,000 peak hour vehicles. No funding has yet been
identified for this connection, but the proposed Quarry Avenue Extension would provide an opportunity
to construct the southern terminus of this connection with US 97. This improvement was identified within
"Alternative 1," indicating the highest priority and feasibility of the City's build alternatives.



                                                                                                        Page 23
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                          Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


A second transportation system improvement identified was the second phase of the Redmond Reroute.
This extension of the Expressway facility through southern Redmond was envisioned as the solution to the
congestion along the portion of US 97 south of the now-constructed Reroute Phase 1. However, as no
funding has been identified for this second phase of the Reroute no other significant improvements are
identified to address this "area of deficiency." The TSP had considered an interchange between the second
phase of the Reroute and Airport Way to address the need for improved airport and fairgrounds access,
noting that this connection would provide access to between 250 and 500 peak hour vehicles, with more
significant benefits during events. The second phase of the Reroute was identified as part of "Alternative
2," indicating the second highest priority and feasibility to construct within the TSP, and an interchange
with Airport Road was included within "Alternative 3."

A third planned improvement was the extension south of 19th Street from the fairgrounds to Deschutes
Junction. This connection was expected to carry between 100 and 400 peak hour vehicles further reducing
highway reliance. At this time this connection is not being considered by the County as part of its ongoing
TSP efforts; therefore, the benefits this connection could provide will not be realized. This was also
identified as part of the "Alternative 2" package.

Another significant improvement that was identified was an extension of Quartz Avenue to help alleviate
the Veteran's Way intersection with US 97. The rail section within the TSP notes that this was envisioned
by the City as a new at-grade railway crossing; as such, this connection would not provide the emergency
benefits and would conflict with the more recent Central Oregon Rail Plan findings that identify closure
and grade-separation of at-grade crossings. Review of the feasibility or costs associated with grade-
separation at this location were not assessed in the rail plan.

While the improvements identified above would provide significant relief and could also serve as
emergency access to southern Redmond (depending on the connections provided), none of the
improvements are currently considered to be "reasonably likely" or a high-priority for the City or ODOT
given funding shortfalls. Without these projects that were intended to relieve US 97 between Quarry Road
and Evergreen Avenue the southern portion of Redmond is projected to experience significant congestion
with its identified needs not being addressed. The adoption of the Quarry Avenue extension addresses
these needs as outlined below:

           Provides the emergency, incident, and event connectivity to the fairgrounds and airport that an
           interchange with a second phase of the Reroute was intended to provide.
           Helps to address the connectivity needs that an extension of Quartz would provide by offsetting
           demand on Veteran's Way and Yew Avenue.
           Provides the southern connection for a future extension of Helmholtz that could be directly tied
           into Quarry Avenue.
           As the County no longer plans to identify a 19th Street extension south to the Deschutes Junction
           within their on-going TSP efforts, the demands associated with this route (100 to 400 peak hour
           vehicles) will be reliant on US 97 and the Yew Avenue ramp terminals. The connection of Quarry
           Avenue to Airport Way will alleviate this demand within this area of deficiency.




                                                                                                       Page 24
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                                       Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


While travel demand model forecasts did not identify high usage of this connection, without the
supporting projects that were identified to alleviate reliance on US 97 in south Redmond in place much
higher use and benefit of this facility as an alternative route is anticipated.


FACILITY DESIGN
Today, the City's TSP identifies the 19th
Street extension as a Minor Arterial.
The portion of roadway that is currently
constructed within the UGB has been
constructed to a three-lane section
with bicycle lanes and attached
sidewalks, as shown in Exhibit 6.
Further, this roadway is more similar to
the City's Major Collector designation
both in dimensions and vehicular
carrying needs.

The City's definition of a Major
Collector is presented below:
                                              Exhibit 6. Current 19th Street section south of Airport Way.
          Major Collector streets provide
          both access and circulation within and between residential and commercial/industrial areas.
          Collectors differ from arterials in that they provide more of a citywide circulation function, do not
          require as extensive control of access (compared to arterials) and penetrate residential
          neighborhoods, distributing trips from the neighborhood and local street system. Collectors are
          typically greater than 0.5 to 1.0 miles in length.

Additional information is provided within the City's TSP detailing the design standards for various facility
types and illustrations of the cross-section elements. Exhibit 7 presents relevant information.




                                                                                                                    Page 25
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                            Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012




Exhibit 7. City of Redmond Major Collector cross-section dimensions and layout.



The Deschutes County TSP identifies standard classification and cross-section elements for rural and urban
areas. The primary difference is the inclusion of pedestrian and bicycle facilities within urban areas. Exhibit
8 presents the County classification standards.

Comparison of City and County standards identifies that the classification of the Quarry Avenue extension
would correspond to the cross-section of a Major Collector/Collector roadway facility throughout its
length. This functional classification would correspond appropriately with the expected purpose and
function of the roadway.




                                                                                                         Page 26
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                         Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012




Exhibit 8. Deschutes County Road Standards.


QUARRY AVENUE EXTENSION ALIGNMENT
Both the Redmond Tract Plan and the BLM Upper Deschutes Plan provide general alignment information
for the Quarry Avenue extension and identify associated connectivity needs without specific engineering
details. The South Redmond Tract Plan identifies the future alignment of 19th generally bisecting the DSL
lands to provide future access to this area, allow for rail spur access, and provide a secondary connection
to Pronghorn Resort (as a condition of approval upon 50% of resort build-out).

The Redmond Tract Plan extends from south of the fairgrounds nearly 5,000 feet, and does not
encompass the area extending down to Quarry Avenue. This plan envisions an ideal alignment of the
Quarry Avenue extension directly south of the roadway's current terminus along the east side of the

                                                                                                      Page 27
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                         Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


Juniper Golf Course and following a westerly alignment along the property's southern boundary. The key
consideration is to allow a new roadway to serve the future development of these properties as large lot
industrial areas with adequate room for rail spur facilities if/when they are brought into the UGB, without
unnecessarily dividing the parcels and precluding this potential future opportunity.

Exhibit 9 illustrates the general alignment of the Quarry Avenue extension, which is recommended to be
sited within the BLM transportation corridor and follow the general alignment as identified within the
South Redmond Tract Plan. The specific alignment can vary from what is shown in the exhibit as the City
works with the County and considers how this ultimately connects to Helmholtz and 46th Street (the
current alignment shown in the City's TSP is illustrated below for context). A more direct connection
between Helmholtz and 19th Street may provide cost savings and a better link between City transportation
facilities, particularly given the uncertainty associated with the second phase of the Redmond Reroute.
Treatment options could be considered that address broader issues such as the "Six Corners" intersection
of Quarry Avenue and S Canal Boulevard to the west.

Subsequent discussions with City staff identified some earlier concepts for the southern connection, and
opportunities to better link Helmholtz with Quarry Road. While these concept plans were prepared in
2007 (preceding the Tract Plan) they further explore system design opportunities for this connection along
with the Reroute Phase 2, and provide phasing options that would allow this to incrementally build toward
its ultimate needs. The concept identified 19th Street as an initial phase of construction, which would be
designed to be converted to the southern portion of the Reroute Phase 2. The rail overcrossing would be
designed wide enough to allow a road adjacent to the BNSF line on both sides, which would ultimately
accommodate a realignment of Business 97 and a southern extension of 19th Street. A concept drawing of
this alignment is included in Attachment "G".




                                                                                                      Page 28
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                                  Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012




                                                               19th Street connection



                                         Planned Helmholtz
                                         (Westside Arterial)
                                          alignment in TSP




              US 97 Interchange:
               consider system                                          Grade-separated BNSF crossing
              connection options


                   "Six Corners" intx

Exhibit 9. Conceptual Quarry Avenue extension alignment concept.
To meet OHP interchange access spacing standards it was noted that the distance between Quarry
Avenue and Yew is 2.6 miles. The design of an interchange ramp would need to provide one-mile spacing
between merge and diverge areas, which could be easily met within the available distance.


OTHER DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
The proposed extension of Quarry Avenue should include a connection to the Deschutes County
Fairgrounds ring roadway system to provide alternative emergency access to the fairgrounds. This could
also provide event management opportunities as it could allow separation of northbound and southbound
US 97 transit/motorist traffic.


QUARRY AVENUE EXTENSION BENEFITS
The proposed Quarry Avenue extension as a Collector is expected to serve several important needs for the
City of Redmond and Deschutes County transportation network. These include:

                Provide parallel capacity to US 97 and improve the portal capacity over the BNSF railway, US
                97, and the canal. This connection can help alleviate congestion along other routes (such as

                                                                                                               Page 29
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                           Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


                Veteran's Way and Evergreen Avenue ­ OR 126) and help defer or eliminate the long-term
                need to reconstruct the Yew interchange with a five-lane undercrossing.
                Provide an alternative route to access Roberts Field, the Deschutes County Fairgrounds, and
                Juniper Golf Club. This alternative route can provide emergency access to these facilities,
                event management opportunities, and increase use of the City roadway network.
                An interchange with US 97 improves the current at-grade Quarry Avenue connection and
                provides motorists with safer access between the Old Redmond-Bend Highway and US 97
                while maintaining corridor mobility for "through" travelers.
                Provides system connection opportunities to improve the link between 19th Street, Helmholtz,
                and improve other adjacent facilities. These connections can further reduce reliance on US 97
                and build toward other adopted City plans for a Westside Arterial.
                With the County no longer planning to extend 19th Street south to the Deschutes Junction as
                identified within the City's TSP, the proposed Quarry Avenue extension will help alleviate
                congestion at the Yew Avenue ­ Airport Way interchange ramps with US 97.


SUMMARY OF TRANSPORTATION PLANNING RULE COMPLIANCE
The relevant review criteria for the proposed Quarry Avenue extension TSP amendment is located within
Division 12 of the Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR), known as the Transportation Planning Rule (OAR
660-12). This section summarizes the relevant regulatory requirements of the proposed TSP amendment
and how the application addresses these policies.


660-012-0000 - Purpose
Section -0000 of the Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) identifies the overall purpose of Statewide Goal
12 is to encourage a safe, convenient, and economic transportation system. The TPR also seeks to provide
modal choices, improve accessibility, encourage coordination among transportation providers, protect
facilities and corridors for their identified function, and facilitate the movement of freight.

The proposed Quarry Avenue extension complies with the overall purpose of the TPR for the following
reasons:

          Provides assured access to the regional airport facility with grade-separated access from US 97
          and across the BNSF line.
          Improves coordination between State, regional, and local plans by incorporating an improvement
          identified in ODOT plans (Yew Avenue to Deschutes Market Road), the Deschutes County TSP,
          locally adopted Department of State Lands/Bureau of Land Management tract plans, and
          identified as a future improvement in the adopted Redmond TSP.
          Improves overall system safety by reducing reliance on US 97, lessens reliance on intersections
          identified as priority safety improvement locations by ODOT, and lessens queuing and crossing
          conflicts with the BNSF line. The Quarry Avenue extension and US 97 interchange also eliminates
          the at-grade connection of Quarry Avenue to US 97, reducing critical conflict points, and provides
          an alternative access route to the fairgrounds and airport.
                                                                                                        Page 30
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                        Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


          The Quarry Avenue interchange ultimately builds toward other Redmond goals by constructing
          the eastern connection of the envisioned Westside Arterial to US 97.


660-012-0010 - Transportation Planning
This section differentiates transportation system planning and transportation project development, with
the latter implementing the system planning. This section also allows plans (or referenced portions) to be
incorporated through reference to avoid duplicative efforts.

This section is relevant to the Quarry Avenue extension in that it distinguishes the connection as part of
system planning, with further details of the specific alignment to be developed as part of a subsequent
project development phase.


660-012-0015 - Preparation and Coordination of Transportation System Plans
Section -0015 requires agencies to prepare and coordinate Transportation System Plans for lands within
their jurisdiction.

This section is relevant to the proposed Quarry Avenue extension as it identifies that the amendment
must be adopted within the City of Redmond and Deschutes County Transportation System Plans.


660-012-0020 - Elements of Transportation System Plans
Section -0020 describes the required elements of an agency's Transportation System Plan. This section
describes the functional classification of roadways as a required element, and the layout of roadways to
be consistent with access management categories and facilitate pedestrian and bicycle travel.

Section (2)(b) is identifies the consistency between agency plans at jurisdictional boundaries. This is
relevant to the section of the Quarry Avenue extension within City limits (19th Street) as the City has
classified the road as an Arterial and the extension south as a Collector Roadway through County lands.
The roadway function is not expected to change at the City/County boundary so the proposed re-
designation of the entire segment between Quarry Avenue and 19th Street as a Collector would enable
compliance with this section. This will require an amendment to the City and County TSP.


660-012-0025 - Complying with the Goals in Preparing Transportation System Plans; Refinement
Plans
This section of the TPR describes a TSP as a land use decision, identifies that compliance with applicable
statewide goals, policies, and regulations is required, and identifies when decisions related to function,
general location, or mode are deferred.

As the general location, function, and mode are defined for the Quarry Avenue extension the relevance of
this section is in identifying how the proposed TSP amendment complies with relevant goals, policies, and
regulations. This discussion is the purpose of this overall assessment.

                                                                                                     Page 31
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                           Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


660-012-0030 - Determination of Transportation Needs
Section -0030 describes how system needs are identified, and how State, MPO, and County needs should
be included within supported agency plans.

Relevance of this section to the Quarry Avenue extension to 19th Street is in preparing TSPs. City's should
consider needs identified by the State and County for items outside of the local system within the UGB.


660-012-0035 - Evaluation and Selection of Transportation System Alternatives
Section -0035 describes how alternative improvement options should be identified. This section describes
that system needs should be based on a no-build alternative, consider management/modal options, and
improvements to existing facilities. The system should support urban and rural development based on
types of development envisioned within Comprehensive Plans.

Section 10 specifically describes improvements within urban fringe areas (within 2 miles of Redmond's
UGB based on the definitions in section -0005), and identifies that these may be included in a TSP if
specific criteria are met regarding the use of the improvement and the ability to meet this need within the
UGB through improvements or management measures.

This section is relevant to the Quarry Avenue extension given its location within an urban fringe and the
assessment process used to identify this improvement as a system need. The needs associated with this
connection are related both to the interchange at US 97's utility in serving the future Westside Arterial,
but also as a stand-alone project providing additional emergency/lifeline connectivity to the airport,
fairgrounds, and other available employment lands. A no-build scenario assessed in the City's TSP
identifies that the available portals will exceed capacity and require improvements, and also notes these
routes as experiencing safety concerns.

The proposed route within a rural area complies with Section 11 as it will not induce significant travel time
by encouraging travel within an urban fringe; on a typical commute period the route provides an
alternative travel option with longer travel time than the urban route along US 97 and through the Yew
Avenue interchange.

System/demand management are not relevant solutions to solve the concerns that the Quarry Avenue
extension addresses but may remain as components of the roadway extension through messaging to
facility users to inform the public when this route should be used.


660-012-0040 - Transportation Financing Program
This section describes the need to prepare preliminary project cost estimates and information on the
timing of improvements so that agencies can plan for adequate transportation facilities. Timing and
finance decisions are not considered land use decisions.

This section is relevant as it identifies that the connection should provide cost estimates and a timing
mechanism to allow for the appropriate planning by the affected agencies. Preliminary cost estimates
were previously prepared for this connection and are contained in the City's 2008 Transportation System
                                                                                                        Page 32
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                            Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


Plan. The timing of these improvements is not based on growth but on emergency service/lifeline routes,
though it could be further influenced by the adequacy of the existing portal facilities (those that cross the
BNSF line, US 97, and the canal) that serve east Redmond.


660-012-0045 - Implementation of the Transportation System Plan
Section -0045 describes the governments' obligation to amend its land use regulations to implement the
TSP, activities that are exempt from land use process, and protective measures to ensure facilities can
perform their intended function and serve pedestrian, bicycle, and connectivity needs.

This section provides limited relevance to the Quarry Avenue extension given the general lack of urban
uses the facility is intended to serve.


660-012-0050 - Transportation Project Development
Transportation projects are to occur in coordination with local governments/providers and include a
public outreach process. This section also states that projects identified within a TSP are not subject to
further justification regarding function, general location, mode, or need.

This section is relevant as the Deschutes County TSP identifies the connection between 19 th Street and
Quarry Avenue and the future interchange at US 97/Quarry Avenue. As the project has been established in
a TSP (Deschutes County TSP) its purpose, need, and function are already defined. Per this section, these
elements are not required for justification as they have previously been established.


660-012-0055 - Timing of Adoption and Update of Transportation System Plans; Exemptions
This section describes the needed adoption of TSPs, exemptions, and amendments. The City of Redmond
and Deschutes County comply with this section through their adopted TSPs, and are provided
opportunities to amend these TSPs.


660-012-0060 - Plan and Land Use Regulation Amendments
Section -0060 describes the process for amending a TSP once it has been adopted to include changes in
zoning or facility function. This section is relevant as the proposed amendment will reclassify 19th Street
from its current designation as an Arterial to a Collector. As this lower-order facility can accommodate the
projected travel demands and continue to serve the roadway's intended function this change complies
with the provisions and goals of this section. Further, as the facility is already identified within the County
TSP along with a future interchange at Quarry Avenue (as also identified within ODOT's plans for the Yew
Avenue to Deschutes Market Road extension) the proposed adoption of the Quarry Avenue extension will
provide consistency between agency plans, coordination between agencies, and compliance between
State, County, and local plans.

The proposed amendment is a significant affect in that it changes the functional classification of an
existing/planned transportation facility, so to comply with this section must ensure allowed land uses and

                                                                                                         Page 33
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                            Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


the long term function of the roadway is consistent with its Collector facility classification. Consistent with
Section 2(a-c), the amendment to the City/County TSP of this connection, incorporation of this connection
into the County's draft TSP, and provision of funding and infrastructure that will serve the horizon period
needs in collaboration with affected agencies and service provides will result in appropriate mitigation of
the significant affect.


660-012-0065 - Transportation Improvements on Rural Lands
This section of the TPR describes the process for approving transportation facilities on rural lands,
provides definitions of what various types of facilities are, and identifies the assessment that needs to be
conducted to allow facilities on rural lands.

This section is relevant to the proposed Quarry Avenue extension as it occurs outside the Urban Area
(within the Urban Fringe). The proposed classification of the roadway as a Collector per section 3(g) allows
this facility without the need for a goal exception process, and provision of an interchange (to replace an
at-grade intersection with US 97) and continuous center turn lane along the length of this facility comply
with conditions 3(e) and 3(f). Section 3(o) notes that the purpose of a road in a rural area should be to
serve rural travel needs or emergency services, which is met by providing this connection to the
fairgrounds and airport with grade separation along the BNSF line. Accordingly, the intent of this section is
met with the proposed amendment, a goal exception is not required, and the provision of an interchange
on US 97 (as identified in ODOT and County plans) complies with facility and statewide goals, and the
continuous center turn lane can be provided (consistent with Redmond and Deschutes County cross-
section standards) with this section without violating the two-travel lane definition of a collector facility.

Further, the tract plans that are included within the project literature review section allow this project to
comply with Section 5, as an alignment assessment was already completed and locally adopted by the City
of Redmond.


660-012-0070 - Exceptions for Transportation Improvements on Rural Land
This section of the TPR addresses exceptions for roadway projects on rural lands for projects not
complying with the prior section. This identifies the relevant criteria for a goal exception.

As the proposed Quarry Avenue extension complies with Section -0065 an exception is not required. As
the specific interchange location and design aspects are not identified through this amendment to a
greater detail than was incorporated into the County TSP the requirement for new interchanges within
Section 10 should not apply.


CONCLUSIONS
As presented herein, the proposed TSP amendment to include the extension of Quarry Avenue complies
with applicable criteria within OAR 660-12. The road extension provides both independent utility and
builds toward other area plans. The incorporation of this connection as a Major Collector/Collector



                                                                                                         Page 34
Quarry Avenue to 19th Street Extension                                                       Project #: 12396
May 24, 2012


roadway facility improves the coordination and consistency between state, regional, local, and area plans
across jurisdictional boundaries.

Please call us at (541) 312-8300 if you have any questions on these materials.




ATTACHMENTS
Attachment A: Existing Traffic Counts

Attachment B: Seasonal Adjustment Factors

Attachment C: Existing Conditions Analysis

Attachment D: Estimated Rail Cost Estimates (Central Oregon Rail Plan)

Attachment E: Travel Demand Model Data

Attachment F: Future Conditions Analysis

Attachment G: 2007 Concept Alignment




                                                                                                    Page 35
         Attachment A
Existing Traffic Counts
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 97 -- Veteran's Way                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10732301
 CITY/STATE: Redmond, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Apr 03 2012
                   880           1197                          Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                              8.3        7.3

                    36 766 78
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 4:55 PM -- 5:10 PM
                                                                                                                          2.8 8.7 6.4

       486   66                         135   483
                                                                                                             2.3   1.5                       5.9      3.9
             107          0.93          214
                                                                                                                   4.7                       3.7
       382   209                        134   267
                                                                                                             2.1   1.0                       2.2      5.2

                   236 995 83
                                                                                                                          0.8 7.8 4.8

                   1109          1314
                                                                                                                          6.5        6.4



                           3                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                   0                          0

             1                            1                                                                        0                          2

                                                                                                                   0                          0


                           5                                                                                               0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                         NA                                                                         NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count            US 97                                  US 97               Veteran's Way             Veteran's Way
     Period         (Northbound)                           (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At Left Thru Right                                                                                                               Total
                                    U               Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                      Totals
     4:00 PM    16    95       9    0                 4      44      3    0     5     7      15     0    23     29     12       0          262
     4:05 PM     8    61       5    0                 9      89      4    0     0     8      25     0    14     33     17       0          273
     4:10 PM    26    83       7    0                 8      90      5    0     2     6      15     0    10     15     10       0          277
     4:15 PM     8    75       5    0                 3      81      4    0     2     6      18     0     9     11      4       0          226
     4:20 PM    12    71       6    0                 5      53      5    0     7    11      18     0    13     16      8       0          225
     4:25 PM    24    65       7    0                 7      53      3    1     1    11      21     0    12     20     17       0          242
     4:30 PM    15    72       7    0                 2      65      2    0     4     9      19     0     6     24     13       0          238
     4:35 PM    14    71       7    0                 5      78      3    0     0     7       9     0    18     17     13       0          242
     4:40 PM    18    77       7    0                 5      61      3    0     6     3      14     0     8     17     13       0          232
     4:45 PM    19    84       7    0                 4      59      0    0     2     6      18     0     7     11     13       0          230
     4:50 PM    16    92       5    0                 8      51      2    1     8     9      18     0    13     15     10       0          248
     4:55 PM    10   101       7    0                11      81      3    0     2     9      17     0     9     12     12       0          274             2969
     5:00 PM    25    70       2    0                 3      48      4    0    11     5      22     0    14     34     20       0          258             2965
     5:05 PM    21    83      12    0                 3      93      3    0     7     8      14     0    10     23     10       0          287             2979
     5:10 PM    28    65       3    0                 6      61      1    0     8     6      27     0    16     30     13       0          264             2966
     5:15 PM    16    95       7    0                 4      60      5    0     4     8      19     0    11     14     11       0          254             2994
     5:20 PM    24    70       8    0                 7      51      3    0     6    18      19     0    11     22     14       0          253             3022
     5:25 PM    29   102       7    0                12      61      3    0     5    19      20     0     9      6      3       0          276             3056
     5:30 PM    16    85      11    0                 9      62      6    0     7     9      12     0     8     13      3       0          241             3059
     5:35 PM    15    76       6    0                11      50      4    0     5    14      13     0    11     18      8       0          231             3048
     5:40 PM    10    62       8    0                 7      50      8    0    10    11      10     0     8     21     11       0          216             3032
     5:45 PM    10    74       6    0                 2      50      0    0     8    10      15     0     8     10      5       0          198             3000
     5:50 PM    14    61       1    0                 4      66      2    0     3     6      15     0     9     14      9       0          204             2956
     5:55 PM     6    68       4    0                 3      45      2    1     8    11      16     0     8      8      2       0          182             2864
 Peak 15-Min             Northbound                            Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right      U               Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles 224 1016       84    0                68     888     40    0    80    88    212      0   132    276   168        0                  3276
 Heavy Trucks    8   100       4                      0      40      0          4     8       0           0      4      4                           172
  Pedestrians          0                                      0                       4                          0                                   4
   Bicycles      0     0       0                      0       0      0          0     0       0           0      1      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/4/2012 9:45 AM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Airport Way -- Veteran's Way                                                                                QC JOB #: 10732201
 CITY/STATE: Redmond, OR                                                                                               DATE: Tue, Apr 03 2012
                      0           0                          Peak-Hour: 4:05 PM -- 5:05 PM                              0.0        0.0

                      0    0      0
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 4:20 PM -- 4:35 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0

       148   1                          0   123
                                                                                                           4.7   0.0                       0.0      4.1
             96           0.92         53
                                                                                                                 3.1                       3.8
       228   131                       70   170
                                                                                                           5.7   7.6                       4.3      4.7

                   94      0     74
                                                                                                                        5.3 0.0 6.8

                   201           168
                                                                                                                        6.5        6.0



                           0                                                                                             0    0    0


                                                                                                                 0                          0

             0                          0                                                                        0                          1

                                                                                                                 0                          0


                           1                                                                                             0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                 NA




             NA                        NA                                                                        NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                 NA



 5-Min Count               Airport Way                    Airport Way            Veteran's Way             Veteran's Way
     Period               (Northbound)                   (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At Left                                                                                                                        Total
                           Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                        Totals
     4:00 PM     2           0      13    0         0       0      0    0     0    11      12     0     4     2      0        0           44
     4:05 PM    10           0       5    0         0       0      0    0     0    17      13     0     8     3      0        0           56
     4:10 PM     8           0       3    0         0       0      0    0     0     4       9     0     5     8      0        0           37
     4:15 PM     6           0       3    0         0       0      0    0     0     5      21     0     4     3      0        0           42
     4:20 PM    13           0       8    0         0       0      0    0     0     1      14     0     6     4      0        0           46
     4:25 PM     8           0      10    0         0       0      0    0     0     3      20     0     5     6      0        0           52
     4:30 PM    10           0       5    0         0       0      0    0     0     7      10     1     6     4      0        0           43
     4:35 PM     5           0       6    0         0       0      0    0     0    11      11     0     7     4      0        0           44
     4:40 PM     7           0       7    0         0       0      0    0     0    15       6     0     7     4      0        0           46
     4:45 PM     6           0       5    0         0       0      0    0     0     7       4     0     3     2      0        0           27
     4:50 PM     4           0       5    0         0       0      0    0     0     7      10     0     6     7      0        0           39
     4:55 PM    10           0       3    0         0       0      0    0     0     8       4     0     6     4      0        0           35              511
     5:00 PM     7           0      14    0         0       0      0    0     0    11       9     0     7     4      0        0           52              519
     5:05 PM     6           0       2    0         0       0      0    0     0     8      16     0     5     2      0        0           39              502
     5:10 PM     3           0       5    0         0       0      0    0     0     6      12     0     9     3      0        0           38              503
     5:15 PM    12           0       5    0         0       0      0    0     0     8      14     0     4     4      0        0           47              508
     5:20 PM    10           0       3    0         0       0      0    0     0    10      13     0     7     3      0        0           46              508
     5:25 PM    14           0       8    0         0       0      0    0     0     0      11     0    10     4      0        0           47              503
     5:30 PM     6           0       6    0         0       0      0    0     0     5       7     0     7     6      0        0           37              497
     5:35 PM     5           0       8    0         0       0      0    0     0     8      16     0     7     4      0        0           48              501
     5:40 PM     7           0       3    0         0       0      0    0     0     4      14     0     7     3      0        0           38              493
     5:45 PM     3           0       7    0         0       0      0    0     0     6       8     0     6     2      0        0           32              498
     5:50 PM     2           0      10    0         0       0      0    0     0     3       3     0     4     3      0        0           25              484
     5:55 PM     2           0       2    0         0       0      0    0     0     1       7     0     3     6      0        0           21              470
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                    Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles 124           0      92    0         0       0      0    0     0    44    176      4    68    56      0        0                  564
 Heavy Trucks    4           0       8              0       0      0          0     0      16           0     0      0                           28
  Pedestrians                0                              0                       0                         0                                   0
   Bicycles      0           0       0              0       0      0          0     0       0           0     0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/10/2012 5:11 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 19th St/ Mountain Pkwy -- Airport Way                                                                           QC JOB #: 10732202
 CITY/STATE: Redmond, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Apr 03 2012
                     0           0                          Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                   0.0         0.0

                     0     0     0
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

       397   0                          0   340
                                                                                                              3.8   0.0                         0.0      3.8
             201          0.88        337
                                                                                                                    4.5                         3.9
       216   15                         3   209
                                                                                                              5.1   13.3                        0.0      4.3

                     60    0     7
                                                                                                                            3.3 0.0 0.0

                     17          67
                                                                                                                            11.8        3.0



                           0                                                                                                 0     0    0


                                                                                                                    0                            0

             0                          0                                                                           0                            0

                                                                                                                    0                            0


                           0                                                                                                 0     0    0




                          NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                       NA                                                                            NA                          NA




                          NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count       19th St/ Mountain Pkwy          19th St/ Mountain Pkwy          Airport Way                  Airport Way
     Period             (Northbound)                    (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                  Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                  Left Thru Right        U        Left Thru Right       U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        2       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     14      1      0     0       26      0         0           43
     4:05 PM        3       0      1     0          0       0     0     0     0      7      1      0     0       26      0         0           38
     4:10 PM        4       0      3     0          0       0     0     0     0     21      2      0     0       33      0         0           63
     4:15 PM        0       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     26      1      0     0       11      0         0           38
     4:20 PM        2       0      1     0          0       0     0     0     0     21      3      0     0       18      0         0           45
     4:25 PM        4       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     15      1      0     1       22      0         0           43
     4:30 PM       15       0      1     0          0       0     0     0     0     14      0      0     0       27      0         0           57
     4:35 PM       14       0      1     0          0       0     0     0     0      8      1      0     0       39      0         0           63
     4:40 PM        5       0      1     0          0       0     0     0     0     10      1      0     0       19      0         0           36
     4:45 PM        4       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     16      0      0     0       16      0         0           36
     4:50 PM        3       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     25      3      0     0       22      0         0           53
     4:55 PM        2       0      1     0          0       0     0     0     0     16      2      0     1       18      0         0           40              555
     5:00 PM        2       0      1     0          0       0     0     0     0     13      0      0     0       34      0         0           50              562
     5:05 PM        3       0      1     0          0       0     0     0     0     16      2      0     0       46      0         0           68              592
     5:10 PM        3       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     18      2      0     0       30      0         0           53              582
     5:15 PM        5       0      1     0          0       0     0     0     0     20      1      0     0       22      0         0           49              593
     5:20 PM        3       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     29      2      0     1       38      0         1           74              622
     5:25 PM        1       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     16      1      0     0       26      0         0           44              623
     5:30 PM        1       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     18      0      0     1       15      0         0           35              601
     5:35 PM        1       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     18      2      0     0       14      0         0           35              573
     5:40 PM        1       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     13      0      0     0       21      0         0           35              572
     5:45 PM        2       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0     10      0      0     0       15      0         0           27              563
     5:50 PM        1       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0      5      0      0     0       10      0         0           16              526
     5:55 PM        3       0      0     0          0       0     0     0     0      8      0      0     0        5      0         0           16              502
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right        U        Left Thru Right       U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles     44       0      4     0          0       0     0     0     0    268     20      0     4      360      0         4                  704
 Heavy Trucks       8       0      0                0       0     0           0      8      0            0       20      0                            36
  Pedestrians               0                               0                        0                            0                                    0
   Bicycles         0       0      0                0       0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/10/2012 5:11 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 97 -- Yew Ave NB Ramps                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10732203
 CITY/STATE: Redmond, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Apr 03 2012
                      0          169                          Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                              0.0        1.2

                      0    0      0
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                         0.0 0.0 0.0

       492   84                         84   445
                                                                                                            3.3   2.4                       0.0      3.4
             100          0.91         361
                                                                                                                  5.0                       4.2
       184   0                           0   254
                                                                                                            3.8   0.0                       0.0      4.7

                   131     1     154
                                                                                                                         0.8 0.0 4.5

                      0          286
                                                                                                                         0.0        2.8



                           0                                                                                              0    0    0


                                                                                                                  0                          0

             0                           0                                                                        0                          0

                                                                                                                  0                          0


                           0                                                                                              0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                  NA




             NA                        NA                                                                         NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count                  US 97                           US 97             Yew Ave NB Ramps         Yew Ave NB Ramps
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)             (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At Left                                                                                                                         Total
                           Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U                          Totals
     4:00 PM     8           1      12    0          0       0      0    0    12     7      0    0      0     14     12    0               66
     4:05 PM    11           0       5    0          0       0      0    0     5     7      0    0      0     30      7    0               65
     4:10 PM     8           1      21    0          0       0      0    0    12    13      0    0      0     35      7    0               97
     4:15 PM     7           0      14    0          0       0      0    0    12    12      0    0      0     11      3    0               59
     4:20 PM    13           0      19    0          0       0      0    0     4    14      0    0      0     14      6    0               70
     4:25 PM     8           0      12    0          0       0      0    0     4     5      0    0      0     17     12    0               58
     4:30 PM     8           0       7    0          0       0      0    0     3     9      0    0      0     34      9    0               70
     4:35 PM    11           0       6    0          0       0      0    0     8     8      0    0      0     44     14    0               91
     4:40 PM     9           1      13    0          0       0      0    0     8     8      0    0      0     20      3    0               62
     4:45 PM    10           0      12    0          0       0      0    0    14     7      0    0      0     20      3    0               66
     4:50 PM    15           0      17    0          0       0      0    0     8    13      0    0      0     24      3    0               80
     4:55 PM    11           0      10    0          0       0      0    0     7    11      0    0      0     22      6    0               67              851
     5:00 PM     6           0      11    0          0       0      0    0     4     2      0    0      0     33     14    0               70              855
     5:05 PM    10           0      13    0          0       0      0    0     9     7      0    0      0     40      6    0               85              875
     5:10 PM     8           0      17    0          0       0      0    0     5     8      0    0      0     34      6    0               78              856
     5:15 PM    11           0      17    0          0       0      0    0     9     7      0    0      0     25      7    0               76              873
     5:20 PM    19           0      21    0          0       0      0    0     5     9      0    0      0     35      8    0               97              900
     5:25 PM    13           0      10    0          0       0      0    0     4    11      0    0      0     30      5    0               73              915
     5:30 PM    17           0      14    0          0       0      0    0     6     8      0    0      0     14      1    0               60              905
     5:35 PM    10           0      15    0          0       0      0    0     5     8      0    0      0     13      3    0               54              868
     5:40 PM     7           0      15    0          0       0      0    0     3    11      0    0      0     16      2    0               54              860
     5:45 PM    10           0       7    0          0       0      0    0     6     8      0    0      0     20      2    0               53              847
     5:50 PM    13           0       5    0          0       0      0    0     7     4      0    0      0      8      5    0               42              809
     5:55 PM     6           0       5    0          0       0      0    0     3     5      0    0      0      5      3    0               27              769
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                  Total
  Flowrates    Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U
  All Vehicles 152           0    220     0          0       0      0    0    76    96      0    0      0    376     84    0                      1004
 Heavy Trucks    4           0       4               0       0      0          0     4      0           0     24      0                            36
  Pedestrians                0                               0                       0                         0                                    0
   Bicycles      0           0       0               0       0      0          0     0      0           0      0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: construction at Yew/Canal
Report generated on 4/10/2012 5:11 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 97 -- Yew Ave SB Ramps                                                                                      QC JOB #: 10732204
 CITY/STATE: Redmond, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Apr 03 2012
                     179            0                           Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                              3.4        0.0

                     110      0     69
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                           2.7 0.0 4.3

       373   0                             0   490
                                                                                                              1.6   0.0                       0.0      3.3
             117             0.95        263
                                                                                                                    4.3                       1.1
       175   58                          227   186
                                                                                                              3.4   1.7                       5.7      4.3

                         0    0     0
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.0 0.0

                     285            0
                                                                                                                           4.9        0.0



                              0                                                                                             0    0    0


                                                                                                                    0                          0

             0                             0                                                                        0                          0

                                                                                                                    0                          0


                              0                                                                                             0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                 NA




             NA                          NA                                                                         NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                 NA



 5-Min Count                     US 97                          US 97             Yew Ave SB Ramps         Yew Ave SB Ramps
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)             (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U                            Totals
     4:00 PM        0           0      0     0         4       0     11    0     0    15      5    0     14     12      0    0               61
     4:05 PM        0           0      0     0         8       0      7    0     0     8      4    0     17     25      0    0               69
     4:10 PM        0           0      0     0         5       0      9    0     0    18      3    0     20     15      0    0               70
     4:15 PM        0           0      0     0         8       0     13    0     0    15      9    0      9     12      0    0               66
     4:20 PM        0           0      0     0         5       0      8    0     0    12      9    0     11     14      0    0               59
     4:25 PM        0           0      0     0         3       0      6    0     0     5     11    0     17     14      0    0               56
     4:30 PM        0           0      0     0         8       0     11    0     0     5      4    0     19     24      0    0               71
     4:35 PM        0           0      0     0         7       0      9    0     0    14     10    0     21     31      0    0               92
     4:40 PM        0           0      0     0         3       0     15    0     0     6      4    0     11     16      0    0               55
     4:45 PM        0           0      0     0        10       0      7    0     0    16      5    0     13     19      0    0               70
     4:50 PM        0           0      0     0         9       0      7    0     0    10      5    0     20     20      0    0               71
     4:55 PM        0           0      0     0         5       0     16    0     0    12      3    0     16     18      0    0               70              810
     5:00 PM        0           0      0     0         0       0      6    0     0     5      6    0     21     14      0    0               52              801
     5:05 PM        0           0      0     0         8       0      5    0     0     6      5    0     25     28      0    0               77              809
     5:10 PM        0           0      0     0         4       0      8    0     0    12      4    0     23     20      0    0               71              810
     5:15 PM        0           0      0     0         6       0      6    0     0    13      5    0     17     22      0    0               69              813
     5:20 PM        0           0      0     0         3       0     11    0     0     7      3    0     24     33      0    0               81              835
     5:25 PM        0           0      0     0         6       0      9    0     0    11      4    0     17     18      0    0               65              844
     5:30 PM        0           0      0     0         4       0      7    0     0    13      4    0      7     24      0    0               59              832
     5:35 PM        0           0      0     0         5       0      9    0     0     2      5    0     10     12      0    0               43              783
     5:40 PM        0           0      0     0         5       0      4    0     0    12      5    0     14     15      0    0               55              783
     5:45 PM        0           0      0     0         5       0     11    0     0     9      3    0     12     16      0    0               56              769
     5:50 PM        0           0      0     0         3       0     12    0     0     6      5    0      9     12      0    0               47              745
     5:55 PM        0           0      0     0         2       0     12    0     0     8      6    0      6      5      0    0               39              714
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U
  All Vehicles      0           0      0     0        52       0    100    0     0   128     48    0    256    300      0    0                      884
 Heavy Trucks       0           0      0               4       0      0          0     4      0          20      8      0                           36
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                       0                         0                                   0
   Bicycles         0           0      0               0       0      0          0     0      0           0      0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: construction at Yew/Canal
Report generated on 4/10/2012 5:11 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 97 -- Quarry Rd                                                                                             QC JOB #: 10732206
 CITY/STATE: Redmond, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Apr 03 2012
                    1073          1575                     Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                   6.7        5.9

                     15 1058 0
                                                          Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                           13.3 6.6 0.0

       25    5                            0   0
                                                                                                            8.0    0.0                        0.0      0.0
             0             0.86           0
                                                                                                                   0.0                        0.0
       16    11                           0   0
                                                                                                            12.5   18.2                       0.0      0.0

                     10 1570 0
                                                                                                                           0.0 5.9 0.0

                    1069          1580
                                                                                                                           6.7        5.9



                            0                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                   0                           0

             0                            0                                                                        0                           0

                                                                                                                   0                           0


                            0                                                                                               0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                          NA                                                                        NA                         NA




                           NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count               US 97                           US 97                  Quarry Rd                    Quarry Rd
     Period            (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                  Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        0    86      0     0            0    87      0    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0         0          174
     4:05 PM        0    83      0     0            0    86      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          169
     4:10 PM        1    97      0     0            0    97      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          195
     4:15 PM        0    99      0     0            0   100      1    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          200
     4:20 PM        1   112      0     0            0    96      2    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          211
     4:25 PM        0    88      0     0            0    92      0    0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          181
     4:30 PM        1    97      0     0            0    80      1    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          179
     4:35 PM        1   103      0     0            0    90      1    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0         0          196
     4:40 PM        0   121      0     0            0    92      1    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0         0          215
     4:45 PM        0   146      0     0            0    87      2    0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          236
     4:50 PM        0   136      0     0            0    55      1    0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          194
     4:55 PM        4   111      0     0            0    80      1    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          196             2346
     5:00 PM        2   119      0     0            0    96      2    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0         0          220             2392
     5:05 PM        0   103      0     0            0   117      1    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          221             2444
     5:10 PM        0   123      0     0            0    95      2    0     0      0      5      0     0        0      0         0          225             2474
     5:15 PM        0   173      0     0            0   102      0    0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          276             2550
     5:20 PM        0   154      0     0            0    93      1    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0         0          249             2588
     5:25 PM        2   155      0     0            0    86      3    0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0         0          248             2655
     5:30 PM        1   126      0     0            0    65      0    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0         0          193             2669
     5:35 PM        0    85      0     0            0    79      1    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          165             2638
     5:40 PM        0    99      0     0            0    81      2    0     1      0      2      0     0        0      0         0          185             2608
     5:45 PM        0    90      0     0            0    73      2    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0         0          166             2538
     5:50 PM        2    90      0     0            0    78      1    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          171             2515
     5:55 PM        0    82      0     0            0    64      1    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          147             2466
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles      8 1928       0     0            0 1124      16    0     8      0      8      0     0        0      0         0                  3092
 Heavy Trucks       0    60      0                  0    80      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                             140
  Pedestrians             0                               0                        0                            0                                     0
   Bicycles         0     0      0                  0     0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/10/2012 5:11 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
               Attachment B
Seasonal Adjustment Factors
                 ODOT ATR 19-020: US 97; MP 124.40; The Dalles-California Highway (No. 4), 1.40 miles south of Yew Avenue in Redmond
          Year      15-Jan    15-Feb      15-Mar     15-Apr     15-May      15-Jun     15-Jul      15-Aug      15-Sep   15-Oct    15-Nov   15-Dec
2010                    97           102           104           109     110     115     119       117        111        110       99        99
2009                    98           101           103           110     110     115     119       115        111        109       101      100
2008                    97           107           109           112     112     115     118       113        108        108       100       95
2007                    95           101           106           109     110     115     114       118        110        107       100       94
2006                    94           101           105           109     108     115     113       118        110        109       101      101
Average                96.3         101.3         105.0         109.3   110.0   115.0   117.0     116.7      110.3      108.7     100.7     98.0
Count Adj.             1.21         1.15          1.11          1.07    1.06    1.02    1.00      1.00       1.06       1.08      1.16      1.19

                    Represent min/max values removed from average
                    Represents peak month of ATR
              Attachment C
Existing Conditions Analysis
Queues
1: Veteran's Way & US 97                                                                                  5/24/2012



Lane Group                    EBL    EBT    EBR     WBL     WBT     NBL    NBT     SBL    SBT
Lane Group Flow (vph)           72   124     248     152     426    270    1221      82   922
v/c Ratio                     0.55   0.67   0.62    0.74    0.69    0.69    0.68   0.35   0.60
Control Delay                 69.1   68.7   12.5    71.0    40.5    19.8    21.3   14.5   25.5
Queue Delay                    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
Total Delay                   69.1   68.7   12.5    71.0    40.5    19.8    21.3   14.5   25.5
Queue Length 50th (ft)          54     93       0    114     124      83    358      22   264
Queue Length 95th (ft)        104    157      73     185     177    148     467      45   398
Internal Link Dist (ft)              422                     734           1065            736
Turn Bay Length (ft)          100           350     250             150            175
Base Capacity (vph)           149    220    473     242     658     468    1792    235    1540
Starvation Cap Reductn           0      0      0       0       0       0       0      0       0
Spillback Cap Reductn            0      0      0       0       0       0       0      0       0
Storage Cap Reductn              0      0      0       0       0       0       0      0       0
Reduced v/c Ratio             0.48   0.56   0.52    0.63    0.65    0.58    0.68   0.35    0.60
Intersection Summary




                                                                                                  Synchro 7 - Report
Existing Conditions - PM Peak Hour                                                                            Page 1
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
1: Veteran's Way & US 97                                                                                                       5/24/2012



Movement                            EBL     EBT      EBR     WBL      WBT      WBR         NBL     NBT     NBR     SBL     SBT     SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (vph)                           67    115      231     141      241      155        251     1051      85       76    823      34
Ideal Flow (vphpl)                  1750    1750     1750    1750     1750     1750       1750     1750    1750    1750    1750    1750
Total Lost time (s)                   4.0     4.0      4.0     4.0      4.0                 4.0      4.0             4.0     4.0
Lane Util. Factor                    1.00    1.00     1.00    1.00     0.95                1.00     0.95            1.00    0.95
Frpb, ped/bikes                     1.00    1.00     1.00    1.00     0.99                1.00     1.00            1.00    1.00
Flpb, ped/bikes                     1.00    1.00     1.00    1.00     1.00                1.00     1.00            1.00    1.00
Frt                                  1.00    1.00     0.85    1.00     0.94                1.00     0.99            1.00    0.99
Flt Protected                        0.95    1.00     1.00    0.95     1.00                0.95     1.00            0.95    1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)                   1630    1651     1473    1614     2976                1646     3051            1568    3064
Flt Permitted                        0.95    1.00     1.00    0.95     1.00                0.20     1.00            0.17    1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)                   1630    1651     1473    1614     2976                  348    3051              283   3064
Peak-hour factor, PHF                0.93    0.93     0.93    0.93     0.93    0.93        0.93     0.93   0.93     0.93    0.93    0.93
Adj. Flow (vph)                        72     124      248     152      259     167         270    1130      91       82     885      37
RTOR Reduction (vph)                    0       0     217        0       90       0           0        4      0        0       2       0
Lane Group Flow (vph)                  72    124        31    152      336        0        270     1217       0       82    920        0
Confl. Peds. (#/hr)                     3                5       5                3           1                                        1
Confl. Bikes (#/hr)                                                      2
Heavy Vehicles (%)                   2%      6%       1%       3%       4%      5%          1%       8%     5%      6%      8%       3%
Turn Type                           Prot             Over     Prot                       pm+pt                    pm+pt
Protected Phases                       7       4        5        3        8                    5      2                1      6
Permitted Phases                                                                               2                       6
Actuated Green, G (s)                8.3    14.2     15.0     15.3     21.2                78.5     68.8           65.2    59.5
Effective Green, g (s)               8.3    14.2     15.0     15.3     21.2                78.5     68.8           65.2    59.5
Actuated g/C Ratio                  0.07    0.12     0.12     0.13     0.18                0.65     0.57           0.54     0.50
Clearance Time (s)                   4.0      4.0      4.0      4.0      4.0                 4.0     4.0             4.0     4.0
Vehicle Extension (s)                3.0     3.0      3.0      3.0      3.0                 3.0      3.0            3.0      3.0
Lane Grp Cap (vph)                  113      195      184      206      526                 390    1749             215    1519
v/s Ratio Prot                      0.04    0.08     0.02    c0.09    c0.11               c0.09    c0.40           0.02     0.30
v/s Ratio Perm                                                                             0.37                    0.19
v/c Ratio                           0.64    0.64     0.17     0.74     0.64                0.69     0.70           0.38    0.61
Uniform Delay, d1                   54.4    50.4     46.9     50.4     45.9                12.8     18.2           14.4    21.8
Progression Factor                  1.00    1.00     1.00     1.00     1.00                1.00     1.00           1.00    1.00
Incremental Delay, d2               11.2     6.6      0.4     12.9      2.6                 5.2      2.3            1.1     1.8
Delay (s)                           65.6    57.1     47.4     63.3     48.4                18.0     20.5           15.6    23.6
Level of Service                       E       E        D        E        D                    B       C               B      C
Approach Delay (s)                          53.0                       52.3                         20.0                   22.9
Approach LOS                                   D                          D                            C                      C
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                             30.3        HCM Level of Service                       C
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio                          0.68
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                            120.0        Sum of lost time (s)                      8.0
Intersection Capacity Utilization                   71.1%         ICU Level of Service                       C
Analysis Period (min)                                   15
c Critical Lane Group




                                                                                                                      Synchro 7 - Report
Existing Conditions - PM Peak Hour                                                                                                Page 2
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
2: Airport Way & Veterans Way                                                                         5/24/2012



Movement                            EBL     EBR       NBL     NBT      SBT      SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                        Stop                      Stop     Stop
Volume (vph)                         105    128       101       73       82       48
Peak Hour Factor                    0.90    0.90      0.90    0.90     0.90     0.90
Hourly flow rate (vph)               117    142       112       81       91       53
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1    EB 2      NB 1    SB 1
Volume Total (vph)                   117      142      193      144
Volume Left (vph)                    117         0     112         0
Volume Right (vph)                      0     142         0      53
Hadj (s)                            0.53    -0.62     0.27    -0.18
Departure Headway (s)                5.9      4.7      5.0      4.6
Degree Utilization, x               0.19     0.19     0.27     0.19
Capacity (veh/h)                     581      721      689      732
Control Delay (s)                     9.1      7.6      9.8      8.7
Approach Delay (s)                   8.3               9.8      8.7
Approach LOS                            A                 A        A
Intersection Summary
Delay                                                   8.9
HCM Level of Service                                      A
Intersection Capacity Utilization                    34.4%         ICU Level of Service   A
Analysis Period (min)                                    15




                                                                                              Synchro 7 - Report
Existing Conditions - PM Peak Hour                                                                        Page 3
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
3: Airport Way & 19th Street                                                                       5/24/2012



Movement                            EBT     EBR      WBL     WBT    NBL      NBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                       215      16        3     361     64        7
Sign Control                        Free                     Free   Stop
Grade                                0%                       0%     0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.88     0.88    0.88    0.88   0.88     0.88
Hourly flow rate (vph)               244       18       3     410     73        8
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                         None                     None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)                1054
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume                                262            670      253
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                                    262            670      253
tC, single (s)                                         4.1            6.4      6.2
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                                 2.2            3.5      3.3
p0 queue free %                                       100             83       99
cM capacity (veh/h)                                  1313            419      790
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1    WB 1    WB 2     NB 1   NB 2
Volume Total                         262        3     410      73      8
Volume Left                             0       3        0     73      0
Volume Right                           18       0        0      0      8
cSH                                 1700    1313    1700      419    790
Volume to Capacity                  0.15     0.00    0.24    0.17   0.01
Queue Length 95th (ft)                  0       0        0     16      1
Control Delay (s)                     0.0     7.7      0.0   15.4    9.6
Lane LOS                                        A               C      A
Approach Delay (s)                   0.0      0.1            14.8
Approach LOS                                                    B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                          1.6
Intersection Capacity Utilization                   31.1%       ICU Level of Service   A
Analysis Period (min)                                   15




                                                                                           Synchro 7 - Report
Existing Conditions - PM Peak Hour                                                                     Page 4
Queues
4: Yew Avenue & NB Ramps                                                                5/24/2012



Lane Group                    EBL     EBT     WBT      WBR        NBL    NBT
Lane Group Flow (vph)           99    118      424       99       154    182
v/c Ratio                     0.32    0.16     0.73    0.17       0.25   0.28
Control Delay                  9.3     7.1     22.4     4.0       13.6    4.1
Queue Delay                    0.0     0.0      0.0     0.0        0.0    0.0
Total Delay                    9.3     7.1     22.4     4.0       13.6    4.1
Queue Length 50th (ft)          13      16     102        0         33      0
Queue Length 95th (ft)          31      36    #216       22         70     33
Internal Link Dist (ft)               500      974                        463
Turn Bay Length (ft)          175                        150
Base Capacity (vph)           308     997      697      674       616    644
Starvation Cap Reductn           0       0        0        0         0      0
Spillback Cap Reductn            0       0        0        0         0      0
Storage Cap Reductn              0       0        0        0         0      0
Reduced v/c Ratio             0.32    0.12     0.61     0.15      0.25   0.28
Intersection Summary
# 95th percentile volume exceeds capacity, queue may be longer.
    Queue shown is maximum after two cycles.




                                                                                Synchro 7 - Report
Existing Conditions - PM Peak Hour                                                          Page 5
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
4: Yew Avenue & NB Ramps                                                                                                5/24/2012



Movement                            EBL   EBT      EBR     WBL    WBT      WBR        NBL     NBT     NBR    SBL     SBT     SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (vph)                        90     107        0       0    386        90      140         1    165      0      0        0
Ideal Flow (vphpl)               1750     1750     1750    1750   1750     1750      1750     1750    1750   1750   1750     1750
Total Lost time (s)                4.0      4.0                     4.0      4.0       4.0      4.0
Lane Util. Factor                 1.00     1.00                    1.00     1.00      1.00     1.00
Frt                               1.00     1.00                    1.00     0.85      1.00     0.85
Flt Protected                     0.95     1.00                    1.00     1.00      0.95     1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)                1630     1667                    1683     1488      1646     1418
Flt Permitted                     0.26     1.00                    1.00     1.00      0.95     1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)                  451    1667                    1683     1488      1646     1418
Peak-hour factor, PHF             0.91     0.91    0.91    0.91    0.91     0.91      0.91     0.91   0.91   0.91    0.91    0.91
Adj. Flow (vph)                      99     118       0       0     424       99       154        1    181      0       0       0
RTOR Reduction (vph)                  0       0       0       0       0       66         0      116      0      0       0       0
Lane Group Flow (vph)               99     118        0       0    424        33      154        66      0      0       0       0
Heavy Vehicles (%)                 2%       5%      0%      0%      4%       0%        1%       0%     5%     0%      0%      0%
Turn Type                       pm+pt                                      Perm      Perm
Protected Phases                      5      2                        6                          8
Permitted Phases                      2                                        6          8
Actuated Green, G (s)             21.5    21.5                     15.4    15.4       16.7    16.7
Effective Green, g (s)            21.5    21.5                     15.4    15.4       16.7    16.7
Actuated g/C Ratio                0.47    0.47                     0.33    0.33       0.36    0.36
Clearance Time (s)                  4.0     4.0                      4.0     4.0        4.0     4.0
Vehicle Extension (s)              3.0     3.0                      3.0     3.0        3.0     3.0
Lane Grp Cap (vph)                 263     776                      561     496        595     513
v/s Ratio Prot                   c0.02    0.07                    c0.25                       0.05
v/s Ratio Perm                    0.16                                     0.02      c0.09
v/c Ratio                         0.38    0.15                     0.76    0.07       0.26    0.13
Uniform Delay, d1                   8.1    7.1                     13.7    10.5       10.4     9.9
Progression Factor                1.00    1.00                     1.00    1.00       1.00    1.00
Incremental Delay, d2              0.9     0.1                      5.8     0.1        1.1     0.5
Delay (s)                           9.0    7.2                     19.5    10.6       11.4    10.4
Level of Service                      A      A                        B       B          B       B
Approach Delay (s)                         8.0                     17.8                       10.9                    0.0
Approach LOS                                 A                        B                          B                      A
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                           13.7      HCM Level of Service                      B
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio                        0.49
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                           46.2      Sum of lost time (s)                    12.0
Intersection Capacity Utilization                 48.6%       ICU Level of Service                       A
Analysis Period (min)                                 15
c Critical Lane Group




                                                                                                                Synchro 7 - Report
Existing Conditions - PM Peak Hour                                                                                          Page 6
