     
 
                                                          TABLE OF CONTENTS



APPLICATION SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................1 
     Notification of Proposed Change (NOPC) Palmer Ranch Master Development Order .............1 
     Notification of Proposed Change (NOPC) Palmer Ranch Increment IV.......................................1 
     Rezone Petition No. 13-27 ...................................................................................................................1 
     Rezone Petition No. 13-28 ...................................................................................................................1 
     Comprehensive Plan Amendment CPA 2013-K...............................................................................2 
     Staff Recommendation on CPA 2013-K ............................................................................................2 
MAP SERIES ...............................................................................................................................................3 
RECOMMENDED MASTER DEVELOPMENT ORDER CONDITIONS...........................................13 
RECOMMENDED INCREMENT IV DEVELOPMENT ORDER CONDITIONS...............................13 
RECOMMENDED STIPULATIONS FOR REZONE NO. 13-27.........................................................17 
RECOMMENDED STIPULATIONS FOR REZONE NO. 13-28.........................................................19 
STAFF REPORT AND REVIEW AGENCY COMMENTS ..................................................................21 
FINDINGS OF FACT ................................................................................................................................71 
DRI AMENDMENT / REZONING HISTORY.........................................................................................75 



APPENDIX A – APPLICATION MATERIALS
APPENDIX B – NEIGHBORHOOD WORKSHOP
APPENDIX C– ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
APPENDIX D – COMPREHENSIVE PLAN GOALS, POLICIES AND OBJECTIVIES
APPENDIX E – CORRESPONDENCE
APPENDIX F – REVIEW AGENCY COMMENTS
APPENDIX G – PLANNING COMMISSION RESOLUTION




                                                                              
 
                                      APPLICATION SUMMARY

This request is to redesignate approximately 68 acres, known as Parcels A2 and A6 within the Palmer
Park of Commerce, from commercial/office and industrial uses to residential uses for the development of
180 single-family residential dwelling units. This application was filed by James Paulmann, agent,
representing Palmer Ranch Holdings, Ltd..
The Palmer Ranch Increment IV Development of Regional Impact (DRI) was approved by the Sarasota
County Commission on June 20, 1989 (Resolution No. 89-205). This Increment encompasses the Palmer
Park of Commerce, a 261 acre mixed use development approved for 1,756,000 square feet of Office,
Light Industrial and Warehousing uses. To date, 140,000 square feet of development has occurred within
the Palmer Park of Commerce.
The requested change of Parcels A2 and A6 to residential uses requires: 1) a Comprehensive Plan
Amendment (CPA) changing the current designation of Major Employment Center (MEC) to Moderate
Density Residential and changes to the road classification of Sawyer Loop Road West; 2) an amendment
to the Palmer Ranch Master Development Order removing Sawyer Loop Road West’s designation as a
Collector Road; 3) an amendment to Increment IV to redesignate Parcels A2 and A6 as residential; and 4)
rezoning Parcels A2 and A6 to residential and updating the remainder of the Palmer Park of Commerce.


    Notification of Proposed Change (NOPC) Palmer Ranch Master Development Order

Palmer Ranch Master Development Order DRI NOPC No. 15 is an application to remove Sawyer Loop
Road West’s designation as a Collector Road which will allow for the construction of Sawyer Loop Road
West as a private residential roadway through Parcels A2 and A6 of Palmer Ranch Increment IV.
 The Southwest Florida Regional Planning Council held a hearing on this NOPC application on March 20,
2014 and recommended unanimous approval.


            Notification of Proposed Change (NOPC) Palmer Ranch Increment IV

Palmer Ranch Increment IV DRI NOPC No. 3 is an application to redesignate Parcels A2 and A6 within
the Palmer Park of Commerce from office/light industrial and warehousing uses to residential uses.
The Southwest Florida Regional Planning Council held a hearing on this NOPC application on March 20,
2014 and recommended unanimous approval.


                                      Rezone Petition No. 13-27

Rezone Petition No. 13-27 is an application to rezone approximately 68 acres, Parcels A2 and A6 within
the Palmer Park of Commerce, from PCD/ILW (Planned Commerce Development/Industrial Light
Manufacturing and Warehousing) and PCD/OPI (Planned Commerce Development/Office, Professional
and Institutional) zone district with stipulations to RSF-2/PUD (Residential, Single-Family, 3.5 units/acre,
Planned Unit Development) zone district.



                                                     1 
 
                                       Rezone Petition No. 13-28

Rezone Petition No. 13-28 is an application to rezone approximately 178 acres, Parcels A3-A5 and A7-
A9 within the Palmer Park of Commerce, from PCD/ILW (Planned Commerce Development/Industrial
Light Manufacturing and Warehousing) and PCD/OPI (Planned Commerce Development/Office,
Professional and Institutional) with stipulations to PCD/ILW (Planned Commerce Development/Industrial
Light Manufacturing and Warehousing) zone district, with amended stipulations.


                          Comprehensive Plan Amendment CPA 2013-K

This is a privately initiated Comprehensive Plan Amendment (No. CPA 2013-D), filed by James
Paulmann, agent, representing Palmer Ranch Holdings, Ltd., to amend the following components of the
Sarasota County Comprehensive Plan:
       Future Land Use Map amendment to change the future land use designation on an approximately
        69-acre vacant parcel from Major Employment Center (MEC) to Moderate Density Residential;
       Amend Figure 6-9: Year 2025 Future Thoroughfare Plan (Functional Classification) of the
        Transportation Chapter, of the Sarasota County Comprehensive Plan by deleting Sawyer Loop
        Road between Clark Road (West) and McIntosh Road as a Minor Collector;
       Amend Figure 6-10: Year 2025 Future Thoroughfare Plan (By Lanes) of the Transportation
        Chapter, of the Sarasota County Comprehensive Plan by deleting Sawyer Loop Road between
        Clark Road (West) and McIntosh Road as a two-lane road; and
       Amend Appendix D, Section 4: Year 2025 Future Thoroughfare Plan, Minor Collector Section for
        Sawyer Loop Road, strikethrough Clark Road West and underline McIntosh Road.
This amendment is being processed concurrently with Rezone Petition No. 13-27 and 13-28.


                               Staff Recommendation on CPA 2013-K

Staff has reviewed the application and provided planning analysis of proposed Comprehensive Plan
Amendment CPA 2012-K in the staff report. Specific recommendations came from Transportation
Planning for the Transportation Chapter amendments, and Future Land Use map amendment
recommendations came from Planning Services.
Staff recommends approval of the Applicant’s request to change the respective parcels from Major
Employment Center (MEC) to Moderate Density Residential. Staff also recommends approval of the
Applicant’s request change to amend the Transportation Chapter of the Sarasota County Comprehensive
Plan by deleting Sawyer Loop Road between Clark Road (West) and McIntosh Road, from the Sarasota
County “Year 2025 Future Thoroughfare Plan.” Staff supports this request to amend the 2025 Future
Thoroughfare Plan by revising Sawyer Loop Road between Clark Road (West) and McIntosh Road, from
a minor collector to a local road as it does not hinder nor obstruct the goals, objectives, and policies of the
Sarasota County Comprehensive Plan.




                                                      2 
 
              MAP SERIES

     PALMER RANCH INCREMENT IV
    Proposed Master Development Plan




                   3 
 
           REZONE PETITION No. 13-27
    Proposed Binding Development Concept Plan




                        4 
 
    5 
 
           REZONE PETITION No. 13-28
    Proposed Binding Development Concept Plan




                        6 
 
    7 
 
    PALMER RANCH INCREMENT IV




                8 
 
    9 
 
    10 
 
    11 
 
    12 
 
                  RECOMMENDED MASTER DEVELOPMENT ORDER CONDITIONS

    The following revisions to the Palmer Ranch Master Development Order adopted by Resolution No. 91-170, as
    amended, denoted with Strikethrough and Underline:
    A. CONDITIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL 
    2.    As mitigation for the impact of Palmer Ranch traffic, Palmer Ranch shall construct one hundred percent 
          (100%) of the following major county roadways at such times as are required in incremental development 
          orders: 
            a. Honore Avenue as a four‐lane divided arterial roadway from Clark Road (S.R.72) to Preymore Street. 
            b. McIntosh Road as a four‐lane divided collector roadway from Clark Road (S.R. 72) to US‐41. 
            c. Sawyer Loop Road East as a collector roadway. 
            d. Palmer  Ranch  Parkway  as  a  collector  roadway  from  Beneva  Road  to  McIntosh  Road,  then  jogging 
               south before continuing easterly between McIntosh Road and Honore Avenue. 
            e. An unnamed collector roadway connecting Sawyer Loop Road with the eastern extension of Palmer 
               Ranch Parkway near Honore Avenue. 
            f. Mall Drive as a collector roadway from Beneva Road to McIntosh Road. 
            g. Livingston Street Central Sarasota Parkway as a collector roadway from U.S. 41 to Honore Avenue. 
            (The  major  roadways  listed  above  are  set  in  terms  of  where  they  enter  and  exit  the  Palmer  Ranch 
            development.) 


              RECOMMENDED INCREMENT IV DEVELOPMENT ORDER CONDITIONS

    The following revisions to the Palmer Ranch Increment IV Development Order adopted by Resolution No. 89-
    205, as amended, denoted with Strikethrough and Underline:
    A.  GENERAL 
      13.  Development  on  Parcels  A‐1  through  A‐7  shall  be  governed  by  the  "Master  Development  Order  for  the 
           Palmer Ranch Development of Regional Impact" (Resolution No. 84‐418). 
      14.  Development  on  Parcels  A‐8  and  A‐1  through  A‐9  shall  be  governed  by  the  "Amended  and  Restated 
           Master Development Order for the Palmer Ranch Development of Regional Impact" (Resolution No. 91‐
           170) as may be amended. 
    B.  Land/Soils 
      1.  Prior  to  construction  plan  approval,  the  Applicant  shall  submit  to  Sarasota  County  the  results  of  the 
          radiation survey conducted for each proposed lake to be excavated for fill materials.  These results shall 
          be reviewed and approved by the Pollution Control Division. 
    C.  Vegetation and Wildlife 
      2.  The  Applicant  shall  mitigate  any  alterations  to  wetland  fringing  hammocks.    Trees  removed  from  this 
          habitat shall be replaced by the Applicant on a ratio between 3 and 5 trees added for every tree removed.  
          The  Applicant  shall  submit  compensation  plans  for  tree  removal  in  wetland‐fringing  hammocks  to  the 




                                                              13 
 
          Natural Sciences Division for review and approval prior to the submittal of the first preliminary or site and 
          development plan for this Increment.  Said plans shall include the following: 

             a list of hardwood and understory species proposed to be planted; 
             a diagram showing proposed spacing; 
             a description of the area to be planted; 
             a commitment to replant if survival falls below 85% during the first three years; and 
             a monitoring and maintenance program (the monitoring period shall be extended beyond three years 
              if significant problems arise in maintaining the required rate of survival).; and 
             for cabbage palm‐dominated wetland fringing hammocks, cabbage palm relocation may be used in 
              lieu of the 3‐5:1 replacement ratio required for hardwood trees. 

      3.  Any  plant  species  listed  as  threatened  by  the  Florida  Department  of  Agriculture  shall  be  preserved 
          including specimens of golden polypody fern (Phlebodium aureum), shoestring fern (Vittaria lineata), air 
          plant  (Tillandsia  setacea),  and  water  spangles  (Salvinia  minima)  through  either  relocation  to  protected 
          habitats or incorporation in the final approved preliminary plans and/or site and development plans and 
          construction plans as determined by the Natural Sciences Division.
    D.  WATER QUALITY AND DRAINAGE 
      4. The Applicant shall submit stormwater management plans with each development proposal (preliminary, 
         site  and  development,  or  construction  plans  as  appropriate).    Each  plan  shall  demonstrate  consistency 
         with  the  finalized  Stormwater  Management  Hydroperiod/Wetland  Maintenance  Plan  and  shall  indicate 
         the following: 
               a. that it is consistent with the low‐flow analysis, if applicable; 
               b. that the water budgets of the wetlands and watercourses are based on the information     
                  provided in the Hydroperiod/Wetland Maintenance Plan; 
               c. that information on seasonal high water elevations are provided to determine the proposed 
                  groundwater elevation/fluctuations of the stormwater detention systems; 
               d. that adequate volumes of treated stormwater are discharged to wetlands and watercourses to 
                  maintain hydroperiods, if necessary; 
               e. that fixed control structures are incorporated into stormwater management plans, if necessary, 
                  to allow hydroperiods to be maintained; 
               f. that bleed‐down notches/orifices are incorporated into wetland discharge structures to allow 
                  natural fluctuations to occur in the upper zones of wetlands, if appropriate; 
               g. that a 30 ft. buffer of vegetation remains undisturbed around all preserved and created 
                  wetlands; 
               h. that all stormwater retention lakes contain littoral zones equal to at least 35% of the surface area 
                  of each lake; 
               i. that stormwater quality treatment schemes are utilized including conveyance of surface runoff 
                  through grass swales, long term detention basins, biological filter systems, and underdrain filter 
                  systems; 
               j. that the stormwater management system is designed to be consistent with the approved 
                  pollutant loading analysis; and 
               k. that the proposed high pool elevations of wetlands are considered in establishing lake levels. 



                                                              14 
 
      13.  Turbidity  shall  be  monitored  daily,  occurring  at  2‐1/2  hour  intervals  during  daily 
           infrastructure/earthmoving  construction  activities  in  a  project  phase/subbasin.    Prior  to  the  approval  of 
           the  construction  plans,  the  Applicant  shall  consult  with  the  Pollution  Control  Division  to  determine 
           sampling  stations  for  monitoring  the  turbidity  in  areas  undergoing  construction.    The  method  of 
           monitoring  turbidity  shall  be  supervised  by  a  laboratory  recognized  by  Sarasota  County.    A  report  on 
           turbidity levels shall be submitted on a weekly basis to the Pollution Control Division for their review.  If 
           any  violation  in  turbidity  as  a  result  of  the  project  is  detected,  the  Pollution  Control  Division  shall  be 
           contacted via telephone and all construction which may be causing the turbidity violation in the subbasin 
           shall  be  immediately  halted  until  the  violation  is  corrected.    If  the  specific  activity  responsible  for  the 
           violation can be isolated, only the activity responsible for the exceedence shall be required to cease until 
           the violation is corrected.  Subsequent to completion and certification by Sarasota County of the project 
           phase infrastructure, turbidity monitoring shall continue once daily for 30 days or until 3 inches of rainfall 
           has occurred after infrastructure completion.  In the event that turbidity violations are noted, corrective 
           action shall immediately take place and turbidity monitoring shall continue for an additional 30 days. 
      14.  If  any  changes  in  water  quality  monitoring  locations,  parameters,  and/or  frequency  are  suggested  by 
           either the Pollution Control Division, the County Natural Resources Department, the Florida Department 
           of Environmental Regulations, the Southwest Florida Water Management District, or the Applicant, such 
           changes shall be coordinated with the appropriate County and State agencies. 
    E.  WETLANDS 
      5.  Prior to the submittal of the first preliminary or site and development plan for Palmer Ranch Increment IV, 
          the Applicant shall submit wetland mitigation and monitoring plans to be reviewed and approved by the 
          Natural Sciences Division.  These plans shall include the following: 
                a. description of the habitats to be altered; 
                b. description of the proposed mitigation sites; 
                c. proposed elevations/contours of the mitigated wetlands; 
                d. evidence that hydroperiods can be maintained in the created systems; 
                e. a list of species to be planted if nursery stock is to be used rather than mulch from disturbed 
                   wetlands; 
                f. a commitment to replant mitigated wetlands if survival falls below 85% during the first three 
                   years; 
                g. a plan of remedial action if proposed hydroperiods are found to be inadequate to maintain the 
                   viability of the wetlands; 
                h. a commitment to remove both “nuisance” vegetation and exotic vegetation from created 
                   wetland habitats (including littoral zones); and 
                i. methods and frequency of monitoring (the period of monitoring shall be extended beyond three 
                   years if it is apparent that there are difficulties in maintaining required survival rates or 
                   hydroperiods). 

      6.  Stormwater  retention  lakes  shall  contain  littoral  zones  equal  to  at  least  35%  of  the  surface  area  of  the 
          lakes.  Preliminary plans and site and development plans shall include a cross‐section of each stormwater 
          retention  lake  showing  the  proposed  location  and  configuration  of  the  required  littoral  zones.    Cross‐
          sections of the transitional areas between wetlands and adjoining lakes shall also be provided.  Prior to 
          approval of the construction plans, the Applicant shall submit a littoral zone plan to the Natural Resources 


                                                                  15 
 
          Department  for  review  and  approval.    The  plan  shall  include  a  list  of  species  to  be  planted,  proposed 
          spacing, proposed method of planting (e.g., mulching and supplemental  planting, planting from nursery 
          stock,  etc.),  a  commitment  to  replant  if  survival  falls  below  85%  and  a  proposed  maintenance  and 
          monitoring  plan.    The  Applicant  shall  cooperate  with  the  Natural  Resources  Department  and  the 
          Southwest  Florida  Water  Management  District  to  monitor  the  growth  rate  (coverage)  and  survivability 
          rate of transferred and/or planted wetland species in the newly created littoral zones.  The appropriate 
          Property  Owners’  Association  shall  be  responsible  for  long‐term  maintenance  of  littoral  zones.  
          Monitoring programs of littoral zone maintenance shall be based on the Aquatic Vegetation Maintenance 
          and Control Plan incorporated into this Development Order as Exhibit D. 
    F.    LAND USE 
      1.  Palmer  Ranch  Increment  IV  shall  include  a  mix  of  professional  office,  light  industrial,  and  warehousing 
          uses  not  to  exceed  a  total  of  1,756,000  square  feet  of  gross  leasable  area,  and  180  residential  units.  
          Parcels A‐2 A‐3 through A‐5 and A‐7 through A‐9 shall be developed under the provisions of the Planned 
          Commerce Development (PCD) District Regulations.  A‐2 and A‐6 shall be developed under the provisions 
          of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District. 
      3.  All  buffer  areas  as  shown on  the  revised  Map  H,  attached  hereto  as  Exhibit  A,  shall  be  depicted  on  the 
          appropriate  preliminary  plans  and/or  site  and  development  plans,  subject  to  review  and  approval  from 
          the  County  Planning  Department.    Within  the  100  foot  wide  buffer  area  between  Gulf  Gate  East 
          subdivision and Parcel A‐6, a densely  planted vegetative screen a minimum  of 10 feet in  width shall be 
          established.  Prior to approval of the first preliminary plan or site and development plan for both Parcels 
          A‐5 and A‐6, the Applicant shall demonstrate recorded buffer easements for drainage/utilities adjacent to 
          these parcels to allow reduction of perimeter buffers as shown on the revised Map H, attached hereto as 
          Exhibit A. 
      4.  In order to enhance land use compatibility between adjacent residential areas and the project (Parcels A5, 
          A6 and A7), other urban design measures (e.g., light glare reduction, screening of cooling units) shall be 
          addressed in deed restrictions for the Palmer Park of Commerce.  Prior to the filing of the first final plat, 
          the  County  Attorney  in  consultation  with  the  Planning  Department  shall  review  and  approve  deed 
          restrictions (see General Condition No. 3). 
    G.  HISTORICAL AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
      2.  Since  additional  historical‐archaeological  sites  could  be  uncovered  during  the  site  preparation  and 
          development process, the construction crews and other personnel shall be briefed at the pre‐construction 
          conference  by  the  Historical  Resources  Department  as  to  the  possible  existence  of  these  sites.    If  any 
          potential  archaeological  or  historical  site  is  discovered  during  construction,  all  work  in  the  immediate 
          vicinity  of  the  discovery  shall  cease.    Barriers  shall  be  installed  around  the  discovery  by  the  Applicant.  
          Further,  the  Applicant  shall  immediately  notify  the  Sarasota  County  Planning  Department,  the  Sarasota 
          County Historical Resources Department, the Southwest Florida Regional Planning Council, and the Florida 
          Division of Historical Resources.  These agencies shall be provided with access to the site for up to ninety 
          (90)  days  to  identify,  evaluate  and  document  the  site  as  well  as  suggest  techniques  for  the  site’s 
          preservation, if necessary.  Additional surveys in areas near any discovered site may be required by the 
          above‐cited County and State agencies. 




                                                                 16 
 
                       RECOMMENDED STIPULATIONS FOR REZONE NO. 13-27

    Note:  Strikethrough  represent  deletions  and  underline  represent  additions  to  the  previously  approved 
    language within Ordinance No. 97‐027.  

                                       Parcels A2 & A6 Palmer Park of Commerce
                                         (PCD/ILW & PCD/OPI to RSF-2/PUD)

GENERAL
     1. All preliminary plans, site and development plans, construction plans, and final plats shall comply with the 
        Development  Order  for  Increment  IV  of  the  Palmer  Ranch  Development  of  Regional  Impact  (Resolution 
        No. 89‐205, as amended). 
     2.  Prior to filing the first final plat, the County Attorney shall review and approve deed restrictions for the 
         Palmer Park of Commerce. These deed restrictions shall be in conformance with the PCD Regulations and 
         shall contain, at a minimum, the following items: 
         a. Size criteria for identification signs, as well as lighting requirements for the signs; 
         b. Maximum height requirements for parking lot security lighting and for roadway lights; 
         c. Weatherproofing and maintenance provisions for all signs and lighting structures; and, 
         d. A listing of the type of landscape materials to be allowed. 
         All subsequent final plats shall be filed with the approved deed restrictions. 
     3.  Pursuant  to  the  PCD  schedule  of  district  regulations,  the  Owner  is  hereby  granted  modifications  to  the 
         100' perimeter buffer requirement as depicted on the Master Development Plan attached hereto. 
         The eastern perimeter buffer on Parcel A‐9, adjacent to the Seminole Gulf Railway, may be reduced to a 
         minimum  of  ten  feet  (10')  in  width  and  shall  contain  three  (3)  canopy  trees  and  twelve  (12) 
         accent/understory trees per 100 linear feet. The required buffer and planting scheme may be modified, 
         subject to the review and approval of the Planning Department. If an alternative buffer/planting scheme 
         is proposed, the alternative plan shall include all of Parcel A‐9, depicting the alternative scheme along the 
         entire length of the parcel abutting the railway. 
     4.  All  off  street  loading  areas  within  sub‐parcel  A‐6  shall  be  screened  from  residential  parcels  to  the  west 
         and southwest. 
     5.  Spill  containment  structures  shall  be  required  for  all  outdoor  tanks  used  for  the  storage  of  liquid 
         chemicals, hazardous substances or their by‐products or petroleum products. The structures shall be sized 
         for  containment  of  110%  of  the  volume  of  the  largest  tank  within  the  structure.  The  design  of  such 
         structures  shall  be  reviewed  and  approved  by  the  Fire  Marshall  for  conformance  with  applicable  NFPA 
         standards. 
     6.  Any wells discovered during earth moving or excavation shall be reported to the Sarasota County Public 
         Health Unit, Office of Environmental Engineering within twenty four (24) hours after discovery is made. 
     7.  The Owner shall be required to maintain the appearance and function of any private drainage facilities to 
         be  constructed  on  the  site,  including  retention  ponds  and  drainage  ditches,  at  its  own  expense  in 
         accordance with applicable federal, state and local regulations. At the time of recording a plat or prior to 
         final  construction  approval,  the  Owner  shall  be  required  to  record  in  the  public  records,  a  Notice  to 
         Purchaser, approved by Sarasota County, putting purchasers on notice that the maintenance of drainage 
         facilities is a private responsibility. 
     2.  Development  shall  take  place  in  substantial  accordance  with  the  Development  Concept  Plan  date 
         stamped  January  28,  2014,  and  attached  hereto  as  Exhibit  “A”,  except  as  necessary  to  comply  with  the 


                                                               17 
 
        stipulations  herein.  This  does  not  imply  or  confer  any  variances  from  applicable  zoning  or  land 
        development regulations. 
    3.  The  wetland  and  associated  upland  vegetative  buffer  shall  be  maintained  in  accordance  with 
        management guidelines contained within the Comprehensive Plan as a preserve and labeled a preserve 
        on all plans.  All activities including but not limited to filling, excavating, well drilling, altering vegetation 
        (including  trimming  of  both  trees  and  understory)  and  storing  of  materials  shall  be  prohibited  within 
        preservation areas, unless written approval is first obtained from Resource Protection.  Exception may be 
        granted  by  Resource  Protection  to  facilitate  implementation  of  approved  habitat  management  plans  or 
        the hand removal of nuisance/invasive vegetation. 
    4.  Mesic  hammock  areas  not  approved  for  removal  shall  be  preserved.    All  activities  including  filling, 
        excavating, altering of vegetation (both trees and understory) and storing of materials shall be prohibited 
        within preservation areas, except where approved by Conservation & Environmental Permitting through: 
        1)  the  Resource  Management  Plan  for  the  project,  or  2)  specific  written  approval  of  hand  removal  of 
        nuisance or exotic vegetation. 
    5.  The  Master  Surface  Water  Management  Plan  shall  be  consistent  with  the  Catfish  Creek  and  Matheny 
        Creek Basin Master Plan.   
    6.  Prior to or concurrent with the development of the subject parcel, the developer/owner shall construct 
        the necessary geometric lane configurations, install a traffic signal pole and mast arm for the eastbound 
        approach,  and modify the signal timing to accommodate the west leg of the McIntosh Road and Sawyer 
        Loop Road intersection. 

RSF‐2 / PUD Modifications 
   1. Pursuant to Section 6.11.2.f of the Sarasota County Zoning Regulations, a modification from the 
        Land  Development  Regulations  (Subdivision  Technical  Manual,  Section  B.3.a.4,  Local  Street)  is 
        granted to reduce the width of local cul‐de‐sac streets from 30 to 20 feet in width, as shown on 
        the Development Concept Plan. 
   2. Pursuant to Section 6.11.2.f of the Sarasota County Zoning Regulations, a modification from the 
        Land Development Regulations (Subdivision Technical Manual, Section A.4.b, Utility Easements) 
        is granted to eliminate rear and side yard lot line utilities and drainage easements, as shown on 
        the Development Concept Plan. 
   3. Pursuant to Section 6.11.2.f of the Sarasota County Zoning Regulations, a modification from the 
        Land Development Regulations (Subdivision Technical Manual, Section A.3.a.3, Minimum Street 
        Design  Specifications)  is  granted  to  reduce  the  minimum  roadway  center  line  turning  radius  of 
        100’  with  delta  greater  than  60  degrees  for  traffic  calming,  as  shown  on  the  Development 
        Concept Plan. 




                                                            18 
 
                       RECOMMENDED STIPULATIONS FOR REZONE NO. 13-28

    Note:  Strikethrough  represent  deletions  and  underline  represent  additions  to  the  previously  approved 
    language within Ordinance No. 97‐027.  

                                 Parcels A3-A5 and A7-A9 Palmer Park of Commerce
                                (PCD/ILW & PCD/OPI to PCD/ILW w/amended stips)

GENERAL
     1. All preliminary plans, site and development plans, construction plans, and final plats shall comply with the 
        Development  Order  for  Increment  IV  of  the  Palmer  Ranch  Development  of  Regional  Impact  (Resolution 
        No. 89‐205, as amended). 
     2.  Prior to filing the first final plat, the County Attorney shall review and approve deed restrictions for the 
         Palmer Park of Commerce. These deed restrictions shall be in conformance with the PCD Regulations and 
         shall contain, at a minimum, the following items: 
         a. Size criteria for identification signs, as well as lighting requirements for the signs; 
         b. Maximum height requirements for parking lot security lighting and for roadway lights; 
         c. Weatherproofing and maintenance provisions for all signs and lighting structures; and, 
         d. A listing of the type of landscape materials to be allowed. 
         All subsequent final plats shall be filed with the approved deed restrictions. 
     2.  Development  shall  take  place  in  substantial  accordance  with  the  Development  Concept  Plan  date 
         stamped December 12, 2013, and attached hereto as Exhibit “A”, except as necessary to comply with the 
         stipulations  herein.  This  does  not  imply  or  confer  any  variances  from  applicable  zoning  or  land 
         development regulations. 
     3.  Pursuant  to  the  PCD  schedule  of  district  regulations,  the  Owner  is  hereby  granted  modifications  to  the 
         100' 50’ perimeter buffer requirement as depicted on the Master Development Plan attached hereto. 
         The eastern perimeter buffer on Parcel A‐9, adjacent to the Seminole Gulf Railway Legacy Trail, may be 
         reduced to a minimum of ten feet (10') in width and shall contain three (3) canopy trees and twelve (12) 
         accent/understory trees per 100 linear feet. The required buffer and planting scheme may be modified, 
         subject to the review and approval of the Planning Department. If an alternative buffer/planting scheme 
         is proposed, the alternative plan shall include all of Parcel A‐9, depicting the alternative scheme along the 
         entire length of the parcel abutting the railway. 
     4.  All  off  street  loading  areas  within  sub‐parcel  A‐6  shall  be  screened  from  residential  parcels  to  the  west 
         and southwest. 
     5.  Spill  containment  structures  shall  be  required  for  all  outdoor  tanks  used  for  the  storage  of  liquid 
         chemicals, hazardous substances or their by‐products or petroleum products. The structures shall be sized 
         for  containment  of  110%  of  the  volume  of  the  largest  tank  within  the  structure.  The  design  of  such 
         structures  shall  be  reviewed  and  approved  by  the  Fire  Marshall  for  conformance  with  applicable  NFPA 
         standards. 
     6.  Any wells discovered during earth moving or excavation shall be reported to the Sarasota County Public 
         Health Unit, Office of Environmental Engineering within twenty four (24) hours after discovery is made. 
     7.  The Owner shall be required to maintain the appearance and function of any private drainage facilities to 
         be  constructed  on  the  site,  including  retention  ponds  and  drainage  ditches,  at  its  own  expense  in 
         accordance with applicable federal, state and local regulations. At the time of recording a plat or prior to 
         final  construction  approval,  the  Owner  shall  be  required  to  record  in  the  public  records,  a  Notice  to 


                                                               19 
 
        Purchaser, approved by Sarasota County, putting purchasers on notice that the maintenance of drainage 
        facilities is a private responsibility. 
    4.  The  Master  Surface  Water  Management  Plan  shall  be  consistent  with  the  Catfish  and  Matheny  Creek 
        Basin Master Plans. 




                                                         20 
 
                     STAFF REPORT AND REVIEW AGENCY COMMENTS


OVERVIEW
The Palmer Ranch Development of Regional Impact (DRI) is an approved 5,307.5 acre development
located west of I-75, east of US 41 and south of Clark Road in Sarasota. Sarasota County originally
approved the Palmer Ranch DRI on December 18, 1984, under Resolution No. 84-418, amended and
restated with Resolution No. 91-170, as amended. Development within Palmer Ranch has continuously
occurred with individually approved DRI increments.
The Palmer Ranch Increment IV DRI was originally approved June 20, 1989 (Resolution No. 89-205) and
amended March 9, 1993 (Ordinance No. 93-043) and March 11, 1997 (Ordinance No. 97-026). This
Increment encompasses the Palmer Park of Commerce, a 261 acre mixed use development approved for
1,756,000 square feet of Office, Light Industrial and Warehousing uses. The Palmer Park of Commerce
consists of nine parcels, A1 through A9. To date, 139,724 square feet of development has occurred within
the Palmer Park of Commerce.
The Application for a Notification of Proposed Change (NOPC) to the Palmer Ranch Increment IV has
been filed by Mr. James Paulmann, agent, representing Palmer Ranch Holdings, Ltd., to allow the
development of 180 single-family dwelling units on Parcels A2 and A6 (68 acres) instead of the approved
office and light industrial uses. No additional development is being proposed for the remaining parcel
with the Increment. No changes are being proposed for the total square footage for the Palmer Park of
Commerce, as approved.
An Application for a NOPC to the Palmer Ranch Master Development Order has also been filled to
remove Sawyer Loop Road East as a Collector Road to be constructed. Sawyer Loop Road West will be
constructed as a private residential roadway through Parcels A2 and A6.
The NOPC applications were also submitted to the Southwest Florida Regional Planning Council
(SWFRPC) and the Department of Economic Opportunity (DEO) pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
380.06, Florida Statutes, which govern the DRI amendment process. The Southwest Florida Regional
Planning Council held a public hearing on this NOPC application on March 20, 2014 and unanimously
recommended approval. DEO provided no comments.
There are also two companion rezoning petitions (No. 13-27 & No. 13-28) associated with the NOPCs.
The purpose of these rezoning requests is to redesignate Parcels A2 and A6 within the Palmer Park of
Commerce Office from Office, Light Industrial and Warehousing uses to Residential.
Comprehensive Plan Amendment CPA 2013-K is a privately initiated revision to amend approximately
68.39 acres of the Future Land Use Map from Major Employment Center (MEC) to Moderate Density
Residential. Concurrently, there is a request to amend the Transportation Chapter of the Sarasota County
Comprehensive Plan by deleting Sawyer Loop Road between Clark Road (West) and McIntosh Road as a
two-lane road from the Sarasota County “Year 2025 Future Thoroughfare Plan,” including any other
amendment necessary to effectuate the change of designation of this segment of Sawyer Loop Road from
a minor collector to a local road, and to ensure internal consistency within the Comprehensive Plan.




                                                  21 
 
                            NOPC Palmer Ranch Master Development Order


LAND USE
The Palmer Ranch Increment IV Notification of Proposed Change (NOPC) and associated Rezone request
to change the current designation of Parcels A2 and A6 (68 acres) to residential use. This change requires
an amendment to the Palmer Ranch DRI Master Development Order (MDO) to make Sawyer Loop Road
“West” a local roadway. Currently Sawyer Loop Road is designated a Collector Road within the
development order. The request to a private residential development with local residential roadway
requires the MDO to be amended, specifically Condition A.2.c., to remove the western portion of Sawyer
Loop Road as a Collector Road to be built.
The Applicant submitted a traffic study that indicates that the land use change will not adversely affect the
study area roadway network. Transportation Planning reviewed the traffic study and is in agreement with
the findings of the report.
Recommended DRI Development Order Conditions
    The following revisions to the Palmer Ranch Master Development Order adopted by Resolution No. 91-170, as
    amended, denoted with Strikethrough and Underline:
    A.  CONDITIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL 
    2.    As mitigation for the impact of Palmer Ranch traffic, Palmer Ranch shall construct one hundred percent 
          (100%) of the following major county roadways at such times as are required in incremental development 
          orders: 
           a. Honore Avenue as a four‐lane divided arterial roadway from Clark Road (S.R.72) to Preymore Street. 
           b. McIntosh Road as a four‐lane divided collector roadway from Clark Road (S.R. 72) to US‐41. 
           c. Sawyer Loop Road East as a collector roadway. 
           d. Palmer  Ranch  Parkway  as  a  collector  roadway  from  Beneva  Road  to  McIntosh  Road,  then  jogging 
              south before continuing easterly between McIntosh Road and Honore Avenue. 
           e. An unnamed collector roadway connecting Sawyer Loop Road with the eastern extension of Palmer 
              Ranch Parkway near Honore Avenue. 
           f. Mall Drive as a collector roadway from Beneva Road to McIntosh Road. 
           g. Livingston Street Central Sarasota Parkway as a collector roadway from U.S. 41 to Honore Avenue. 
           (The  major  roadways  listed  above  are  set  in  terms  of  where  they  enter  and  exit  the  Palmer  Ranch 
           development.) 

Issues to be Resolved
None




                                                            22 
 
                                      NOPC Palmer Ranch Increment IV


LAND USE
Palmer Ranch DRI Increment IV Notification of Proposed Change (NOPC) No. 3 is an application to
change the current designation of Parcels A2 and A6 (68 acres), approximately 68 acres, from Office,
Light Industrial and Warehousing uses to residential use.
Project Inventory and Impact Assessment
The proposed development would redesignate Parcels A2 and A6 as residential within the Palmer Park of
Commerce (Increment IV) but not reduce the overall approved Office, Light Industrial and Warehousing
uses. Palmer Ranch Increment IV is currently approved for 1,756,000 square feet of Office, Light
Industrial and Warehousing uses. Overall approved totals for Office, Light Industrial and Warehousing
and residential would remain the same for the Master Palmer Ranch DRI. Palmer Ranch is approved for
11,550 residential dwelling units; to date 9,902 dwelling units have been approved and/or built within
twenty Increments.
Comprehensive Plan Consistency
The Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map designates this area a Major Employment Center (MEC).
The proposed designation to Moderate Density Residential and use is consistent with the Sarasota County
Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Map. The designation of this site is also consistent with the
Palmer Ranch Master Development Order (Resolution 84-418 as amended and restated as Resolution 91-
170 as amended). A total of 11,550 residential dwelling units have been approved for the entire Palmer
Ranch Development of Regional Impact and that number will remain unchanged. Additionally, adequate
levels of service have been demonstrated.
The applicant is proposing to mitigate any potential incompatibilities between land uses through as
Planned Unit Development, as required by the Palmer Ranch Master Development Order.
Relevant Policies
         FLU Policy 1.2.1
         FLU Policy 1.2.3
         FLU Policy 2.2.1
         FLU Policy 2.2.3
         FLU Policy 3.1.1
         FLU Policy 3.2.3

Applicant Commitments to be included as Development Order Conditions
None

Recommended DRI Development Order Conditions
    The following revisions to the Palmer Ranch Increment IV Development Order adopted by Resolution No. 89-
    205, as amended:
    A.  General 
    13.  Development  on  Parcels  A‐1  through  A‐7  shall  be  governed  by  the  "Master  Development  Order  for  the 
         Palmer Ranch Development of Regional Impact" (Resolution No. 84‐418). 




                                                            23 
 
    14.  Development  on  Parcels  A‐8  and  A‐1  through  A‐9  shall  be  governed  by  the  "Amended  and  Restated 
         Master Development Order for the Palmer Ranch Development of Regional Impact" (Resolution No. 91‐
         170) as may be amended. 
    F.  Land Use 
    1.    Palmer  Ranch  Increment  IV  shall  include  a  mix  of  professional  office,  light  industrial,  and  warehousing 
          uses  not  to  exceed  a  total  of  1,756,000  square  feet  of  gross  leasable  area,  and  180  residential  units.  
          Parcels A‐2 A‐3 through A‐5 and A‐7 through A‐9 shall be developed under the provisions of the Planned 
          Commerce Development (PCD) District Regulations.  A‐2 and A‐6 shall be developed under the provisions 
          of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District. 
    3.    All  buffer  areas  as  shown on  the  revised  Map  H,  attached  hereto  as  Exhibit  A,  shall  be  depicted  on  the 
          appropriate  preliminary  plans  and/or  site  and  development  plans,  subject  to  review  and  approval  from 
          the  County  Planning  Department.    Within  the  100  foot  wide  buffer  area  between  Gulf  Gate  East 
          subdivision and Parcel A‐6, a densely  planted vegetative screen a minimum  of 10 feet in  width shall be 
          established.  Prior to approval of the first preliminary plan or site and development plan for both Parcels 
          A‐5 and A‐6, the Applicant shall demonstrate recorded buffer easements for drainage/utilities adjacent to 
          these parcels to allow reduction of perimeter buffers as shown on the revised Map H, attached hereto as 
          Exhibit A. 
    4.    In order to enhance land use compatibility between adjacent residential areas and the project (Parcels A5, 
          A6 and A7), other urban design measures (e.g., light glare reduction, screening of cooling units) shall be 
          addressed in deed restrictions for the Palmer Park of Commerce.  Prior to the filing of the first final plat, 
          the  County  Attorney  in  consultation  with  the  Planning  Department  shall  review  and  approve  deed 
          restrictions (see General Condition No. 3). 

Issues to be Resolved
None

ENVIRONMENT
Project Inventory and Impact Assessment

Conservation & Environmental Permitting: 
Palmer Ranch Increment IV NOPC (Parcels A-2 and A-6) is proposed for a 68.39 acre development
containing approximately 1.73 acres of preserved native habitat. These parcels contain freshwater
wetlands and mesic hammock as identified on the F1 map. The remainder of the site contains developed
features (improved pasture and Brazilian pepper). The subject project is intended for residential
development. The acreage of each native habitat type present on the site and under post-construction
conditions is provided below:

Habitat Type                                           Pre-Construction           Post-Construction
Wet Prairie/Freshwater Marsh                                0.93ac.                         0.93ac.
Mesic Hammock                                               0.90ac.                         0.80ac.




                                                                24 
 
The applicant proposes to preserve 0.93 acres of on-site wetlands. The applicant also proposes to impact
0.1 acres of on-site mesic hammock and preserve the remaining 0.80 acres. (Refer to Habitat Preservation
and Alteration Plan, Map F-2 of the AIDA)

Stormwater: 
Parcels A2 & A6 of the Palmer Ranch Development of Regional Impact (DRI) lie within the Catfish and
Matheny Creek Watersheds. Based on Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD)
topographic aerials, runoff from the site generally flows in a north Westerly direction where it is carried
offsite by a ditch along the sites north boundary.
Soils
The soil information is based on data obtained from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
Soil Conservation Service. It should be noted that this information pertains to ‘natural’ conditions and
that the presence of adjacent man–made drainage works can affect wet season water table depth and
duration.

                                                                             Depth of WSWT1                          Months for 
      Drainage                                      Approximate Percent 
                                  Soil                                    Below Existing Ground                   Wet Season Water 
    Classification                                   (%) of Soil on Site 
                                                                              Surface (feet)                            Table 

                         Wabasso (41) – fine 
    Poorly Drained                                           64.2                     0.5 to 1.5                   June to October 
                               sand 

                          Pineda (31) – fine 
    Poorly Drained                                           9.2                      0.0 to 1.0                  June to February 
                                sand 

                         Bradenton (4) – fine 
    Poorly Drained                                           8.0                      0.0 to 1.0                   June to October 
                                sand 

                        EauGallie or Myakka                                           0.5 to 1.5                   June to October      
    Poorly Drained                                           7.8 
                          (10) – fine sands                                           0.5 to 1.5                   June to October 

                                                                                                                  June to February      
     Very Poorly         Floridana or Gator                                          +2.02 to 1.0             
                                                             4.9                                                     January to 
      Drained            (15) ‐ depressional                                         +2.02 to 1.0             
                                                                                                                     December 

     Very Poorly         Holopaw (22) – fine 
                                                             4.4                     +2.02 to 1.0                 June to February 
      Drained            sand,  depressional 

     Very Poorly          Felda (12) – fine 
                                                             1.5                     +2.02 to 1.0                 June to February 
      Drained            sand, depressional 

       1.   WSWT – Wet Season Water Table 
       2.   The (+) indicates that the water is above the ground surface and these soils are generally located in depressional 
            areas and poorly defined drainage ways. 




                                                                 25 
 
Floodplain
The table below describes floodplain information for the subject property:

                          Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA)                                                          Percent (%) of 
                                         Flood Insurance Map (FIRM)                                                               Property 

                    X (unshaded) or areas to be outside the 500‐year floodplain                                                       100% 

    Little Sarasota Bay Watershed (60.8% Catfish Creek & 39.2% Matheny Creek), Basin                                            Percent (%) of 
                       Master Plans and SWFWMD Aerial Topography                                                                  Property 

                  100‐year floodplain (Flood Zone AE or > 3 feet deep or moving)                                                      5.2% 

                         100‐year floodplain (Flood Zone AH or 1‐3 feet deep)                                                         1.4% 

Future Land Use Policy 1.1.6 from the Sarasota County Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Policy allows development within the 100-year floodplain as
long as the function of the floodplain is protected through floodplain compensation. Floodplain compensation must meet the requirements of the Land
Development Regulations (LDR) and will be examined at the time of Site and Development Plan / Construction Plan Approval.



Flooding History for the Area
A review of the Public Works Business Center Neighborhood Response Team (NRT), MAXIMO
databases, and Staff reports did not indicate any reports of structure flooding of the subject site. This
statement is not intended to indicate that the subject site is not susceptible to flooding, only that none has
been reported to the County. However, there were reports of street flooding along Kingston Dr. in the
winter of 1996 and 1997. This flooding was caused by a silted in ditch along Kingston Dr. The flooding
was alleviated when County O&M staff removed the silt from the ditch.

Air & Water Quality: 
The Applicant is proposing to strike three Conditions for Development Approval germane to Air and
Water Quality programs.
1. B.  LAND/SOILS 

          1.  Prior  to  construction  plan  approval,  the  Applicant  shall  submit  to  Sarasota  County  the  results  of  the 
              radiation  survey  conducted  for  each  proposed  lake  to  be  excavated  for  fill  materials.    These  results 
              shall be reviewed and approved by the Pollution Control Division. 

Staff has no objection to this proposed amendment as it duplicates a condition of the Master Development
Order. The Palmer Ranch Master Development Order (Resolution No. 91-170), in Exhibit “B” –
Amended and Restated Conditions of Development Approval for the Palmer Ranch Development of
Regional Impact, and Regional and Local Impacts and Information Requirements for Subsequent AIDA’s
[sic] current states:
          SPECIFIC CONDITIONS 
          LAND/SOILS 
          A. CONDITIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL 
          2.  Palmer  Ranch  agrees  to  determine  the  concentration  of  the  naturally  occurring  radioactive  series  in 
              the cores taken from proposed excavation for lakes and/or fill materials.  The report of the results of 


                                                                          26 
 
           the core sampling shall be submitted to the Sarasota County Pollution Control Division for review prior 
           to  construction  authorization.    The  Applicant  shall  comply  with  the  recommendations  made  by  a 
           recognized radon expert approved by the Natural Resources Department, as they apply to any future 
           excavation for lakes and/or fill materials within the Palmer Ranch DRI. 
       B. ISSUES SUBJECT TO FURTHER REVIEW IN AIDA’S [sic] 
          None 

2.  D.  Water Quality and Drainage 

       13.  Turbidity  shall  be  monitored  daily,  occurring  at  2‐1/2  hour  intervals  during  daily 
            infrastructure/earthmoving construction activities in a project phase/subbasin.  Prior to the approval 
            of the construction plans, the Applicant shall consult with the Pollution Control Division to determine 
            sampling  stations  for  monitoring  the  turbidity  in  areas  undergoing  construction.    The  method  of 
            monitoring turbidity shall be supervised by a laboratory recognized by Sarasota County.  A report on 
            turbidity levels shall be submitted on a weekly basis to the Pollution Control Division for their review.  
            If any violation in turbidity as a result of the project is detected, the Pollution Control Division shall be 
            contacted  via  telephone  and  all  construction  which  may  be  causing  the  turbidity  violation  in  the 
            subbasin shall be immediately halted until the violation is corrected.  If the specific activity responsible 
            for the violation can be isolated, only the activity responsible for the exceedence shall be required to 
            cease until the violation is corrected.  Subsequent to completion and certification by Sarasota County 
            of the project phase infrastructure, turbidity monitoring shall continue once daily for 30 days or until 3 
            inches  of  rainfall  has  occurred  after  infrastructure  completion.    In  the  event  that  turbidity  violations 
            are noted, corrective action shall immediately take place and turbidity monitoring shall continue for an 
            additional 30 days. 

Staff has no objection to this proposed amendment. Turbidity monitoring and control is inherent to
federal and state permitting, and the Sarasota County Earthmoving, Mining, and Water Pollution Control
Codes. Turbidity monitoring is also addressed in Exhibit “C” of the Amended and Restated Master
Development Order for the Palmer Ranch Development of Regional Impact (Resolution No. 91-170).
Exhibit “C” is described as, “An Exhibit Containing Guidelines for Best Management Practice (BMP’s)
[sic] and Consisting of Pages C-1 through C-7.”
3.  D.  Water Quality and Drainage 

       14.  If any changes in water quality monitoring locations, parameters, and/or frequency are suggested by 
            either  the  Pollution  Control  Division,  the  County  Natural  Resources  Department,  the  Florida 
            Department of Environmental Regulations, the Southwest Florida Water Management District, or the 
            Applicant, such changes shall be coordinated with the appropriate County and State agencies. 

Staff has no objection to this proposed amendment. Palmer Ranch has an extensive history of ambient
water quality monitoring that has provided valuable information to Sarasota County. Exhibit “E” to the
Amended and Restated Master Development Order for the Palmer Ranch Development of Regional
Impact (Resolution 91-170) is described as, “An Exhibit Containing Surface Water Monitoring Program
and Consisting of Pages E-1 through E-5.” Under Frequency, on page E-2 of the Exhibit, it is stated,
“Once and area is substantially developed as agreed to by the Sarasota County Pollution Control Division
and Palmer Ranch, a modification of the monitoring program shall be subject to discussion at any time to
change the frequency of water quality monitoring from quarterly to semi-annual or to discontinue the


                                                              27 
 
monitoring.” Although it is not explicitly stated, the interpretation is that changes to the locations and
specific parameters may be authorized pursuant to an agreement between Sarasota County and Palmer
Ranch.

Utilities Planning: 
All development within the Palmer Ranch Increment IV is required to use reclaimed water, connect to
central water and wastewater, and adhere to Sarasota County Uniform Water, Wastewater and Reclaimed
Water Systems Code.
An 18” water transmission main is planned to be extended from McIntosh Road to Sawyer Road within
the right of way that is proposed to be vacated. The Developer will be required to dedicate an
appropriately sized easement thru the property as part of the right of way vacation for the construction of
a transmission main by the county at a future date.
Non- Exclusive Permanent Easements are required for all reclaimed water, water and wastewater lines
installed on the property that are dedicated to the County. Wherever possible all lines will be outside of
paved areas to the greatest extent possible.

Comprehensive Plan Consistency
Conservation & Environmental Permitting:

The applicant proposes to preserve the on-site wetlands and minimize/mitigate proposed impacts to the
mesic hammock consistent with the development order stipulations.
Therefore, based on the applicant's commitments provided in the Application for Incremental
Development Approval - NOPC, the project is consistent with the County’s Comprehensive Plan in terms
of native habitat protection.
Relivent Policies
       Principles for Evaluating Development Proposals in Native Habitats.
       ENV Policy 4.4.1.
       ENV Policy 4.4.2.
       ENV Policy 4.4.5.
       ENV Policy 4.5.1.
       ENV Policy 4.5.18

Stormwater: 
Stormwater drainage concurrency for new development is based in part on provisions of a new on-site
stormwater management system designed to meet current level of service requirements of the Sarasota
County Comprehensive Plan and the Land Development Regulations (Ordinance No. 2000-074). Final
determination of stormwater drainage concurrency is deferred to the time of Site and Development Plan /
Construction Plan Approval.
At the time of Site and Development Plan / Construction Plan Approval, the applicant must demonstrate
that the proposed project shall not cause any adverse impacts to off-site property and shall not worsen any
existing off-site drainage problems in order to obtain Construction Authorization.


                                                    28 
 
Chapter 4, Watershed Management: 
 

    WATER Policy 2.2.2                          Must be consistent at site and 
    WATER Policy 2.2.3                          development. 
    WATER Policy 2.3.2 
    WATER Policy 2.3.5 


Air & Water Quality: 
                                          The project will be consistent 
Chapter 2, Environment: 
                                          through continued 
 
                                          implementation of the Ambient 
  ENV Policy 2.1.5 
                                          Water Quality Monitoring Plan. 
                                           
                                          Must be consistent at site and 
    ENV Policy 4.3.2 
                                          development. 
                                           
Chapter 4, Watershed Management: 
 
                                          Must be consistent at site and 
  WATER Policy 2.2.2 
                                          development. 
  WATER Policy 2.2.3 
  WATER Policy 2.3.2 
                                           
Chapter 9, Future Land Use:               Consistency will be verified 
                                          during site and development 
  FLU Policy 1.1.6                        review. 

Utilities Planning: 
Chapter 4, Watershed Management: 
 
  WATER Policy 1.2.1 
  WATER Policy 1.3.1 
  WATER Policy 1.5.1 
                                          Must be consistent at site and 
  WATER Policy 1.5.3 
                                          development. 
  WATER Policy 3.2.2 
  WATER Policy 3.2.3 
  WATER Policy 3.3.4 
  WATER Policy 3.5.1 
  WATER Policy 3.5.4 




                                    29 
 
Applicant Commitments to be included as Development Order Conditions
Conservation & Environmental Permitting: 
None
Stormwater: 
None
Air & Water Quality: 
None
Utilities Planning: 
None
Recommended DRI Development Order Conditions
Conservation & Environmental Permitting: 
    C. Vegetation and Wildlife 
             a.  Condition No. 2 shall remain with the additions the applicant agreed to during sufficiency review.  
                  The addition adds the following bullet item: 
                  “for cabbage palm‐dominated wetland fringing hammocks, cabbage palm relocation may be used 
                  in lieu of the 3‐5:1 replacement ratio required for hardwood trees.”  
              b.  Staff is in agreement with the proposed removal of Condition No. 3. 
    E. Wetlands 
             a. Condition No. 4 shall remain as agreed by the applicant during sufficiency review. 
             b. Staff is in agreement with the proposed removal of Condition No. 5. 
             c. Staff is in agreement with the proposed removal of Condition No. 6. 
Stormwater: 
None
Air & Water Quality: 
    B. Land/Soils  
             a. Staff is in agreement with the proposed removal of Condition No. 1. 
    D. Water Quality and Drainage 
             a. Staff is in agreement with the proposed removal of Condition No. 13. 
             b. Staff is in agreement with the proposed removal of Condition No. 14. 
Utilities Planning: 
None

Issues to be Resolved
Conservation & Environmental Permitting: 
None
Stormwater: 
None
Air & Water Quality: 
None
Utilities Planning: 
None



                                                          30 
 
TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
Transportation Planning staff has reviewed the subject applications for the Palmer Ranch Development of
Regional Impact (DRI).

Project Inventory and Impact Assessment
Palmer Ranch is an approved 5,119± acre development of regional impact located east of US-41, west of I-
75, north of Preymore Street, and south of Clark Road in Sarasota County. The subject petition is to revise
two conditions of the Master Development Order relating to Transportation Condition A.2 and Land Use
Condition F.1, to remove Sawyer Loop Road West of McIntosh Road from the list of roads Palmer Ranch
must construct as a collector road. Additionally, the NOPC seeks to develop 180 single family residential
dwelling units instead of approved office and light industrial uses on Parcels A-2 and A-6. The revision has
been filed in an accompanying comprehensive plan amendment CPA-2013-K with transportation analysis
justifying the request.

Trip Generation and Impact Area
The Palmer Ranch 2009 Reanalysis indicated that the DRI generates 141,910 daily trips and 13,950 PM
peak-hour trips. Table 1 shows the trip generation potential under the adopted and proposed Land Use
changes. The proposed land use change results in 2,809 and 404 decrease in daily trips and PM peak hour
trips, respectively.

Table 1: Trip Generation 
                                                                              Net New Trips 
           Scenario            Land Use              Intensity 
                                                                            Daily       PM Peak 
    Existing Land Use       Industrial/Office       587,784 sf             4,523           584 
    Proposed Land Use          Residential            180 du               1,714           180 
                                                 Net Trip Decrease         ‐2,809         ‐404 

Applicant Commitments to be included as Development Order Conditions
The Applicant is proposing to amend Transportation Condition A.2 of the Palmer Ranch Master
Development Order adopted by Resolution No. 91-170, as amended, and amend Land Use Condition F.1
contained in Resolution No. 89-205, as amended.
The Applicant submitted a traffic study that indicates that the land use change will not adversely affect the
study area roadway network. Transportation Planning reviewed the traffic study and is in agreement with
the findings of the report.

Recommended DRI Development Order Conditions
    The following revisions to the Palmer Ranch Master Development Order adopted by Resolution No. 91-170, as
    amended:
    A.  CONDITIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL 
    2.    As mitigation for the impact of Palmer Ranch traffic, Palmer Ranch shall construct one hundred percent 
          (100%) of the following major county roadways at such times as are required in incremental development 
          orders: 



                                                        31 
 
             a. Honore Avenue as a four‐lane divided arterial roadway from Clark Road (S.R.72) to Preymore Street. 
             b. McIntosh Road as a four‐lane divided collector roadway from Clark Road (S.R. 72) to US‐41. 
             c. Sawyer Loop Road East as a collector roadway. 
             d. Palmer  Ranch  Parkway  as  a  collector  roadway  from  Beneva  Road  to  McIntosh  Road,  then  jogging 
                south before continuing easterly between McIntosh Road and Honore Avenue. 
             e. An unnamed collector roadway connecting Sawyer Loop Road with the eastern extension of Palmer 
                Ranch Parkway near Honore Avenue. 
             f. Mall Drive as a collector roadway from Beneva Road to McIntosh Road. 
             g. Livingston Street Central Sarasota Parkway as a collector roadway from U.S 41 to Honore Avenue. 
             (The  major  roadways  listed  above  are  set  in  terms  of  where  they  enter  and  exit  the  Palmer  Ranch 
             development.) 
    The following revisions to the Palmer Ranch Increment IV Development Order adopted by Resolution No. 89‐205, 
    as amended: 
    F.  Land Use 
    1.    Palmer  Ranch  Increment  IV  shall  include  a  mix  of  professional  office,  light  industrial,  and  warehousing 
          uses  not  to  exceed  a  total  of  1,756,000  square  feet  of  gross  leasable  area,  and  180  residential  units.  
          Parcels A‐2 A‐3 through A‐5 and A‐7 through A‐9 shall be developed under the provisions of the Planned 
          Commerce Development (PCD) District Regulations.  A‐2 and A‐6 shall be developed under the provisions 
          of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District. 

Issues to be Resolved
None

HEALTH DEPARTMENT
Recommended DRI Development Order Conditions
    G.  HISTORICAL AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
    2.    Since  additional  historical‐archaeological  sites  could  be  uncovered  during  the  site  preparation  and 
          development process, the construction crews and other personnel shall be briefed at the pre‐construction 
          conference  by  the  Historical  Resources  Department  as  to  the  possible  existence  of  these  sites.    If  any 
          potential  archaeological  or  historical  site  is  discovered  during  construction,  all  work  in  the  immediate 
          vicinity  of  the  discovery  shall  cease.    Barriers  shall  be  installed  around  the  discovery  by  the  Applicant.  
          Further,  the  Applicant  shall  immediately  notify  the  Sarasota  County  Planning  Department,  the  Sarasota 
          County Historical Resources Department, the Southwest Florida Regional Planning Council, and the Florida 
          Division of Historical Resources.  These agencies shall be provided with access to the site for up to ninety 
          (90)  days  to  identify,  evaluate  and  document  the  site  as  well  as  suggest  techniques  for  the  site’s 
          preservation, if necessary.  Additional surveys in areas near any discovered site may be required by the 
          above‐cited County and State agencies. 

FIRE DEPARTMENT
No comments




                                                                 32 
 
SCHOOL BOARD
Project Inventory and Impact Assessment
The number of proposed residential units in this Increment of the Palmer Ranch DRI, which includes
parcels A2 and A6, is 180 single family units and is projected to generate approximately 51 school aged
children or 4 per grade level. It is estimated that 8.9% or 4 of the students will attend a charter school and
10% or 5 students will attend a non-zoned or special school. Based on these estimates, approximately 42
new students will be attending a zoned school. The impact of new students to the school system would
equate to 24 elementary students, 12 middle school students and 16 high school students. The current
school attendance zones for this project are: Ashton Elementary School, Sarasota Middle School and
Riverview High School.

Comprehensive Plan Consistency
School concurrency requirements began in Sarasota County on October 1, 2008. However, this DRI was
approved prior to the implementation of school concurrency and is exempt from that review process.

Applicant Commitments to be included as Development Order Conditions
N/A

Recommended Development Order Conditions
None

Issues to be resolved
None

SOUTHWEST FLORIDA REGIONAL PLANNING COUNCIL
No comments




                                                     33 
 
                                     Rezone Petition No. 13-27


LAND USE
Rezone Petition No. 13-27 is an application to rezone approximately 68 acres, Parcels A2 and A6 within
the Palmer Park of Commerce. The subject parcels, Parcels A2 and A6, are designated Major
Employment Center (MEC) on Sarasota County’s Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map and
currently zoned PCD/ILW (Planned Commerce Development/Industrial Light Manufacturing and
Warehousing) and PCD/OPI (Planned Commerce Development/Office, Professional and Institutional).
This petition proposes to change the zoning to RSF-2/PUD (Residential, Single-Family, 3.5 units/acre,
Planned Unit Development) to allow for residential development of 180 single-family dwelling units.
Main access to the development will be provided via McIntosh Road with secondary access onto Sawyer
Loop Road West, which will be extended to the north.
This petition is being filed concurrently with a Notification of Proposed Change to Palmer Ranch
Increment IV and a Comprehensive Plan Amendment that would change the designation of these parcels
to residential.
Future Land Use
The Future Land Use designation for the subject property Major Employment Center (MEC). The
proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment for Parcels A2 and A6 would change the land use designation
to Moderate Density Residential (ModDR). A total of 180 single-family dwelling units and an amenity
center will be developed with an overall gross residential density of 2.63 dwelling units per acre. This
density is within the residential density range of > 2 and <5 dwelling units per acre as set forth on the
Future Land Use Map and the proposed RSF-2/PUD zone district (3.5 dwelling units/acre).
Compatibility
Parcels A2 and A6 are south of Clark Road and adjacent to and west of McIntosh Road. The site is
currently undeveloped and mostly improved pasture. To the north is Seminole Gulf Railway and further
north is the Meridian Industrial Park and Imagine charter School, both of which are zoned PID (Planned
Industrial Development). To the west is Gulf Gate East residential community which is zoned RSF-3
(Residential, Single-family, 4.5 units/acre). To the south is the Marbella residential community which is
zoned RMF-1/PUD (Residential, Multi-family/Planned Unit Development, 6 units/acre). To the east is
vacant and developed parcels within the Palmer Park of Commerce, which is zoned PCD/ILW.
The Palmer Ranch Master Development Order requires all residential development to be approved with
the Planned Unit development (PUD) overlay district. The PUD district regulations require a minimum
of 30% of the planned residential areas within the Palmer Ranch DRI be set aside as open space. The
Development Concept Plan for Parcels A1 and A6 commits to approximately 34% of the site as open
space use. Total open space provided within the Palmer Ranch DRI through its approved 18 Increments is
approximately 54%. The perimeter buffering of the development will comply with the requirements of
Article 7, Section 7.3 Landscaping and Buffering under the Sarasota County Zoning Ordinance and the
Palmer Ranch Development Code. An enhanced 50-foot wide landscaped buffer will be provided along
McIntosh Road. A wetland area is located along the southern boundary with the Marbella residential
community and will be augmented by additional landscape buffers where appropriate. A 30-foot wide
landscape buffer will be located between the Gulf Gate East residential community to the west.




                                                   34 
 
Proposed Modifications to the Planned Unit Development
The Palmer Ranch Master Development Order (Resolution 91-170 as Amended, Land Use/ Housing
Condition A.5) requires the property to be developed as a Planned Unit Development (PUD). Pursuant to
Section 6.11.2.f of the Zoning Regulations, modifications to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
and Land Development Regulations (LDR) may be requested at the time of rezoning.
The Applicant has requested three modifications to the Sarasota County Land Development Regulations
as follows:
    1. Pavement Width of Private Cul-de-sac Streets - Reduce the minimum right-of-way width of
       private cul-de-sac roads within the development (modification from the LDR Subdivision
       Technical Manual, Section A.3.c, Minimum Street Design Specifications). If approved, this
       modification would permit the width of these private roads to be reduced from 30 feet to 20 feet in
       width.
    2. Rear and Side Yard Lot Line Utilities and Drainage Easements – Eliminate rear and side yard lot
       line utilities and drainage easements (modification from the LDR Subdivision Technical Manual,
       Section A.4.b, Utility Easements). If approved, this modification would permit the elimination or
       rear and side yard lot line utilities and drainage easements.
    3. Minimum Centerline Turning Radius – Reduce the minimum roadway center line turning radius
       (modification from the LDR Subdivision Technical Manual, Section A.3.a.3, Minimum Street
       Design Specifications). If approved, this modification would permit a reduction in the minimum
       standard for roadway center line turning radius of 100’ with delta greater than 60 degrees.

The Applicant’s justification for the modifications is as follows:
Pavement Width of Private Cul-de-sac Streets: The requested modification to the cul-de-sac width allows
for a functional residential design which does not create any operational problems, will limit vehicular
speeds, and will create a safer and more pedestrian friendly community.
Rear and Side Yard Lot Line Utilities and Drainage Easements: Modification to the rear and side yard lot
line utilities and drainage easements will support a maintenance free community.
Minimum Centerline Turning Radius: The Development Concept Plan shows the location where there
are tighter curves within the residential development. The tighter curves will limit vehicular speeds and
provide a more pedestrian friendly community by limiting vehicular speeds. The design of the roadways
will encourage low vehicle speeds and pedestrian friendly neighborhood. The expected types and
volumes of traffic are not expected to have any operational difficulties.
Stipulations
    1. All preliminary plans, site and development plans, construction plans, and final plats shall comply with the 
       Development  Order  for  Increment  IV  of  the  Palmer  Ranch  Development  of  Regional  Impact  (Resolution 
       No. 89‐205, as amended). 
    2.  Prior to filing the first final plat, the County Attorney shall review and approve deed restrictions for the 
        Palmer Park of Commerce. These deed restrictions shall be in conformance with the PCD Regulations and 
        shall contain, at a minimum, the following items: 
        a. Size criteria for identification signs, as well as lighting requirements for the signs; 
        b. Maximum height requirements for parking lot security lighting and for roadway lights; 
        c. Weatherproofing and maintenance provisions for all signs and lighting structures; and, 
        d. A listing of the type of landscape materials to be allowed. 



                                                            35 
 
        All subsequent final plats shall be filed with the approved deed restrictions. 
    3.  Pursuant  to  the  PCD  schedule  of  district  regulations,  the  Owner  is  hereby  granted  modifications  to  the 
        100' perimeter buffer requirement as depicted on the Master Development Plan attached hereto. 
        The eastern perimeter buffer on Parcel A‐9, adjacent to the Seminole Gulf Railway, may be reduced to a 
        minimum  of  ten  feet  (10')  in  width  and  shall  contain  three  (3)  canopy  trees  and  twelve  (12) 
        accent/understory trees per 100 linear feet. The required buffer and planting scheme may be modified, 
        subject to the review and approval of the Planning Department. If an alternative buffer/planting scheme 
        is proposed, the alternative plan shall include all of Parcel A‐9, depicting the alternative scheme along the 
        entire length of the parcel abutting the railway. 
    4.  All  off  street  loading  areas  within  sub‐parcel  A‐6  shall  be  screened  from  residential  parcels  to  the  west 
        and southwest. 
    5.  Spill  containment  structures  shall  be  required  for  all  outdoor  tanks  used  for  the  storage  of  liquid 
        chemicals, hazardous substances or their by‐products or petroleum products. The structures shall be sized 
        for  containment  of  110%  of  the  volume  of  the  largest  tank  within  the  structure.  The  design  of  such 
        structures  shall  be  reviewed  and  approved  by  the  Fire  Marshall  for  conformance  with  applicable  NFPA 
        standards. 
    6.  Any wells discovered during earth moving or excavation shall be reported to the Sarasota County Public 
        Health Unit, Office of Environmental Engineering within twenty four (24) hours after discovery is made. 
    7.  The Owner shall be required to maintain the appearance and function of any private drainage facilities to 
        be  constructed  on  the  site,  including  retention  ponds  and  drainage  ditches,  at  its  own  expense  in 
        accordance with applicable federal, state and local regulations. At the time of recording a plat or prior to 
        final  construction  approval,  the  Owner  shall  be  required  to  record  in  the  public  records,  a  Notice  to 
        Purchaser, approved by Sarasota County, putting purchasers on notice that the maintenance of drainage 
        facilities is a private responsibility. 
    2.  Development  shall  take  place  in  substantial  accordance  with  the  Development  Concept  Plan  date 
        stamped  January  28,  2014,  and  attached  hereto  as  Exhibit  “A”,  except  as  necessary  to  comply  with  the 
        stipulations  herein.  This  does  not  imply  or  confer  any  variances  from  applicable  zoning  or  land 
        development regulations. 

RSF-2 / PUD Modifications
    1. Pursuant  to  Section  6.11.2.f  of  the  Sarasota  County  Zoning  Regulations,  a  modification  from  the  Land 
       Development  Regulations  (Subdivision  Technical  Manual,  Section  B.3.a.4,  Local  Street)  is  granted  to 
       reduce the width of local cul‐de‐sac streets from 30 to 20 feet in width, as shown on the Development 
       Concept Plan. 
    2. Pursuant  to  Section  6.11.2.f  of  the  Sarasota  County  Zoning  Regulations,  a  modification  from  the  Land 
       Development  Regulations  (Subdivision  Technical  Manual,  Section  A.4.b,  Utility  Easements)  is  granted  to 
       eliminate  rear  and  side  yard  lot  line  utilities  and  drainage  easements,  as  shown  on  the  Development 
       Concept Plan. 
    3. Pursuant  to  Section  6.11.2.f  of  the  Sarasota  County  Zoning  Regulations,  a  modification  from  the  Land 
       Development  Regulations  (Subdivision  Technical  Manual,  Section  A.3.a.3,  Minimum  Street  Design 
       Specifications)  is  granted  to  reduce  the  minimum  roadway  center  line  turning  radius  of  100’  with  delta 
       greater than 60 degrees for traffic calming, as shown on the Development Concept Plan. 




                                                              36 
 
ENVIRONMENT
Recommended Stipulations
If the subject petition is approved, the Environmental Services Team recommends the following
stipulations to ensure consistency with the Comprehensive Plan:

Conservation & Environmental Permitting: 
    1. The  wetland  and  associated  upland  vegetative  buffer  shall  be  maintained  in  accordance  with 
       management guidelines contained within the Comprehensive Plan as a preserve and labeled a preserve 
       on all plans.  All activities including but not limited to filling, excavating, well drilling, altering vegetation 
       (including  trimming  of  both  trees  and  understory)  and  storing  of  materials  shall  be  prohibited  within 
       preservation areas, unless written approval is first obtained from Resource Protection.  Exception may be 
       granted  by  Resource  Protection  to  facilitate  implementation  of  approved  habitat  management  plans  or 
       the hand removal of nuisance/invasive vegetation. 
    2. Mesic  hammock  areas  not  approved  for  removal  shall  be  preserved.    All  activities  including  filling, 
       excavating, altering of vegetation (both trees and understory) and storing of materials shall be prohibited 
       within preservation areas, except where approved by Conservation & Environmental Permitting through: 
       1)  the  Resource  Management  Plan  for  the  project,  or  2)  specific  written  approval  of  hand  removal  of 
       nuisance or exotic vegetation. 

Stormwater: 
    1. The  Master  Surface  Water  Management  Plan  shall  be  consistent  with  the  Catfish  Creek  and  Matheny 
       Creek Basin Master Plan.   

Air & Water Quality 
None

Utilities Planning: 
None

Environmental Background
The Environmental Services Team has conducted an evaluation of the subject property and identified the
following environmental considerations:
Native Habitats
During review of the subject petition, Sarasota County’s Conservation and Environmental Permitting
(CEP) inspected the subject property on January 22, 2014. The site contains wetlands, mesic hammock,
and improved pasture. The applicant proposes to preserve the on-site native habitat consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and the Development Order for Increment IV. The table below summarizes the
native habitats identified by staff on the subject property and the applicable Management Guidelines.


                                                Chapter 2                                     Acres 
                 Native Habitats                                              Existing 
                                           Management Guideline                           Preserved and 
                 Present On‐site                                               Acres 
                                              Requirements                                  Conserved 
                   Freshwater 
                                         VII.A.2.a.  Shall be Preserved        0.93            0.93 
                    Wetlands 
                                       VIII.A.2.b.  Areas not approved 
                Mesic Hammock                                                  0.90            0.30 
                                       for impact, Shall be Preserved  


                                                           37 
 
 
The native habitats to be preserved are clearly depicted on the development concept plan. ENV Policy
4.5.18. of the Comprehensive Plan requires that native habitats set aside in preservation and conservation
areas be managed in accordance with resource management plans to ensure maintenance of the functions
and values of the native habitats.

Grand Trees and Other Trees
During a staff inspection of the property, 8 Grand Trees were identified on Parcel A-6. These live oaks
(Quercus virginiana) are shown as protected on the Development Concept Plan.
During the site and development plan process, the applicant will be required to meet the requirements of
the Tree Protection Ordinance. As part of this review, the applicant will be required to implement the
principles of avoidance and minimization in addressing impacts to trees. In addition, if tree removal is
proposed, the applicant must demonstrate that the Tree Removal criteria have been met. The applicant
will also be required to implement Best Management Practices (e.g. tree barricades) to minimize impacts
to trees during development.
Wildlife
During a staff inspection of the property, no evidence of listed species was identified. ENV Policy 4.4.5.
of the Environment Chapter of the Comprehensive Plan requires that development order applicants
consult with appropriate agencies and use recognized sampling techniques to identify endangered,
threatened, and species of special concern. A professional wildlife survey will be required during the site
and development plan or preliminary plan approval process to identify any listed wildlife species
occupying the subject property.
Stormwater and Drainage
Parcels A2 & A6 of the Palmer Ranch Development of Regional Impact (DRI) lie within the Catfish and
Matheny Creek Watersheds. Based on Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD)
topographic aerials, runoff from the site generally flows in a north Westerly direction where it is carried
offsite by a ditch along the sites north boundary.
Soils
The soil information is based on data obtained from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
Soil Conservation Service. It should be noted that this information pertains to ‘natural’ conditions and
that the presence of adjacent man–made drainage works can affect wet season water table depth and
duration.

                                                                Depth of WSWT1 
                                              Approximate                            Months for 
            Drainage                                             Below Existing 
                                 Soil         Percent (%) of                       Wet Season Water 
          Classification                                        Ground Surface 
                                               Soil on Site                              Table 
                                                                     (feet) 

                            Wabasso (41) –
          Poorly Drained                           64.2            0.5 to 1.5       June to October 
                              fine sand 
                             Pineda (31) – 
          Poorly Drained                           9.2             0.0 to 1.0      June to February 
                               fine sand 
                            Bradenton (4) –
          Poorly Drained                           8.0             0.0 to 1.0       June to October 
                               fine sand 




                                                      38 
 
                                  EauGallie or 
                                                                                0.5 to 1.5                 June to October      
            Poorly Drained       Myakka (10) –             7.8 
                                                                                0.5 to 1.5                 June to October 
                                   fine sands 
                                  Floridana or 
                                                                             +2.02 to 1.0             June to February      
        Very Poorly Drained       Gator (15) ‐             4.9 
                                                                             +2.02 to 1.0             January to December
                                  depressional      
                                 Holopaw (22) –
        Very Poorly Drained        fine sand,              4.4               +2.02 to 1.0                  June to February 
                                  depressional 
                                  Felda (12) – 
        Very Poorly Drained        fine sand,              1.5               +2.02 to 1.0                  June to February 
                                  depressional 
       1.    WSWT – Wet Season Water Table 
       2.    The (+) indicates that the water is above the ground surface and these soils are generally located in 
             depressional areas and poorly defined drainageways. 
 
Floodplain

The table below describes floodplain information for the subject property:


                     Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA)  
                                                                                               Percent (%) of Property 
                               Flood Insurance Map (FIRM) 


                 X (unshaded) or areas to be outside the 500‐year floodplain                               100% 
            Little Sarasota Bay Watershed (60.8% Catfish Creek & 39.2% Matheny 
                                                                                               Percent (%) of Property 
                 Creek), Basin Master Plans and SWFWMD Aerial Topography 
               100‐year floodplain (Flood Zone AE or > 3 feet deep or moving)                              5.2% 

                    100‐year floodplain (Flood Zone AH or 1‐3 feet deep)                                   1.4% 



Future Land Use Policy 1.1.6 from the Sarasota County Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Policy
allows development within the 100-year floodplain as long as the function of the floodplain is protected
through floodplain compensation. Floodplain compensation must meet the requirements of the Land
Development Regulations (LDR) and will be examined at the time of Site and Development
Plan/Construction Plan Approval.
A review of the Public Works Business Center Neighborhood Response Team (NRT), MAXIMO
databases, and Staff reports did not indicate any reports of structure flooding of the subject site. This
statement is not intended to indicate that the subject site is not susceptible to flooding, only that none has
been reported to the County. However, there were reports of street flooding along Kingston Dr. in the
winter of 1996 and 1997. This flooding was caused by a silted in ditch along Kingston Dr. The silt was
removed by County O&M personnel which alleviated the flooding.




                                                              39 
 
Comprehensive Plan Consistency:
Stormwater: 
Stormwater drainage concurrency for new development is based in part on provisions of a new on-site
stormwater management system designed to meet current level of service requirements of the Sarasota
County Comprehensive Plan and the Land Development Regulations (Ordinance No. 2000-074). Final
determination of stormwater drainage concurrency is deferred to the time of Site and Development
Plan/Construction Plan Approval.
At the time of Site and Development Plan / Construction Plan Approval, the applicant must demonstrate
that the proposed project shall not cause any adverse impacts to off-site property and shall not worsen any
existing off-site drainage problems in order to obtain Construction Authorization.
Air & Water Quality and Environmental Pollution: 
Various bodies of water, waterways, and segments of waterways are identified through the use of Water
Body Identification numbers, referred to as WBIDs. The land encompassing Parcels A2 and A6 of
Increment IV of the Palmer Ranch Development of Regional Impact lies at the confluence of two WBIDs
as follows: 1975 – Elligraw Bayou, and 1975B – Matheny Creek. A mapping discrepancy may exist in
that a portion of Catfish Creek is shown lying within WBID 1975. Elligraw Bayou (which, for planning
purposes includes Matheny Creek) is impaired for Nutrients, Dissolved Oxygen, and Coliform Bactieria.
The impairments are typically considered during state review of Environmental Resource Permit (ERP)
applications by the Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD), or the DEP.
Staff reviewed available state and local information, and found no pollution-related issues that will
influence the proposed land use change.
Utilities Planning: 
The project’s potable water, wastewater and reclaim water system will be served by Sarasota County
Utilities. The developer is responsible for the installation of these central services.
All development within the Palmer Ranch Increment IV is required to use reclaimed water, connect to
central water and wastewater, and adhere to Sarasota County Uniform Water, Wastewater and Reclaimed
Water Systems Code.
Non- Exclusive Permanent Easements are required for all reclaimed water, water and wastewater lines
installed on the property that are dedicated to the County. Wherever possible all lines will be outside of
paved areas to the greatest extent possible.
 

                             Utilities                    Franchise or Utility 

                          Potable Water                    Sarasota County 
                       Wastewater Disposal                 Sarasota County 

 
                               




                                                    40 
 
 
                                                                                               Water = 250 GPD per Unit           Sewer = 200 GPD per Unit 


                  Zoning Use                       Number of EDUs**                                         Water Flows                    Wastewater Flows 

                  Current Use                                0                                                      0                                    0 
                 Proposed Use                               180                                                45,000                               36,000 
                                                                                                   All flows are shown in Gallons per Day (GPD 
        **Equivalent Dwelling Unit – The utilization of capacity that represents the potential of creating a system demand equal to that of a 
          single‐family residence. 
 
Potable Water 
An 18” water transmission main is planned to be extended from McIntosh Road to Sawyer Road within
the right of way that is proposed to be vacated. The Developer will be required to dedicate an
appropriately sized easement thru the property as part of the right of way vacation for the construction of
a transmission main by the county at a future date.
Wastewater 
The developer shall provide wastewater service to the development by extending the existing sanitary
sewer system stubbed out for this project.
Reclaimed Water 
The developer shall extend the existing 6-inch reclaimed water main on McIntosh Road to provide
reclaimed water for irrigation to the development.

TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
Overview
The subject of this rezone petition is a  68.38 acre parcel located west of the intersection of McIntosh
Road and Sawyer Loop Road. The property is currently zoned Planned Commerce Development/
Industrial, Light and Warehouse (PCD/ILW). The Applicant is seeking to rezone the parcel to Residential,
Single-Family/Planned Unit Development (RSF-2/PUD).
Subject Area Roadway Conditions
The subject parcel has access to McIntosh Road and Sawyer Road. McIntosh Road is a designated four-
lane minor arterial in the Future Thoroughfare Plan from Clark Road to US 41. Sawyer Loop Road is a
designated two-lane minor collector in the Future Thoroughfare Plan from Clark Road to McIntosh Road.
The Applicant has filed an accompanying Comprehensive Plan Amendment (CPA-2013-K) seeking to
remove Sawyer Loop Road from Clark Road to McIntosh Road from the Thoroughfare Plan. If CPA-
2013-K is approved, Sawyer Loop Road from McIntosh Road to the southern terminus of the existing
Sawyer Road (south of Clark Road) will be built as a local road.
                                                                             Pavement Width 




                                                                                                                                                              (open/closed) 
                                            Right‐of‐Way 




                                                             Surface Type 




                                                                                                                                                                               Speed Limit 
                                                                                                              Lane Width 




                                                                                                                                           Resurfaced 
                                                                                                                              Condition 




                                                                                                                                                                Drainage 
                                                                                                 # Lanes 




                                                                                                                                                                                 Posted 
                                                (feet) 




                                                                                 (feet) 




                                                                                                                 (feet) 




                                                                                                                                              Last 




     ROADWAY             SEGMENT 



                        Clark Road to 
    McIntosh Road       Palmer Ranch              70        Asphalt                 24                 2           12       Very Good         2005                Open               40 
                          Parkway 




                                                                                  41 
 
                           Clark Road to end 
       Sawyer Road                            108‐175                   Asphalt          22          2     11      Marginal          1989            Open      30 
                                of road 

    SOURCE: Sarasota County Roadway Inventory, aerial photos with half section overlays, and/or site visit




Access to Subject Parcel
                         Roadway                                        Access Type                                        Comment 


                                                                        Unrestricted                                     Primary Access 
          McIntosh Road 

                                                                        Unrestricted                                  Secondary Access 
          Sawyer Road 



Right-of-Way Needs
None

Trip Generation
                              Reference Key




                                                  Trip                                                            Gross Trips           Primary Trips
                                                                                ITE       Number of       Unit
               Zoning                          Generation       Land Use
                                                                                LUC         Units         Type
                                                Scenario
                                                                                                                           PM     Percent              PM
                                                                                                                 Daily            Primary
                                                                                                                                             Daily
                                                                                                                           Peak                        Peak
                                                 Current
                            Line 1                                Vacant        N/A             0          du     0         0     100%        0          0
                                                  Use
              Existing
              PCD/ILW                                           Industrial       110         310,000       sf    2,214     286    100%
              PCD/OPI                            Current
                            Line 2                                                                                                           4,100      593
                                                 Zoning
                                                                  Office         710         277,784       sf    2,393     390    79%

                                                Proposed
                            Line 3                              Residential      210           180         du    1714      180    100%         270      180
                                                  Use
              Proposed
               RSF-2
                                                Proposed
                            Line 4                              Residential      210           239         du    2,275     239    100%       2,275      239
                                                 Zoning

                            Line 5            Zoning Impact (Line 4 minus Line 2)                                                            (1,825)    -354

                            Line 6            Concurrency Impact (Line 4 minus Line 1)                                                       2,275      180

                            Line 7            Impact of Proposed Use (Line 3 minus Line 1)                                                     270      180
              Based on the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), Trip Generation, 8th Ed. 


Concurrency Analysis
The subject rezone application proposes a land use, which is less intensive than land uses that could be
developed under the existing zoning. The submitted traffic study demonstrates that the roadway segments
within the study area are projected to operate at the adopted level of service standards.



                                                                                       42 
 
Recommended Stipulations
    1. Prior to or concurrent with the development of the subject parcel, the developer/owner shall construct 
       the necessary geometric lane configurations and modify the signal timing to accommodate the west leg 
       of the McIntosh Road and Sawyer Loop Road intersection. 
    Justification: McIntosh Road and Sawyer Loop Road is a three-leg signalized intersection. The
    addition of the west leg requires intersection related modification related to signal modification and
    geometric lane configurations. Therefore, in accordance with the Land Development Regulations
    (LDR), the developer/owner should construct the applicable lanes and modify signalization timing to
    mitigate the impacts of the proposed development [LDR, Development Improvements Technical
    Manual, Section B.2.b]

Transportation Impact Addendum (3-24-14)
The Applicant has requested that staff’s proposed Stipulation No. 1 in the January 28, 2014
Transportation Report be amended to provide clarity to the condition. Staff has no objection to the
Applicant’s requested changes. Therefore, staff recommends amending the stipulation as follows:

    1. Prior to or concurrent with the development of the subject parcel, the developer/owner shall construct 
       the necessary geometric lane configurations, install a traffic signal pole and mast arm for the eastbound 
       approach, and modify the signal timing to accommodate the west leg of the McIntosh Road and Sawyer 
       Loop Road intersection. 

HEALTH DEPARTMENT

We have reviewed the referenced petition and determined its consistency with the following goals and
objectives of Chapter 4 of the Sarasota County Comprehensive Plan:

Goal 1: Sanitary sewer service shall be provided through a centralized system.
         Consistent       Inconsistent        Consistent with follow up

Goal 3: Potable water service shall be provided to Sarasota County residents through the a centralized
       treatment, and distribution system,
           Consistent       Not Consistent    Consistent with follow up

HISTORY DEPARTMENT
No comments

FIRE DEPARTMENT
Comments will be forwarded during the Site and Development Review process for compliance with the
current edition of the Florida Fire Prevention Code, Land Development Regulations and the Sarasota
County Utility Code as they apply to Emergency Services.

ZONING
The development concept plan submitted with the application is a binding plan. Zoning finds the request
is IN CONFORMANCE with the Zoning Ordinance.



                                                       43 
 
LANDSCAPE
This petition has been deemed to be in compliance with current landscape buffer requirements.

Additional Information:
Where the RSF-2/PUD property abuts PID, I (ILW), and RE-1 zoned property along the north property
boundary:
----It appears that a natural vegetated buffer already exists, no additional landscaping will be required if
this remains.
----A 30 foot wide variable buffer is proposed.
Where the RSF-2/PUD zoned property abuts the RSF-3 zoned property along the west property boundary:
----No buffer is required
----A 30 foot wide buffer is proposed.
Where the RSF-2/PUD zoned property abuts the RMF-1/PUD zoned property along the south property
boundary:
----A 10 foot wide buffer is required.
----A 15 foot wide buffer is proposed.
Where the RSF-2/PUD zoned property abuts McIntosh Road (Arterial Road) along the east boundary:
----A 10 foot wide street buffer is required.
----A 50 foot wide buffer is proposed.

SCHOOL BOARD
See NOPC Report




                                                    44 
 
                                             Rezone Petition No. 13-28


LAND USE
The purpose Rezone Petition No. 13-28 is to modify the Planned Commerce District zoning to remove
Parcels A2 and A6 within the Palmer Park of Commerce. This change would also remove Parcels A2 and
A6 from the Development concept Plan and Stipulations for Development Approval adopted by
Ordinance No. 97-027. This application is accompanied by separate, but concurrent application Rezone
No. 13-27.
Stipulations

    1. All preliminary plans, site and development plans, construction plans, and final plats shall comply with the 
       Development  Order  for  Increment  IV  of  the  Palmer  Ranch  Development  of  Regional  Impact  (Resolution 
       No. 89‐205, as amended). 
    2.  Prior to filing the first final plat, the County Attorney shall review and approve deed restrictions for the 
        Palmer Park of Commerce. These deed restrictions shall be in conformance with the PCD Regulations and 
        shall contain, at a minimum, the following items: 
        a. Size criteria for identification signs, as well as lighting requirements for the signs; 
        b. Maximum height requirements for parking lot security lighting and for roadway lights; 
        c. Weatherproofing and maintenance provisions for all signs and lighting structures; and, 
        d. A listing of the type of landscape materials to be allowed. 
        All subsequent final plats shall be filed with the approved deed restrictions. 
    2.  Development  shall  take  place  in  substantial  accordance  with  the  Development  Concept  Plan  date 
        stamped December 12, 2013, and attached hereto as Exhibit “A”, except as necessary to comply with the 
        stipulations  herein.  This  does  not  imply  or  confer  any  variances  from  applicable  zoning  or  land 
        development regulations. 
    3.  Pursuant  to  the  PCD  schedule  of  district  regulations,  the  Owner  is  hereby  granted  modifications  to  the 
        100' 50’ perimeter buffer requirement as depicted on the Master Development Plan attached hereto. 
        The eastern perimeter buffer on Parcel A‐9, adjacent to the Seminole Gulf Railway Legacy Trail, may be 
        reduced to a minimum of ten feet (10') in width and shall contain three (3) canopy trees and twelve (12) 
        accent/understory trees per 100 linear feet. The required buffer and planting scheme may be modified, 
        subject to the review and approval of the Planning Department. If an alternative buffer/planting scheme 
        is proposed, the alternative plan shall include all of Parcel A‐9, depicting the alternative scheme along the 
        entire length of the parcel abutting the railway. 
    4.  All  off  street  loading  areas  within  sub‐parcel  A‐6  shall  be  screened  from  residential  parcels  to  the  west 
        and southwest. 
    5.  Spill  containment  structures  shall  be  required  for  all  outdoor  tanks  used  for  the  storage  of  liquid 
        chemicals, hazardous substances or their by‐products or petroleum products. The structures shall be sized 
        for  containment  of  110%  of  the  volume  of  the  largest  tank  within  the  structure.  The  design  of  such 
        structures  shall  be  reviewed  and  approved  by  the  Fire  Marshall  for  conformance  with  applicable  NFPA 
        standards. 
    6.  Any wells discovered during earth moving or excavation shall be reported to the Sarasota County Public 
        Health Unit, Office of Environmental Engineering within twenty four (24) hours after discovery is made. 




                                                              45 
 
    7.  The Owner shall be required to maintain the appearance and function of any private drainage facilities to 
        be  constructed  on  the  site,  including  retention  ponds  and  drainage  ditches,  at  its  own  expense  in 
        accordance with applicable federal, state and local regulations. At the time of recording a plat or prior to 
        final  construction  approval,  the  Owner  shall  be  required  to  record  in  the  public  records,  a  Notice  to 
        Purchaser, approved by Sarasota County, putting purchasers on notice that the maintenance of drainage 
        facilities is a private responsibility. 

ENVIRONMENT
Recommended Stipulations
If the subject petition is approved, the Environmental Services Team recommends the following
stipulations to ensure consistency with the Comprehensive Plan:

Conservation & Environmental Permitting: 
None

Stormwater: 
    1. The Master Surface Water Management Plan shall be consistent with the Catfish and Matheny Creek 
       Basin Master Plans.   

Air & Water Quality 
None

Utilities Planning: 
None

Environmental Background
The Environmental Services Team has conducted an evaluation of the subject property and identified the
following environmental considerations:
Native Habitats
During review of the subject petition, Sarasota County’s Conservation and Environmental Permitting
inspected the subject property on January 22, 2014. The site contains protected native habitat designated
as preserve areas during the review and approval of RZ89-25. The applicant is proposing no changes to
the existing native habitat preserve areas.

Grand Trees and Other Trees
During a staff inspection of the property, no Grand Trees were identified. During the site and
development plan process, the applicant will be required to meet the requirements of the Tree Protection
Ordinance. As part of this review, the applicant will be required to implement the principles of avoidance
and minimization in addressing impacts to trees. In addition, if tree removal is proposed, the applicant
must demonstrate that the Tree Removal criteria have been met. The applicant will also be required to
implement Best Management Practices (e.g. tree barricades) to minimize impacts to trees during
development.

Wildlife
During a staff inspection of the property, no evidence of listed species was identified. ENV Policy 4.4.5.
of the Environment Chapter of the Comprehensive Plan requires that development order applicants
consult with appropriate agencies and use recognized sampling techniques to identify endangered,


                                                             46 
 
threatened, and species of special concern. A professional wildlife survey will be required during the site
and development plan or preliminary plan approval process to identify any listed wildlife species
occupying the subject property.

Stormwater and Drainage
Parcels A2-A9 & A3-A5 and A7-A9 of the Palmer Ranch Development of Regional Impact (DRI) lie
within the Catfish and Matheny Creek Watersheds. Based on Southwest Florida Water Management
District (SWFWMD) topographic aerials, runoff from the site flows toward the site boundaries where it is
collected by ditches and canals. The water is then discharged in to stormwater ponds adjacent to the site
boundaries.
Soils
The soil information is based on data obtained from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
Soil Conservation Service. It should be noted that this information pertains to ‘natural’ conditions and
that the presence of adjacent man–made drainage works can affect wet season water table depth and
duration.

                                                                          Depth of WSWT1 
                                                      Approximate                                          Months for 
             Drainage                                                      Below Existing 
                                      Soil            Percent (%) of                                     Wet Season Water 
           Classification                                                 Ground Surface 
                                                       Soil on Site                                            Table 
                                                                               (feet) 

                                  EauGallie or 
                                                                              0.5 to 1.5                  June to October      
           Poorly Drained        Myakka (10) –             54 
                                                                              0.5 to 1.5                  June to October 
                                   fine sands 
                                  Felda (12) – 
       Very Poorly Drained          fine sand,             19.9              +2.02 to 1.0                June to February 
                                 depressional 
                                Ft. Green (21) –
           Poorly Drained                                  16.5               0.5 to 1.5                 June to September 
                                    fine sand 
                                  Floridana or 
                                                                             +2.02 to 1.0             June to February      
       Very Poorly Drained        Gator (15) ‐             5.5 
                                                                             +2.02 to 1.0             January to December
                                 depressional      
                                Wabasso (41) –
           Poorly Drained                                  1.9                0.5 to 1.5                  June to October 
                                    fine sand 
                                Holopaw (22) –
       Very Poorly Drained          fine sand,             1.8               +2.02 to 1.0                June to February 
                                 depressional 
      1.   WSWT – Wet Season Water Table 
      2.   The (+) indicates that the water is above the ground surface and these soils are generally located in 
           depressional areas and poorly defined drainageways. 




                                                              47 
 
Floodplain 
The table below describes floodplain information for the subject property: 


                   Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA)  
                                                                                Percent (%) of Property 
                             Flood Insurance Map (FIRM) 

               X (unshaded) or areas to be outside the 500‐year floodplain               100% 
          Little Sarasota Bay Watershed (94.1% Catfish Creek & 5.9% Matheny 
                                                                                Percent (%) of Property 
               Creek), Basin Master Plans and SWFWMD Aerial Topography 
              100‐year floodplain (Flood Zone AE or > 3 feet deep or moving)            18.6% 

                   100‐year floodplain (Flood Zone AH or 1‐3 feet deep)                 16.0% 


Future Land Use Policy 1.1.6 from the Sarasota County Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Policy
allows development within the 100-year floodplain as long as the function of the floodplain is protected
through floodplain compensation. Floodplain compensation must meet the requirements of the Land
Development Regulations (LDR) and will be examined at the time of Site and Development Plan /
Construction Plan Approval.
Flooding History for the Area
A review of the Public Works Business Center Neighborhood Response Team (NRT), MAXIMO
databases, and Staff reports did not indicate any reports of structure flooding of the subject site. This
statement is not intended to indicate that the subject site is not susceptible to flooding, only that none has
been reported to the County. However, there was a report of parking lot flooding along Clark Center
Avenue in the spring of 2005. The flooding was caused by a ditch that was filled in. The ditch was re-
excavated by County O&M personnel which alleviated the flooding.
Site Stormwater Management Plan
The applicant has submitted a concept plan that illustrates a proposed stormwater management facility.
This facility shall be required to treat and attenuate stormwater for the site in accordance with the Sarasota
County Comprehensive Plan and the Land Development Regulations.
Stormwater Concurrency Analysis
Stormwater drainage concurrency for new development is based in part on provisions of a new on-site
stormwater management system designed to meet current level of service requirements of the Sarasota
County Comprehensive Plan and the Land Development Regulations (Ordinance No. 2000-074). Final
determination of stormwater drainage concurrency is deferred to the time of Site and Development Plan /
Construction Plan Approval.
At the time of Site and Development Plan / Construction Plan Approval, the applicant must demonstrate
that the proposed project shall not cause any adverse impacts to off-site property and shall not worsen any
existing off-site drainage problems in order to obtain Construction Authorization.

Air & Water Quality and Environmental Pollution: 
Various bodies of water, waterways, and segments of waterways are identified through the use of Water
Body Identification numbers, referred to as WBIDs. The land encompassing Increment IV of the Palmer
Ranch Development of Regional Impact lies at the confluence of several WBIDs as follows: 1975 –
Elligraw Bayou, 1975B – Matheny Creek, 1982 – South Creek, and 1984 – Catfish Creek (tidal). Several
of the WBIDs are listed by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Florida Department of


                                                           48 
 
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: McIntosh Rd -- Sawyer Loop Rd                                                                             QC JOB #: 11380701
 CITY/STATE: Sarasota, FL                                                                                            DATE: Wed, Nov 20 2013
                  365          359                        Peak-Hour: 7:45 AM -- 8:45 AM                               11.2        4.2

                   0    304 61
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 8:00 AM -- 8:15 AM
                                                                                                                      0.0 12.2 6.6


       0     0                       65   158
                                                                                                         0.0   0.0                           3.1     10.1
             0          0.83          0
                                                                                                               0.0                           0.0
       0     0                       93   172
                                                                                                         0.0   0.0                       15.1         2.9

                   0    291 114
                                                                                                                      0.0 4.5 0.9

                  397          405
                                                                                                                      12.8        3.5



                         0                                                                                             0     0    0



                                                                                                               0                              0

             0                        0                                                                        0                              0

                                                                                                               0                              1

                         0                                                                                             0     2    1




                        NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                      NA                                                                        NA                            NA




                        NA                                                                                                   NA

                                                                                                                                                     R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count        McIntosh Rd                        McIntosh Rd               Sawyer Loop Rd             Sawyer Loop Rd                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U            R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U               R*
    7:00 AM    0    50    16    0           0     5   22     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0     6    0    5    0               2         106
    7:15 AM    0    65    25    0           3     7   19     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    10    0    3    0               7         139
    7:30 AM    0    53    24    0           6     5   49     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    24    0    4    0              15         181
    7:45 AM    0    90    26    0           0    12   57     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    15    0   11    0              11         223      649
    8:00 AM    0    81    37    0           3    22   90     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    21    0    6    0              18         279      822
    8:15 AM    0    61    24    0           4    17   85     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    26    0    2    0               9         229      912
    8:30 AM    0    59    19    0           1     7   72     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    31    0    3    0               5         197      928
    8:45 AM    0    76    20    0           7     3   52     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    25    0    3    0               4         190      895




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                       Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U               R*            Total
  All Vehicles   0 324 148       0         12    88 360      0    4      0     0    0     0    0    0    84    0    24    0             72            1116
 Heavy Trucks    0    8     4                     8   52     0                 0    0     0               8    0     4                                 84
  Pedestrians         0                                0                            0                          0                                        0
    Bicycles     0    0     0                     0    0     0                 0    0     0               0    0     0                                  0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/25/2013 5:06 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                        A-72
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: McIntosh Rd -- Sawyer Loop Rd                                                                              QC JOB #: 11380702
 CITY/STATE: Sarasota, FL                                                                                             DATE: Thu, Nov 21 2013
                  321          325                        Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                1.6        7.1

                   0    289 32
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                       0.0 1.4 3.1


       0     0                        48   214
                                                                                                          0.0   0.0                          2.1      3.7
             0          0.96           0
                                                                                                                0.0                          0.0
       0     0                       166   173
                                                                                                          0.0   0.0                          4.2      1.2

                   0    274 144
                                                                                                                       0.0 8.0 0.7

                  455          418
                                                                                                                       2.4        5.5



                         0                                                                                              0    0    0



                                                                                                                0                             0

             0                         1                                                                        0                             0

                                                                                                                0                             0

                         0                                                                                              0    0    0




                        NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                      NA                                                                         NA                           NA




                        NA                                                                                                   NA

                                                                                                                                                     R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count        McIntosh Rd                         McIntosh Rd               Sawyer Loop Rd             Sawyer Loop Rd                       Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U             R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    4:00 PM    0    80    31    0           14    7    61     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    36    0    4    0              4         237
    4:15 PM    0    67    25    0           11     6   72     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    33    0    1    0              6         222
    4:30 PM    0    74    24    0           11     4   66     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    40    0    6    0              7         233
    4:45 PM    0    69    28    0            8     7   70     0     2     0     0    0     0    0    0    35    0    2    0              3         224      916
    5:00 PM    0    66    23    0           19    9    78     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    39    0    4    0             11         249      928
    5:15 PM    0    65    17    0           14    9    75     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    52    0    3    0             12         247      953
    5:30 PM    0    73    19    0           13    4    62     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    30    0    3    0              3         207      927
    5:45 PM    0    45    14    0            5     6   74     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    27    0    0    0              7         178      881




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                        Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U            R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles   0 264     92    0          76    36 312      0    0      0     0    0     0    0    0   156    0    16    0            44            996
 Heavy Trucks    0   16     4                      0    4     0                 0    0     0               4    0     0                                28
  Pedestrians         0                                 0                            0                          0                                       0
    Bicycles     0    0     0                      0    0     0                 0    0     0               0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/25/2013 5:06 PM                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                         A-73
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: McIntosh Rd -- Sawyer Loop Rd                                                                             QC JOB #: 11380701
 CITY/STATE: Sarasota, FL                                                                                            DATE: Wed, Nov 20 2013
                  365          359                        Peak-Hour: 7:45 AM -- 8:45 AM                               11.2        4.2

                   0    304 61
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 8:00 AM -- 8:15 AM
                                                                                                                      0.0 12.2 6.6


       0     0                       65   158
                                                                                                         0.0   0.0                           3.1     10.1
             0          0.83          0
                                                                                                               0.0                           0.0
       0     0                       93   172
                                                                                                         0.0   0.0                       15.1         2.9

                   0    291 114
                                                                                                                      0.0 4.5 0.9

                  397          405
                                                                                                                      12.8        3.5



                         0                                                                                             0     0    0



                                                                                                               0                              0

             0                        0                                                                        0                              0

                                                                                                               0                              1

                         0                                                                                             0     2    1




                        NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                      NA                                                                        NA                            NA




                        NA                                                                                                   NA

                                                                                                                                                     R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count        McIntosh Rd                        McIntosh Rd               Sawyer Loop Rd             Sawyer Loop Rd                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U            R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U               R*
    7:00 AM    0    50    16    0           0     5   22     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0     6    0    5    0               2         106
    7:15 AM    0    65    25    0           3     7   19     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    10    0    3    0               7         139
    7:30 AM    0    53    24    0           6     5   49     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    24    0    4    0              15         181
    7:45 AM    0    90    26    0           0    12   57     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    15    0   11    0              11         223      649
    8:00 AM    0    81    37    0           3    22   90     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    21    0    6    0              18         279      822
    8:15 AM    0    61    24    0           4    17   85     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    26    0    2    0               9         229      912
    8:30 AM    0    59    19    0           1     7   72     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    31    0    3    0               5         197      928
    8:45 AM    0    76    20    0           7     3   52     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    25    0    3    0               4         190      895




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                       Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U               R*            Total
  All Vehicles   0 324 148       0         12    88 360      0    4      0     0    0     0    0    0    84    0    24    0             72            1116
 Heavy Trucks    0    8     4                     8   52     0                 0    0     0               8    0     4                                 84
  Pedestrians         0                                0                            0                          0                                        0
    Bicycles     0    0     0                     0    0     0                 0    0     0               0    0     0                                  0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/25/2013 5:06 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                        A-155
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: McIntosh Rd -- Sawyer Loop Rd                                                                              QC JOB #: 11380702
 CITY/STATE: Sarasota, FL                                                                                             DATE: Thu, Nov 21 2013
                  321          325                        Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                1.6        7.1

                   0    289 32
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                       0.0 1.4 3.1


       0     0                        48   214
                                                                                                          0.0   0.0                          2.1      3.7
             0          0.96           0
                                                                                                                0.0                          0.0
       0     0                       166   173
                                                                                                          0.0   0.0                          4.2      1.2

                   0    274 144
                                                                                                                       0.0 8.0 0.7

                  455          418
                                                                                                                       2.4        5.5



                         0                                                                                              0    0    0



                                                                                                                0                             0

             0                         1                                                                        0                             0

                                                                                                                0                             0

                         0                                                                                              0    0    0




                        NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                      NA                                                                         NA                           NA




                        NA                                                                                                   NA

                                                                                                                                                     R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count        McIntosh Rd                         McIntosh Rd               Sawyer Loop Rd             Sawyer Loop Rd                       Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U             R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    4:00 PM    0    80    31    0           14    7    61     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    36    0    4    0              4         237
    4:15 PM    0    67    25    0           11     6   72     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    33    0    1    0              6         222
    4:30 PM    0    74    24    0           11     4   66     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    40    0    6    0              7         233
    4:45 PM    0    69    28    0            8     7   70     0     2     0     0    0     0    0    0    35    0    2    0              3         224      916
    5:00 PM    0    66    23    0           19    9    78     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    39    0    4    0             11         249      928
    5:15 PM    0    65    17    0           14    9    75     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    52    0    3    0             12         247      953
    5:30 PM    0    73    19    0           13    4    62     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    30    0    3    0              3         207      927
    5:45 PM    0    45    14    0            5     6   74     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    27    0    0    0              7         178      881




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                        Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U            R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles   0 264     92    0          76    36 312      0    0      0     0    0     0    0    0   156    0    16    0            44            996
 Heavy Trucks    0   16     4                      0    4     0                 0    0     0               4    0     0                                28
  Pedestrians         0                                 0                            0                          0                                       0
    Bicycles     0    0     0                      0    0     0                 0    0     0               0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/25/2013 5:06 PM                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                         A-156
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: McIntosh Rd -- Sawyer Loop Rd                                                                             QC JOB #: 11380701
 CITY/STATE: Sarasota, FL                                                                                            DATE: Wed, Nov 20 2013
                  365          359                        Peak-Hour: 7:45 AM -- 8:45 AM                               11.2        4.2

                   0    304 61
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 8:00 AM -- 8:15 AM
                                                                                                                      0.0 12.2 6.6


       0     0                       65   158
                                                                                                         0.0   0.0                           3.1     10.1
             0          0.83          0
                                                                                                               0.0                           0.0
       0     0                       93   172
                                                                                                         0.0   0.0                       15.1         2.9

                   0    291 114
                                                                                                                      0.0 4.5 0.9

                  397          405
                                                                                                                      12.8        3.5



                         0                                                                                             0     0    0



                                                                                                               0                              0

             0                        0                                                                        0                              0

                                                                                                               0                              1

                         0                                                                                             0     2    1




                        NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                      NA                                                                        NA                            NA




                        NA                                                                                                   NA

                                                                                                                                                     R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count        McIntosh Rd                        McIntosh Rd               Sawyer Loop Rd             Sawyer Loop Rd                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U            R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U               R*
    7:00 AM    0    50    16    0           0     5   22     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0     6    0    5    0               2         106
    7:15 AM    0    65    25    0           3     7   19     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    10    0    3    0               7         139
    7:30 AM    0    53    24    0           6     5   49     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    24    0    4    0              15         181
    7:45 AM    0    90    26    0           0    12   57     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    15    0   11    0              11         223      649
    8:00 AM    0    81    37    0           3    22   90     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    21    0    6    0              18         279      822
    8:15 AM    0    61    24    0           4    17   85     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    26    0    2    0               9         229      912
    8:30 AM    0    59    19    0           1     7   72     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    31    0    3    0               5         197      928
    8:45 AM    0    76    20    0           7     3   52     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    25    0    3    0               4         190      895




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                       Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U               R*            Total
  All Vehicles   0 324 148       0         12    88 360      0    4      0     0    0     0    0    0    84    0    24    0             72            1116
 Heavy Trucks    0    8     4                     8   52     0                 0    0     0               8    0     4                                 84
  Pedestrians         0                                0                            0                          0                                        0
    Bicycles     0    0     0                     0    0     0                 0    0     0               0    0     0                                  0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/25/2013 5:06 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                        A-257
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: McIntosh Rd -- Sawyer Loop Rd                                                                              QC JOB #: 11380702
 CITY/STATE: Sarasota, FL                                                                                             DATE: Thu, Nov 21 2013
                  321          325                        Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                1.6        7.1

                   0    289 32
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                       0.0 1.4 3.1


       0     0                        48   214
                                                                                                          0.0   0.0                          2.1      3.7
             0          0.96           0
                                                                                                                0.0                          0.0
       0     0                       166   173
                                                                                                          0.0   0.0                          4.2      1.2

                   0    274 144
                                                                                                                       0.0 8.0 0.7

                  455          418
                                                                                                                       2.4        5.5



                         0                                                                                              0    0    0



                                                                                                                0                             0

             0                         1                                                                        0                             0

                                                                                                                0                             0

                         0                                                                                              0    0    0




                        NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                      NA                                                                         NA                           NA




                        NA                                                                                                   NA

                                                                                                                                                     R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count        McIntosh Rd                         McIntosh Rd               Sawyer Loop Rd             Sawyer Loop Rd                       Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U             R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    4:00 PM    0    80    31    0           14    7    61     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    36    0    4    0              4         237
    4:15 PM    0    67    25    0           11     6   72     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    33    0    1    0              6         222
    4:30 PM    0    74    24    0           11     4   66     0     1     0     0    0     0    0    0    40    0    6    0              7         233
    4:45 PM    0    69    28    0            8     7   70     0     2     0     0    0     0    0    0    35    0    2    0              3         224      916
    5:00 PM    0    66    23    0           19    9    78     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    39    0    4    0             11         249      928
    5:15 PM    0    65    17    0           14    9    75     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    52    0    3    0             12         247      953
    5:30 PM    0    73    19    0           13    4    62     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    30    0    3    0              3         207      927
    5:45 PM    0    45    14    0            5     6   74     0     0     0     0    0     0    0    0    27    0    0    0              7         178      881




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                        Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U            R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles   0 264     92    0          76    36 312      0    0      0     0    0     0    0    0   156    0    16    0            44            996
 Heavy Trucks    0   16     4                      0    4     0                 0    0     0               4    0     0                                28
  Pedestrians         0                                 0                            0                          0                                       0
    Bicycles     0    0     0                      0    0     0                 0    0     0               0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/25/2013 5:06 PM                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                         A-258
