                                                          Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                            Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                 February 10, 2012
                                                                                      Page 2 of 35

The transportation analysis includes a summary of prior traffic studies conducted at the study
intersection, system context of the intersection, intersection use, baseline performance,
alternatives evaluation, additional considerations, and concludes with recommendations.

Summary of Prior Traffic Studies
Several background documents address design and traffic considerations of the study
intersection. Previous work includes the Empire Avenue Extension Preliminary Design Report3,
the Empire Avenue Extension Final Transportation Technical Report4, and the Juniper Ridge
Employment Sub-District Transportation Study5. A brief summary of each document is provided
below.

Empire Avenue Extension Final Transportation Technical Report (April 2006)
Parametrix prepared the Empire Avenue Extension Final Transportation Technical Report,
which was one of the underlying documents that influenced the Empire Avenue Extension
Preliminary Design Report. The document provides an in depth analysis of the current and future
landscape for transportation planning along the study corridor, including evaluation of the
existing traffic control, geometrics, volumes, intersection operations (for the weekday PM peak
hour conditions), crash history, and other transportation modes. The report also identifies future
transportation needs (for the weekday PM peak hour) using forecasted year 2030 volumes
(developed based on growth rate methodologies) and testing of different improvement options.
Recommendations were made regarding street design requirements, intersection design, access
management, and pedestrian and bicycle circulation.

The NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street intersection was identified as operating within the City of
Bend's intersection level of service standards (2005 existing conditions) with a relatively low
crash rate. Under future year conditions (weekday PM peak hour), the intersection was evaluated
using several scenarios including different roadway cross sections and different traffic control
types (e.g., signal or roundabout alternatives). Evaluation was done using VISSIM, Synchro, and
Rodel software packages, as the evaluation occurred before the City adopted their current
guidelines for roundabout analysis. The ultimate geometric recommendations are described
below in the summary of the Empire Avenue Extension Preliminary Design Report.

Empire Avenue Extension Preliminary Design Report (December 2006)
This report documented the analysis for the proposed Empire Avenue extension project that
would complete a segment of a major transportation corridor in the northeast corner of the City
of Bend. The report included documentation of the proposed construction of new roadway
connecting NE Empire Avenue from NE Purcell Boulevard to NE 27th Street/NE Butler Market
Road. While the City's standard design for the proposed major arterial would be a five-lane cross
section, the improvements documented in the report included an interim design of widening NE
Empire Avenue between NE 18th Street and NE Purcell Boulevard to two eastbound lanes and
one westbound lane (including 5-foot raised shared pedestrian/bicycle facilities in each direction

3
  Empire Avenue Extension Preliminary Design Report. Otak, December 8, 2006.
4
  Empire Avenue Extension Final Transportation Technical Report . Parametrix, April 2006.
5
  Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District Transportation Study. DKS Associates, July 2010.
                                                          Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                            Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                 February 10, 2012
                                                                                      Page 3 of 35

across the canal due)6. The interim design of the proposed extension between NE Purcell
Boulevard and NE Butler Market Road included one lane in each direction (per limitation of
roadways outside the UGB) that was estimated to serve growth until approximately the year
2020. The design team, led by Otak, prepared a preliminary design document that included an
evaluation of existing conditions and recommended improvements for the entire corridor.

The intersection of NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street was recommended for improvement to a
multi-lane roundabout. Based on the analysis, the east and west legs would have two entry lanes
and two exit lanes. The south leg would have a single entry lane and exit, and the north leg
would have a single lane exit and double lane entry as part of the assumed year 2018 build
design. Additional modifications to the design would depend on the widening of the Central
Oregon Irrigation District (COID) canal (accommodating a 5-lane cross section), which was
expected to occur in 2020. The design included facilities for both pedestrians and bicyclists.

Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District Transportation Study
The Juniper Ridge Transportation Study evaluated the transportation impacts during the weekday
PM peak hour of the proposed rezone of the Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District, which is
located in the northeastern portion of the Bend urban growth boundary (UGB). The zone change
evaluated in the Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District modified a net 205 acres of developable
parcels from Urban Area Reserve (UAR) to Light Industrial (LI).

The increased potential traffic volumes resulting from the rezone was found to significantly
impact the transportation network surrounding the area. Therefore, a series of mitigation
measures (broken up by phases of development) was created and agreed to by the City of Bend
and ODOT in a formal Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA). Part of the mitigation package
includes widening NE 18th Street to three lanes from Cooley Road to NE Empire Avenue,
completing sidewalks and bicycle lanes along the corridor, constructing a multi-lane roundabout
at NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street including a southbound right turn slip lane in addition to
two entry lanes, and constructing improvements to Purcell Boulevard and extending the roadway
corridor to Cooley Road (which would divert traffic from the intersection of NE Empire
Avenue/NE 18th Street).

Intersection System Context
Identifying the system in which an intersection operates is important to determine the factors that
will contribute to its overall function. The existing and future context of the NE Empire
Avenue/NE 18th Street intersection is discussed below. Factors including the motor vehicle
system, pedestrian system, bicycle system, transit system, and emergency response system are
outlined. Figure 2 provides a summary of the system context.


Figure 2 ­ System Context

6
 This interim lane configuration appears to be based off of weekday PM peak hour operational analysis, as the
documentation does not include analysis of the directional flow differences and operations under weekday AM peak
hour conditions.
                              Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                     February 10, 2012
                                                          Page 4 of 35
                                                             Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                               Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                    February 10, 2012
                                                                                         Page 5 of 35

Motor Vehicle System
A field inventory was conducted by DKS Associates on December 5, 2011 to determine
characteristics of the study intersection and surrounding transportation network. Information
collected included posted speed limits, intersection and roadway configurations, pedestrian
facilities, and intersection control. The summary of the study area roadway characteristics is
provided in Table 1.

Table 1: Existing Study Area Roadway Characteristics
                                                                                           Turn
                                                Posted
Roadway                                                                                    Lane
                              Functional        Speed        Traffic        Number                   Bike       Additional
(Intersection    Agency                                                                   Storage
                             Classification7    Limit        Control        of Lanes                 Lane         Notes
Leg)                                                                                      Length
                                                (mph)
                                                                                            (ft)
                                                                                                                Identified for
                                                                                                              future widening
NE 18th Street    City of                                     Stop-                                             to three lanes
                             Minor Arterial       45                            2          None       Yes
(North Leg)       Bend                                      Controlled                                         and addition of
                                                                                                                sidewalk and
                                                                                                                 bike lanes8
                                                                                                                  A Central
                                                                                                                   Oregon
                                                                                                                  Irrigation
                                                                                                              District canal is
                                                                                                                    located
NE Empire
                  City of                                                                                      approximately
Avenue (East                  Major Arterial      35       Uncontrolled         2          None       Yes
                  Bend                                                                                          300 feet from
Leg)
                                                                                                                  the study
                                                                                                              intersection and
                                                                                                               will need to be
                                                                                                               considered for
                                                                                                                    design.
                                                                                            Left
                                                                                 3
NE 18th Street    City of                                     Stop-                        Turn
                             Major Collector      35                        (including                Yes              -
(South Leg)       Bend                                      Controlled                     Lane
                                                                            turn lane)
                                                                                           (270)
                                                                                            Left
NE Empire                                                                        3
                  City of                                                                  Turn
Avenue (West                  Major Arterial      35       Uncontrolled     (including                Yes              -
                  Bend                                                                     Lane
Leg)                                                                        turn lane)
                                                                                           (110)

Nearby Traffic Control
The adjacent public street intersections located near the NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street
intersection are stop-controlled along the side streets. On the north leg of NE 18th Street, the
adjacent intersection of NE Sierra Drive is a local street that intersects NE 18th Street
approximately 500 feet north of the study intersection and provides access to residential areas.
On the east leg of NE Empire Avenue, Brookstone Lane intersects NE Empire Avenue
approximately 550 feet from the study intersection (approximately 170 feet east of the Central

7
  Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan. Updated 2006-06-21.
https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/handle/1794/3223. Accessed December 13, 2011.
8
  An IGA between ODOT and City of Bend for the Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District requires widening to three lanes and
addition of sidewalk and bike lanes when the development creates 1,880 PM peak hour trips (approximately year 2025).
                                                       Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                         Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                              February 10, 2012
                                                                                   Page 6 of 35

Oregon Irrigation District (COID) canal). On the south leg, Montana Way intersects NE 18th
Street approximately 675 feet south of the study intersection. West of the intersection, High
Desert Lane interests NE Empire Avenue (approximately 900 feet to the west).

In addition, there are several existing stop-controlled access points to NE Empire Avenue and
NE 18th Street near the intersection. To the west, there is a right-in/right-out/left-in access
located on the north side of NE Empire Avenue approximately 500 feet from the intersection. In
addition, there is a right-in/right-out access located on the south side of NE Empire Avenue
approximately 660 feet to the west of the intersection. To the south, there are two private access
points located on the east side of NE 18th Street approximately 350 and 550 feet south of the
intersection. There are also two private access points located on the west side of NE 18th Street,
located approximately 250 feet (right-in/right-out) and 470 feet south of the intersection,
respectively.

Pedestrian System
Field review of the study intersection revealed that the north leg of NE 18th Street does not have
sidewalks on either side of the roadway. A sidewalk is present along the west side of NE 18th
Street beginning at NE Primrose Place (approximately 900 to the north), which is located curb
tight to the travel lane. Sidewalk begins on the east side further north near Morningstar Drive
(approximately 1,700 feet north of the intersection).

On the east leg of NE Empire Avenue sidewalk is present on the south side of the roadway and is
buffered by vegetation. The sidewalk runs approximately 230 feet to the east and then ends at the
COID canal abutment. On the north side of the east leg of NE Empire Avenue, no sidewalk is
present.

On the south leg of the study intersection, sidewalk is present on both the east and west side of
the roadway and is separated from the roadway by a planter strip. Sidewalks are present all the
way to Brinson Boulevard approximately 2,700 feet to the south.

On the west leg of the study intersection, sidewalk is present on both sides of NE Empire
Avenue. The sidewalk along the south side is buffered from the roadway by a planter strip, but
further west the sidewalk becomes curb tight just prior to Lower Meadow Drive. The sidewalk
on the north side is present for approximately the first 670 feet to the west and then stops prior to
High Desert Lane (with a 1,500 foot gap in sidewalk until Lower Meadow Drive).

As development occurs within the vacant lots in the northwest quadrant of the intersection, the
missing sidewalk gap along the north side of NE Empire Avenue and the west side of NE 18th
Street will likely be filled in with respective frontage improvements (or they could be built as
part of this improvement project).

The intersection currently features no striped crosswalks. Pedestrian ramps are located on all
quadrants of the intersection except for the northeast quadrant (no existing sidewalks along the
                                                          Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                            Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                 February 10, 2012
                                                                                      Page 7 of 35

north side NE Empire Avenue to the east or on east side of NE 18th Street to the north). The
existing ramps are not ADA compliant.

The Pilot Butte Canal Trail interects
NE Empire Avenue 400 feet east of the
intersection. North of NE Empire
Avenue, the trail runs along the east
side of the canal (see Figure 3). South
of NE Empire Avenue, the trail is
designated to continue along NE 18th
Street. However, a maintenance road
is located along the west side of the
canal south of NE Empire Avenue that
appears to be used as a continuation of
the trail corridor. Trail users on this
segment must cross NE Empire
Avenue at an uncontrolled/unimproved                    Figure 3: Pilot Butte Canal Trail
crossing and traverse the NE Empire                    (looking north from Empire Ave)
Avenue canal bridge to move along the
corridor. Improving this crossing and providing for pedestrian/bicycle facilities across the canal
bridge should be considered as part of the intersection improvements, if feasible.

Bicycle System
Striped bike lanes are present along on all approaches at the NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street
intersection. The Pilot Butte Canal Trail is a multiuse path located approximately 400 east of the
intersection and continues to the north and south from NE Empire Avenue, as described in the
previous section.

Transit System
Transit services in the City of Bend are provided by Cascade East Transit. The closest transit
service to the study intersection is provided by route 5 (Wells Acres)9 which runs east and west
along Butler Market Road and Wells Acres Road. Butler Market road is a minor arterial and a
parallel east west facility located approximately one mile south of NE Empire Avenue. There
are currently no bus stops located within typical walking distance (less than or equal to one
quarter mile).




9
 Cascade East Transit, Bend Bus Service. Wells Acres 5. http://www.cascadeseasttransit.com/bend-schedule.html.
Accessed January 6, 2012.
                                                              Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                                Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                     February 10, 2012
                                                                                          Page 8 of 35

Emergency Response System
Two fire stations could potentially serve the study area on a regular basis. Station 305 (North
Station)10, is located at 63377 Jamison Street. The station is approximately two miles northwest
of the intersection and would take responders roughly seven minutes to travel from the Station to
the study intersection. Station 304 is located southeast of the study intersection at 62420 Hamby
Road. This station is located about twice as far from the study intersection (four miles), but it
would require approximately the same travel time (eight minutes). However, emergency calls to
this area could come from any fire station within Bend, as the nearest station could be
responding to another call when an emergency occurs in the study area. Therefore, the
intersection design must accommodate EMS responses from all approaches.
.
The main hospital in Bend is the St. Charles Medical Center. The medical center is located near
the corner of NE Neff Road and NE 27th Street, which is approximately three miles southeast of
the study intersection.

The Bend Police Department is located on 555 NE 15th Street, which is 1 mile east of US 97 just
off of US 20. The Deschutes County Sheriff's office and the Oregon State Police Patrol office
are located near the north end of
town where US 20 and US 97
converge.

Land Use
The existing zoning near the NE
Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street
intersection is Professional Office,
Industrial Light, Commercial
Convenience, Residential Urban
Medium Density, and Residential
Urban Standard Density, which is
shown in Figure 4. The northern
portion of the study intersection is
also identified as a special planned
district. Upland areas of special
interest are located northeast of the
intersection.

The northwest quadrant of the
intersection consists of land zoned
Residential Urban Medium
Density, Commercial
Convenience, and Professional
Office. Residential Urban Medium                                   Figure 4: Existing Land Use Zoning


10
     City of Bend, Station Locations. http://www.bendoregon.gov/index.aspx?page=335. Accessed December 21, 2011.
                                                        Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                          Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                               February 10, 2012
                                                                                    Page 9 of 35

Density is intended to provide primarily for the development of multiple family residential
housing in areas where sewer and water service are available. The residential density range in the
District is 7.3 to 21.7 units per gross acre and shall provide a transitional use area between other
residential districts and other less restrictive areas.11 The Commercial Convenience use is
intended to provide larger in scale retail to provide for frequent shopping and service needs of
nearby residents. New Commercial Convenience nodes shall develop as commercial centers
rather than a commercial strip and be limited in size up to 5 acres.12 The Professional Office zone
is intended to provide for professional offices in locations near arterial or collector streets and to
provide a transition of uses between residential areas and other more intensive zones. Through
design standards, the Professional Office zone is intended to create a mix of high density
residential housing, office and service commercial developments that are pedestrian oriented and
provide a positive contribution to the streetscape.13

The northeast quadrant of the intersection consists of land zoned Residential Urban Medium
Density which was described previously, and Residential Urban Standard Density. Residential
Urban Standard Density provides opportunity for a wide variety of residential housing types at
the most common residential densities in places where community sewer and water services are
available. The residential density rate in this district is 2.0 to 7.3 dwelling units per acre. 14

The southeast quadrant of the intersection consists of land zoned Residential Urban Standard
Density which was previously described, and Industrial Light. The Industrial Light zone is
intended to provide for heavier commercial and light industrial uses with easy access to collector
and arterial streets.15

The southwest quadrant of the intersection is zoned completely Industrial Light.




11
   Bend Code ­ Chapter 10-10 Development Code, Section 2.1.100,
http://www.ci.bend.or.us/modules/showdocument.aspx?documentid=4006. Accessed January 9, 2012.
12
   Ibid.
13
   Ibid.
14
   Ibid.
15
   Ibid.
                                                             Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                               Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                    February 10, 2012
                                                                                        Page 10 of 35

Intersection Use
This section identities the users of the study intersection and quantifies the existing motor
vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle use during the AM and PM peak hours. In addition, motor
vehicle volumes for the future year of 2030 are provided.

Existing Volumes
Intersection turn movements counted at the study
intersection during the AM (7:00-9:00) and PM (4:00-
6:00) peak periods are shown in Figure 5.16 The peak hour
traffic volumes are greater than those used in previous
studies and are attached in Appendix A. Roadway tube
counts collected on NE 18th Avenue (Appendix B)
indicate while there is a school peak traffic period due to
the proximity to local schools, the peak traffic demand for
the intersection still occurs between 4:00 PM and 6:00
PM.

Traffic counts indicated a total of 1,169 total entering
vehicles during the AM peak hour and 1,317 total entering
vehicles during the PM peak hour. During the AM peak
hour, traffic volumes are highest along NE Empire
Avenue in the westbound travel direction. During the PM                      Figure 5: Existing Peak Hour
peak hour, this peak direction flow reverses to the
                                                                             Volumes
eastbound direction.

Pedestrian activity at the study intersection is moderate. A total of five pedestrians were counted
at the intersection during the AM peak hour and nine during the PM peak hour. The intersection
currently features no striped crosswalks; however pedestrians were counted crossing along all
four legs of the intersection during both the AM and PM peak hours. The most heavily used
crosswalks were the west leg and south leg which both feature existing sidewalk connections.

There are several public schools located near the study intersection. Both Sky View Middle
School and Lava Ridge Elementary School are located approximately one mile to the north along
NE 18th Street. Ponderosa Elementary School is located just to the east near the intersection of
NE Empire Avenue/NE Purcell Boulevard. Mountain View High School is located to the
southeast at the intersection of NE Wells Acres Road/NE 27th Street (approximately 1.5 miles
from the intersection). The intersection is within the district boundaries of the schools and some
students may live on the opposite side of the intersecting streets from where the school is
located.

The proximity of the schools creates the potential for students walking between schools and
residential areas to cross at the intersection. Providing improvements that increase pedestrian

16
     Intersection turn movement counts, Quality Counts, February 11, 2010.
                                                         Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                           Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                February 10, 2012
                                                                                    Page 11 of 35

crossing safety and fill-in gaps in the sidewalk network could increase the number of students
that walk to school. For example, students that live south of the intersection may be more likely
to walk to Sky View Middle School if the crossing of NE Empire Avenue were improved and
sidewalk gaps were filled-in on NE 18th Street. Students living west of the canal and NE 18th
Street may be more likely to walk to Ponderosa Elementary or Mountain View High School if
the crossing of NE 18th Street were improved and a pedestrian facility was provided across the
canal.

Only one bicyclist was counted at the study intersection during the AM peak hour. Two were
counted during the PM peak hour. All four approaches currently feature striped bike lanes.

As described in above and in previous sections, this intersection is located near several schools,
multiple residential and business land use types, and a multi-use trail. The northwest quadrant is
currently undeveloped with multiple zoning designations, including commercial. The
development of this area may attribute to greater vehicle, bicycle, and pedestrian volumes. Based
on the variety of land use types, there could be a need for special users to maneuver through the
intersection. These special users could be those with physical disabilities, elderly, school
children. The recommended intersection design should account for these potential user types.

Future Motor Vehicle Volumes
Future motor vehicle traffic demand for the intersection was
forecasted to the year 2030 to analyze future traffic operations.
The future 2030 peak period turn movement volumes were
developed using the Bend MPO's regional travel demand model
"Financially Committed" network scenario. Near the intersection,
the "Financially Committed" network scenario improvements
include:

     x   Constructing a 3-lane extension of NE Empire Avenue
         from Purcell Boulevard to NE 27th Street17.

Other potential projects in the area (such as extending NE Purcell
Boulevard north to Cooley Road and traffic growth from the
Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District) are assessed in a                       Figure 6: Future Year 2030 Peak
sensitivity analysis in the Additional Considerations section of                        Hour Volumes
this memorandum.

Traffic forecasts were "post processed" following a methodology consistent with NCHRP Report
25518. The resulting future 2030 AM and PM peak hour turn movement volumes for the
intersection are shown in Figure 6.
17
   In the Financially Committed network, NE Empire Avenue is maintained as a 3-lane roadway between NE Boyd
Acres Road and NE 18th Street.
18
   Highway Traffic Data for Urbanized Area Project Planning and Design - National Cooperative Highway
Research Program Report 255, Transportation Research Board, Washington D.C., 1982.
                                                           Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                             Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                  February 10, 2012
                                                                                      Page 12 of 35

Design Vehicle
NE Empire Avenue and NE 18th Street are both classified as arterial roadways. They are,
therefore, subject to varying modes of vehicle types. NE Empire Avenue to the west and NE 18th
Street to the south are classified as local freight routes. NE Empire Avenue east of NE 18th Street
is identified as a future local freight route19. These local freight routes are intended to provide
freight activity within the City, which complements the existing industrial activities in the
intersection area as well as future industrial growth located to the north (Juniper Ridge).
Therefore, this intersection is likely subject to larger vehicles than other areas in the City (e.g.,
neighborhoods) that only generally see emergency vehicles, garbage trucks, and school buses.

To provide more detailed information about the types of large vehicles that currently utilize the
intersection, a detailed vehicle classification study was conducted as part of the AM peak period
count (7:00 a.m. ­ 9:00 a.m.) at the intersection using the Federal Highway Administration's 13
standard vehicle classes (Table 2 and Appendix C). This classification found that several class
5,6,7,8, and 9 large vehicles use the intersection. These vehicles are equivalent to 5-axle double
unit truck (WB-67 - Interstate Semitrailer) and smaller. One class 13 vehicle was counted
making an eastbound right turn at the intersection. This was the largest vehicle type recorded at
the study intersection and is equivalent to a truck with seven or more axles consisting of three or
more units (WB-100T ­ Triple Trailer Combination). This type of vehicle is consistent with the
type of truck making a northbound left turn at this intersection as shown in Figure 7.
                                                        th
Table 2: Vehicle Classification at Empire Avenue/NE 18 Street (AM 2-Hour Peak Period)
                                                                    Vehicle Classification
Intersection Approach                       Passenger Car        Single Unit    Tractor/Trailer     Tractor/Multi-
                                                                   Truck                               Trailer
Southbound                                        466                17                2                  0
Northbound                                        64                  5                2                  0
Eastbound                                         512                28                1                  1
Westbound                                         968                37                11                 0
Total                                            2010                87                16                 1
Passenger Car = Vehicle class 1, 2, and 3
Single Unit Truck = Vehicle class 4, 5, 6, and 7
Tractor/Trailer = Vehicle class 8, 9, and 10
Tractor/Multi-Trailer = Vehicle class 11, 12, and 13
Note: 24-hour vehicle classification data for the east and south legs can be found in Appendix B.




19
  2007-2030 Metropolitan Transportation Plan, Bend Metropolitan Planning Organization, Figure 11-1, Adopted
June 27, 2007
                                                            Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                              Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                   February 10, 2012
                                                                                       Page 13 of 35

The City's base design vehicle is a WB-50; however, due to the industrial areas and freight
routes served by this intersection, the design vehicle should be a WB-67 for all movements
(allowing the truck cab to stay in-lane with
the trailer potentially tracking onto the truck
apron). In addition, a double or triple trailer
truck, as well as a "lowboy" style trailer,
should be accommodated for all movements
at this intersection. Under roundabout
control, these "accommodated" vehicles
would be allowed to use the apron; however,
the apron height should be verified so that a
"lowboy" trailer will not get high centered.

Additionally, at roundabout controlled
intersections, the City's design guidelines
require that emergency vehicles be
accommodated at the intersection without
the use of truck aprons or mountable curbs.
                                                                    Figure 7: Observed Triple Trailer Truck


Baseline Performance
This section summarizes intersection safety and existing and future intersection operations. The
purpose is to form a b aseline for which future conditions can be compared to.

Safety
To evaluate the safety of the existing intersection, the most recent three years of collision data at
the NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street intersection was obtained from the Oregon Department of
Transportation (ODOT) and are attached in Appendix D20. Using the number of vehicles entering
an intersection and the total number of collisions experienced, a collision rate describing
frequency of collisions per million entering vehicles (MEV) is used to determine if the number
of collisions is significant enough to indicate that there may be a safety issue. A collision rate of
1.0 MEV or greater typically indicates a higher than average crash rate. As listed in Table 3, the
collision rate at the study intersection is 0.67.

Table 3: Intersection Collision Summary (2008-2010)
                                        Collisions By Year                 Collision Severity
Intersection                                                  Total                                Collision Rateb
                                       2008   2009    2010              Fatal   Injury    PDOa

Empire Ave./NE 18th St.                 5       1       3       9         0        7        2            0.67
a
    PDO = Property damage only.
b
    Average annual collisions per million entering vehicles (MEV); MEV based on PM Peak Hour Volumes.

20
     ODOT Collision Data for January 1, 2008 through December 31, 2010.
                                                       Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                         Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                              February 10, 2012
                                                                                  Page 14 of 35


The collision history was reviewed in additional detail to determine if there were any trends for
collision types or locations. Of the nine recorded crashes, seven resulted from vehicles failing to
yield the right-of-way or running a stop sign, which would lead to crossing crashes. Crossing
crashes have the potential for high rates of injury due to likely vehicle speed and location of
impact. At this intersection, most of the reported collisions involved minor to moderate injuries.
There were no collisions with major injuries reported and no fatal collisions at the study
intersection.

The crossing type crashes were found to occur fairly equally between the north and south legs of
the intersection (three to four crashes occurring from each approach during the three year
period).

In addition to the ODOT 2008 to 2010 collision data, the City of Bend has provided a 2011 year
to date set of collision data. The 2011 data set provided by the City of Bend accounts for
collisions occurring in the City of Bend through November 2011. At the study intersection, one
collision has occurred in the 2011 data set through the month of November. The collision
occurred on May 15th, 2011 and was a rear end collision.

Intersection Operations
The following sections outline the City of Bend's intersection performance measures and
intersection operation standards for various intersection control types.

Measures of Effectiveness
The City of Bend uses four measures of effectiveness (MOEs) to evaluate the operation of a
roundabout. These measures include the volumes-to-capacity ratio, queuing, level of service, and
delay. A combination of these four measures are used to evaluate two-way stop controlled
intersections, all-way stop controlled intersections, and a signalized intersection. A summary of
each of the MOEs is given below.
Volume to Capacity Ratio
The volume-to-capacity ratio is a measure used to represent the level of saturation (i.e., the
portion of capacity that is being used). It is given as a decimal typically between 0.00 and 1.00
and is determined by dividing the peak hour traffic volume by the hourly capacity of a given
intersection or movement. A lower ratio indicates smooth operations and minimal delays. As the
ratio approaches 1.00, congestion increases and performance is reduced. If the forecasted ratio is
greater than 1.00, the intersection, lane, or movement is oversaturated and usually results in
excessive queues and long delays.
Queuing
Queuing reports typically show the 95th percentile queue, defined to be the length of queue that
has only a five percent probability of being exceeded during the analysis time period. The 95th
percentile is useful in determining the appropriate length of turn pockets, but is not
representative of what an average driver would experience.
                                                        Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                          Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                               February 10, 2012
                                                                                   Page 15 of 35

Level of Service
The level of service (LOS) is a measure of effectiveness that is similar to a "report card" rating
and is based on average vehicle delay. Level of service A, B, and C indicate conditions where
traffic moves without significant delays over periods of peak hour travel demand. Level of
service D and E are progressively worse operating conditions. Level of service F represents
conditions where average vehicle delay has become excessive and demand is near capacity. The
average delay value (in seconds) corresponds to each level of service designation.

The unsignalized level of service calculation evaluates each movement separately to identify
problems (typically left turns from side streets). The calculation is based on the average total
delay per vehicle for stop-controlled movements (typically on the minor side street or left turn
movements). Level of service F indicates that there are insufficient gaps of suitable size to allow
minor street traffic to safely enter or cross the major street. This is generally evident by long
delays and queuing on the minor street.
Delay
The City's operational performance standard for roundabouts is measured against a volume to
capacity ratio, but delay is used to compare alternative intersection forms to a roundabout.
Typically under the same traffic conditions, a roundabout will result in lower overall delay than
traffic signals and all-way stop control, but may result in higher overall delay than a two-way
stop controlled intersection.

Agency Operational Standards
The City of Bend has established operation standards for two-way stop control intersections, all-
way stop control intersections, roundabouts, and signalized intersections under the jurisdiction of
the City of Bend. Below are the operational standards from the Bend Code ­ Chapter 10-10
Development Code.21

     x   Two-Way Stop Control ­ Approaches with greater than 100 peak hour trips; average
         delay for the critical lane group is less than or equal to 50 seconds during the Peak Hour;
     x   All-Way Stop Control ­ Average delay for the intersection as a whole is less than or
         equal to 80 seconds during the Peak Hour;
     x   Roundabout ­ Volume to capacity ratio for the intersection as a whole is less than or
         equal to 1.0 during the Peak Hour. For this study, the intersection as a whole v/c ratio was
         estimated by calculating a weighted average (by volume) using the critical lane for each
         approach. The intersection as a whole v/c ratio is considered the minimum operational
         standard. For design considerations, this study also identifies the v/c ratio for each
         approach to a roundabout, as maintaining a v/c ratio of less than 1.0 for each approach
         would be an ideal design condition for a roundabout;
     x   Signalized Intersection under the jurisdiction of the City of Bend:
             o For intersections that are not constructed to the widths and infrastructure elements
                 of the Bend Urban Transportation System Plan or other approved master plan and

21
  Bend Code ­ Chapter 10-10 Development Code. Section 4.7.400 Part B.
http://www.ci.bend.or.us/modules/showdocument.aspx?documentid=4006 Accessed on December 12, 2011.
                                                           Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                             Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                  February 10, 2012
                                                                                      Page 16 of 35

                 not located within or directly adjoining a historic district of Central Business
                 Zone, the volume to capacity ratio for the intersection as a whole is less than or
                 equal to 1.0 during the Peak Hour.
               o For intersections that are not constructed to the widths and infrastructure elements
                 of the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan or other approved master
                 plan and are located within or directly adjoining a historic district or Central
                 Business Zone, the volume to capacity ratio for the intersection as a whole is less
                 than or equal to 1.0 during the hour directly preceding and following the Peak
                 Hour.
               o For intersections that are already constructed to the widths and infrastructure
                 elements of the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan or other approved
                 master plan, the operation standard shall be a volume-to-capacity ratio less than or
                 equal to the 1.0 for the intersection as a whole during the hour directly preceding
                 and following the Peak Hour.

Existing Intersection Operations
Intersection traffic operations were analyzed at the study intersection using Synchro 7TM
software, which employs the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual22 methodology for signalized and
unsignalized intersections. The following sections summarize existing and future year 2030 peak
hour intersection operations at the study intersection.

The existing AM and PM peak hour intersection operations at the NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th
Street intersection are summarized in Table 4. As noted in Table 4, the level of volume
performing turn movements from the side street exceed the capacity that would be estimated for
the movement with default HCM critical gap and follow-up times. Therefore, to calibrate to
observed levels of delay and an existing operations v/c ratio below 1.0, a 15% reduction was
applied to the critical gap and follow-up times. This indicates that drivers at the intersection are
potentially more aggressive than normal due to the high levels of congestion at the intersection.
Aggressive behavior and the acceptance of smaller gaps to turn from the side-street may relate to
the crash patterns described in the Safety section of this memorandum.

Table 4 As indicated, this intersection currently does not meet the City's unsignalized
operational standard during the AM and PM peak hours. This is due to the relatively high
volumes along NE Empire Avenue and moderate volumes along the stop controlled NE 18th
Street approaches, primarily the southbound left turn. Vehicles making a southbound left turn
were observed to form significant queues (up to 10 vehicles during the afternoon school peak
period) and experience delays corresponding to the estimated LOS F conditions while seeking
gaps in order to execute the left turn maneuver. Existing intersection operation calculation sheets
are attached in Appendix E.

As noted in Table 4, the level of volume performing turn movements from the side street exceed
the capacity that would be estimated for the movement with default HCM critical gap and
follow-up times. Therefore, to calibrate to observed levels of delay and an existing operations
22
     2000 Highway Capacity Manual, Transportation Research Board, Washington DC, 2000.
                                                            Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                              Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                   February 10, 2012
                                                                                       Page 17 of 35

v/c ratio below 1.0, a 15% reduction was applied to the critical gap and follow-up times. This
indicates that drivers at the intersection are potentially more aggressive than normal due to the
high levels of congestion at the intersection. Aggressive behavior and the acceptance of smaller
gaps to turn from the side-street may relate to the crash patterns described in the Safety section
of this memorandum.

Table 4: Existing 2010 Intersection Operating Conditions (AM/PM Peak Hour)
                                                                              Existing 2011
                                                                          1
Intersection Operations                                  AM Peak Hour                           PM Peak Hour1
                                                    Delay          LOS         V/C        Delay          LOS           V/C
                                              Unsignalized Intersections
                    th
Empire Ave./NE 18 St.                                71.7           F/A        0.95          90.2         F/A          0.94
Unsignalized Intersections
Delay = Individual lane group stopped delay per vehicle (seconds) for the worst case approach
LOS = Minor Street/Major Street level-of-service
V/C = Individual lane group volume-to-capacity ratio
1. HCM default critical gap and follow up time were reduced by approximately 15% to calibrate existing side
    street delay to actual delay measured in the field and to result in an existing operations v/c ratio below 1.0..




Future 2030 Intersection Operations
Table 5 summarizes the future 2030 AM and PM peak hour intersection operations at the NE
Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street intersection under existing intersection geometry and control.
With the additional traffic volumes associated with future traffic growth, this intersection would
further degrade and continue to not meet the City's unsignalized operational standard during the
AM and PM peak hours. Future year intersection operation calculation sheets are attached in
Appendix F.

Table 5: Future 2030 Intersection Operating Conditions (AM/PM Peak Hour)
                                                                               Future 2030
Intersection Operations                                  AM Peak Hour1                          PM Peak Hour1
                                                   Delay          LOS         V/C         Delay         LOS        V/C
                                              Unsignalized Intersections
Empire Ave./NE 18th St.                            >200.0         F/B         >2.00      >200.0         F/B       >2.00
Unsignalized Intersections
Delay = Individual lane group stopped delay per vehicle (seconds) for the worst case approach
LOS = Minor Street/Major Street level-of-service
V/C = Individual lane group volume-to-capacity ratio
1. HCM default critical gap and follow up time were reduced by approximately 15% based on calibration to
    existing field conditions
                                                         Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                           Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                February 10, 2012
                                                                                    Page 18 of 35

Potential Solutions
In order to reduce delays along the side street at the study intersection, a preliminary alternative
anaysis was conducted in order to determine the most appropriate intersection configuration to
accommodate future growth to the year 2030. The alternatives analysis focused on intersection
improvements such as all-way stop control, traffic signalization, and a roundabout.
Roundabout
The City currently implements a roundabout first policy; therefore a roundabout was considered
as a viable intersection control alternative and carried forward with the alternatives analysis. The
alternatives analysis will determine the required number of circulating lanes within the
roundabout and any other geometric modifications needed.
All-Way Stop
All-way stop warrants were reviewed for the study intersection to determine the merit based on
the requirements outlined in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)23.

An all-way stop would likely be warranted at this intersection based on future 2030 traffic
volumes; however this intersection would fail to meet the City's intersection operational
standards for all way stop control (average delay greater than 80 seconds during the AM and
afternoon peak hour). Therefore, this intersection control was not considered for further analysis.
Traffic Signal
Although a traffic signal is currently not warranted at the study intersection, a traffic signal may
be warranted by year 2015 based on the future PM peak hour volumes. The peak hour traffic
signal warrant was conducted as outlined in the MUTCD24 and is attached in Appendix G. This
alternative was carried forward with the alternatives analysis in order to determine the
preliminary signal operations and any other geometric modifications which may be needed.


Alternatives Evaluation
Based on the potential solutions identified in the previous section, both a roundabout and traffic
signal were analyzed in more detail. Each alternative was evaluated using the future 2030 AM
and PM peak hour traffic volumes previously identified. The following sections provide a
comparison of the traffic operations and queuing results for both intersection alternatives.




23
   2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Section 2B-07 Multi-Way Stop Applications, U.S. Department
of Transportation and Federal Highway Administration.
24
   2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Warrant 3 Peak Hour, U.S. Department of Transportation and
Federal Highway Administration.
                                                              Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                                Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                     February 10, 2012
                                                                                         Page 19 of 35

Alternative 1 ­ Roundabout Operations
The first alternative included a roundabout, which was
evaluated per City of Bend guidelines.25 In order for the
roundabout to meet the City's ideal operational
standards (i.e., each approach v/c ratio less than 1.0)
during the future year 2030 AM and PM peak hours, a
partial multi-lane roundabout would be required. A
conceptual sketch of the multi-lane roundabout is
illustrated in Figure 8. Scaled-down concepts that may
be adequate for interim years or to only meet the City's
minimum operational standard are evaluated in the
Additional Considerations section of this memorandum.
                                                                          Figure 8: Conceptual Partial Multi-Lane
The peak hour roundabout operations and queuing                              Roundabout
results are listed in Table 6 and calculation sheets for
this alternative are attached in Appendix H. The west leg of the roundabout would operate near
capacity (i.e., a v/c ratio of 0.97). The 95th percentile queues over the peak 15 minutes for this
critical approach could extend up to 375 feet (and would not block any intersections or access
points) during the 2030 PM peak hour. The overall intersection v/c ratio is both AM and PM
peak hours is below 1.0 and would meet the City's minimum operational standard.

Table 6: Alternative 1 - Future 2030 Partial Multi-Lane Roundabout Operations and Queuing Results (AM/PM
Peak Hour)
                                               Empire Ave./NE 18th St.
                                                                          Future 2030
                                                       AM Peak                                  PM Peak
Roundabout Operations
                                           North      East        South   West    North      East        South    West
                                            Leg       Leg          Leg    Leg      Leg       Leg          Leg     Leg
Volume/Capacity                             0.83      0.82        0.16    0.54     0.72      0.77          0.83   0.97
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)           31.9      19.7         9.5    17.8     20.5      20.5          52.1   56.3
Intersection Volume/Capacity**                             0.75                                     0.83
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                           22.4                                     35.0
Intersection Level of Service                                C                                       D
                       th
Queuing Results (95 Percentile Queues)*
Peak 15 min. flows (ft)                     225      250           25     100       175       200          200    375
Peak Hour flows (ft)                        175      200           25     75        125       150          125    250

*Queue lengths are rounded to the nearest 25 feet.
** The intersection v/c ratio was calculated using a weighted average based on the critical lane volumes.


25
     Roundabout Operational Analysis Guidelines, City of Bend, April 2010.
                                                      Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                        Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                             February 10, 2012
                                                                                 Page 20 of 35

Alternative 2 ­ Traffic Signal Operations
This alternative includes traffic signal
control at the study intersection. For
the traffic signal to meet the City's
peak hour operational requirement,
additional turn lanes and receiving
lanes would need to be provided along
all approaches at the intersection.
These additional storage lanes are
illustrated in the conceptual sketch
provided in Figure 9. Appendix I
includes a sketch of a potential traffic
signal layout.

Traffic signal operations were
evaluated using Synchro 7TM and
queuing estimates were made using
the SimTrafficTM software package.
Lane utilization factors were estimated
to account for downstream lane drops
reducing the use of additional                         Figure 9: Conceptual Traffic Signal
approach lanes. Estimates of 95th
percentile queue lengths were
determined using an average of five
simulation runs of the SimTrafficTM model.

It was assumed that the traffic signal would operate with protected-permissive left-turn phasing
on the NE Empire Avenue eastbound and westbound approaches. Protected left turn phasing was
assumed for the northbound and southbound left turns due to the dual southbound left turn lanes.
Furthermore a westbound right turn overlap was assumed. The results of the traffic operations
and queuing analysis is summarized in
                                                       Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                         Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                              February 10, 2012
                                                                                  Page 21 of 35

Table 7. Intersection operation calculation sheets for this alternative are attached in Appendix J.

Although the traffic signal would operate within the City's operational standards during the AM
and PM peak hours, it would operate near capacity during the AM peak hour and operations
would resemble LOS D conditions. Queues would be greatest along the southbound minor street
approach during the AM and PM peak hours.
                                                              Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                                Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                     February 10, 2012
                                                                                         Page 22 of 35

Table 7: Alternative 2 - Future 2030 Traffic Signal Operations and Queuing Results (AM/PM Peak Hour)
                                             Empire Ave./NE 18th St.
                                                                       Future 2030
Traffic Signal Operations
                                                       AM Peak                           PM Peak
Volume/Capacity                                           0.96                              0.95
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                          38.4                              50.5
Intersection Level of Service                              D                                 D
                     th
Queuing Results (95 Percentile Queues)*
                                 L                       200 ft                            525 ft
North Leg
                                 T/R                     425 ft                            725 ft
                                 L                        75 ft                             50 ft
East Leg                         T                       400 ft                            250 ft
                                 R                       250 ft                            250 ft
                                 L                        25 ft                            175 ft
South Leg
                                 T/R                     200 ft                            350 ft
                                 L                       125 ft                            300 ft
West Leg
                                 T/R                     150 ft                            250 ft
L = Left; T = Through; R = Right
*Queue lengths are rounded to the nearest 25 feet.
                                                           Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                             Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                  February 10, 2012
                                                                                      Page 23 of 35

Alternatives Evaluation
Per the City's Tier 1 Table from the Intersection Form Evaluation Framework, a comparison
between Alternative 1 (Roundabout) and Alternative 2 (Traffic Signal) was performed to
determine the preferred alternative. The comparison is summarized in Table 8. Based on this
evaluation, a partial multi-lane roundabout is the recommended long-term traffic control for this
location due primarily to safety and operational benefits.

Table 8: Tier 1 Intersection Form Selection Criteria
   Category                Criteria                    Evaluation Comments                       Conclusion
                                                       Safety
Motor Vehicle     Conflict points              Motor Vehicle Conflict Points:
Safety            (exposure)                   Traffic signal w/four approaches = 32       Roundabout
                  Severity (speed)             Partial Multi-Lane Roundabout w/four
                                               approaches = 19

                                               Posted Speed:
                                               NE Empire Avenue = 35mph
                                               NE 18th Street = 45 mph

                                               A partial multi-lane roundabout would
                                               have fewer motor vehicle conflict
                                               points, therefore reducing the exposure
                                               to potential collisions. A partial multi-
                                               lane roundabout would also have less
                                               severe collisions than a traffic signal
                                               due to the lower entry/circulating
                                               speeds imposed by the roundabouts
                                               geometry.
Non-              Conflict points              Pedestrian Conflict Points:                 Neutral
Motorized         (exposure)                   Traffic signal w/four approaches = 24
Vehicle Safety    Severity (speed)             Partial Multi-Lane Roundabout w/four
                                               approaches = 14

                                               Posted Speed:
                                               NE Empire Avenue = 35mph
                                               NE 18th Street = 45 mph

                                               A traffic signal would provide a
                                               protected pedestrian movement along
                                               all legs of the intersection.

                                               A partial multi-lane roundabout has
                                               fewer pedestrian conflict points
                                               therefore reducing the overall exposure
                                               to potential accidents. However, it
                                               would require pedestrians to cross two
                                               travel lanes at a time on some legs of
                                               the intersection, which could result in
                                               second car-coming conflicts. This
                                                         Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                           Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                February 10, 2012
                                                                                    Page 24 of 35

  Category               Criteria                   Evaluation Comments                       Conclusion
                                            would require pedestrians to select
                                            larger gaps in the traffic stream while
                                            crossing unprotected. However, these
                                            pedestrian issues would be eliminated if
                                            the multi-lane approaches are
                                            signalized for pedestrian movements to
                                            meet the Public Rights-of-Way
                                            Accessibility Guidelines.
                                             Traffic Operations
Peak-Hour        Volume-to-capacity ratio   Both a partial multi-lane roundabout        Roundabout
Traffic          Average delay              and traffic signal could meet the City of
Operations       LOS                        Bend's ideal and minimum operational
                 Queue lengths              standards during the AM and PM peak
                                            hours for each respective intersection
                                            control.

                                            A partial multi-lane roundabout would
                                            yield shorter queues and less delay
                                            during the AM and PM peak hours.

                                             Anticipated Users
Design Vehicle   Appropriate heavy          Both a traffic signal and partial multi-    Neutral
                 vehicle                    lane lane roundabout would be
                 Buses                      designed using the same
                 Emergency vehicles         design/accommodated vehicle(s).

                                            It is assumed that the intersection
                                            would be designed for a WB-67 and
                                            larger double or triple trailer trucks
                                            would be accommodated for all
                                            movements. Additionally the truck
                                            apron of the roundabout would be
                                            designed to accommodate a lowboy
                                            trailer.

Special User     School children            Both a traffic signal and partial multi-    Neutral
Needs            Elderly                    lane roundabout would be designed to
                 Visually impaired          accommodate the same special user
                 ADA compliance             needs at the intersection.

                                              System Context
System Effects   Adjacent traffic control   There is an existing traffic signal         Neutral
                 Railroad crossing          located to the west along NE Empire
                                            Avenue/Boyd Acres Road
                                            (approximately 0.75 miles). There is an
                                            existing partial multi-lane roundabout
                                            to the north along NE 18th Street at
                                            Cooley Road (approximately 1.4
                                            miles). Neither a traffic signal nor
                                            roundabout would significantly impact
                                                        Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                          Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                               February 10, 2012
                                                                                   Page 25 of 35

  Category              Criteria                Evaluation Comments                        Conclusion
                                        the existing roadway system operations.
Environmental   Land use context        The land use zoning surrounding the          Roundabout
Impacts                                 intersection varies, including industrial,
                                        commercial, and residential uses.
                                        Neither a traffic signal nor roundabout
                                        is anticipated to have significant
                                        environmental impacts to the
                                        surrounding residential land use.

                                        Due to lower intersection delays and
                                        shorter queue lengths during non-peak
                                        periods, a roundabout could reduce the
                                        number of stops, therefore reducing
                                        noise and emissions associated with
                                        stop and go driving.

                                        A traffic signal may be generally
                                        preferred by freight users along this
                                        designated freight corridor. However,
                                        the roundabout design vehicle has been
                                        increased from the City standard WB-
                                        50 to a WB-67, which may actually
                                        improve turning movements for freight
                                        vehicles compared to a traffic signal
                                        alternative.

Emergency       Response time/control   A traffic signal would be equipped with      Neutral
Response        delay                   emergency vehicle preemption along all
                                        approaches. Emergency vehicles would
                                        be able to use left turn lanes and
                                        opposing traffic lanes to maneuver
                                        through the intersection.

                                        The City's roundabout standards
                                        require a 20 foot wide entrance and exit
                                        lane in order to allow emergency
                                        vehicles to enter around and pass
                                        vehicles stopped within the roundabout.
                                                         Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                           Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                February 10, 2012
                                                                                    Page 26 of 35

                                           Context at Intersection
Intersection     Intersection proper        Both a traffic signal and partial multi-    Neutral
Footprint        (physical & operational    lane roundabout would require
                 influence area)            additional lanes to be added at the
                                            intersection. A traffic signal would
                                            require widening along NE Empire
                                            Avenue and additional turn lanes along
                                            NE 18th Street (both approaches). The
                                            canal crossing (east of NE 18th Street)
                                            would need to be widened for both
                                            alternatives.

                                            The roundabout alternative would not
                                            require widening of the south leg of the
                                            intersection. In addition, the roundabout
                                            alternative would require fewer lanes
                                            approaching the intersection on the east
                                            and west legs. This could offset the
                                            larger intersection size that roundabout
                                            typically have compared to signals.
                                            Therefore, the right-of-way impact area
                                            could be similar between the two
                                            alternatives.

Intersection     Driveway closures or       The nearest access to the intersection is   Roundabout
Influence Area   impacts                    located on the south leg of NE 18th
                                            Street approximately 265 south.
                                            Queuing along the northbound
                                            approach would likely extend back to
                                            this access during the PM peak hour
                                            under traffic signal operations. The
                                            roundabout alternative would not
                                            impact any nearby intersections or
                                            roundabouts
                                                      Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                        Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                             February 10, 2012
                                                                                 Page 27 of 35

Additional Roundabout Design Considerations
Additional factors that could influence the design of the recommended roundabout were
evaluated, future year scenario sensitivity (including the Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District
Scenario), roundabout construction phasing, including year of opening operations, and
multimodal system considerations. The following subsections discuss each of these factors.

Future Year Sensitivity Scenario
As described in the Summary of Prior Traffic Studies section,
the City of Bend completed a long-range transportation analysis
at the study intersection as part of the Juniper Ridge
Employment Sub-District Transportation Study. In that
evaluation, a unique travel demand model scenario was created
that adjusted both land use and roadway network, including key
items such as:

   x   Increased employment land use and trip generation in the
       Juniper Ridge area
   x   Improving and extending NE Purcell Boulevard to
       Cooley Road
   x   Widening NE 18th Street to 3-lanes from NE Empire
       Avenue to Cooley Road                                     Figure 10: Year 2030 Peak Hour
   x   Improving the US 97/Empire Avenue interchange            Volumes (Juniper Ridge Sensitivity
                                                                              Scenario)
The City of Bend and ODOT formally agreed to these
improvements (and others in the area) in an IGA to allow the rezoning and development of the
Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-District. Therefore, this scenario (Figure 10 shows 2030 Peak
Hour Volumes) was evaluated with the proposed roundabout configuration (as shown in Figure
8) to determine how the full build configuration would perform. The intersection operations, as
listed in Table 9 (see Appendix K), were found to meet City of Bend ideal operational standards.
Therefore, no configuration modifications would be required for this volume scenario. Compared
to the Financially Committed Scenario operations listed in Table 6, this scenario would result in
increased congestion on the north leg during the AM peak, additional congestion on the east leg
during the PM peak, and reduced congestion on the south leg during the PM peak.
                                                              Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                                Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                     February 10, 2012
                                                                                         Page 28 of 35

Table 9: Future 2030 Juniper Ridge Roundabout Operations Results (AM/PM Peak Hour) with Partial Multi-Lane
Roundabout (Full Buildout of Roundabout)
                                            NE Empire Ave./NE 18th St.
                                                                  2030 Juniper Ridge Scenario
                                                       AM Peak                                  PM Peak
Roundabout Operations
                                           North      East       South   West      North     East         South    West
                                            Leg       Leg         Leg    Leg        Leg      Leg           Leg     Leg
Volume/Capacity                             0.92      0.83       0.15     0.55      0.71      0.85          0.77   0.97
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)           44.8      21.3        8.8     16.5      20.1      29.3          43.7   52.9
Intersection Volume/Capacity*                             0.78                                       0.85
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                          27.1                                       36.2
Intersection Level of Service                                D                                        E
* The intersection v/c ratio was calculated using a weighted average based on the critical lane volumes.



Roundabout Construction Phasing
There are multiple factors that should be considered in evaluating potential phasing of the
roundabout configuration needed to meet the City's ideal operational standards under the
forecasted 2030 conditions. First, a single-lane roundabout would likely operate adequately
under year of opening conditions. Second, there are nearby physical constraints that that limit
the ability to achieve full buildout of the roundabout concept, such as the canal crossing to the
east that would need to be widened to have dual entry or dual exit lanes on the east leg of the
intersection. Third, there are currently no identified funds to construct planned projects that are
part of the Financially Committed system that would add volume to this intersection, such as the
NE Empire Avenue extension to NE 27th Street. In addition, several of the potential network
improvements in the Financially Committed Scenario and the Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-
District scenario (which would be needed to accommodate growth in the area) are outside of the
current State acknowledged Urban Growth Boundary, which could mean that it will be some
time before these projects can be constructed. Therefore, phased construction was evaluated to
determine a potential sequence of improvements that could be used to transition towards the full
2030 configuration.

Using calculated growth rates that were based on comparing existing (year 2011) traffic volumes
and Financially Committed scenario 2030 volumes, 5-year incremental turn-movement volume
sets were developed and analyzed. The interim year forecasts were then used to develop and
evaluate phased components of the roundabout configuration, starting with a single lane
configuration and working towards dual entry and then dual exit configurations, as needed.
Figure 11 shows the potential interim year phasing strategies and Table 10 summarizes their
operations.
                              Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                     February 10, 2012
                                                         Page 29 of 35




   Figure 11: Potential roundabout construction phasing
                                                        Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                          Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                               February 10, 2012
                                                                                   Page 30 of 35

Table 10: Future Alternatives Roundabout Operations Results (AM/PM Peak Hour)
                                                   NE Empire Ave./NE 18th St.
                                                             Volume to Capacity
Roundabout                           AM Peak                                        PM Peak
Operations
                         North     East    South      West     Over-   North      East   South   West   Over-
                          Leg      Leg      Leg       Leg       all     Leg       Leg     Leg    Leg     all
Year 2015 Scenarios
Single Lane               0.48      0.68    0.05      0.31     0.54     0.32      0.57   0.22    0.65   0.53
Year 2020 Scenarios
Year 2020 Single Lane     0.80      0.89    0.06      0.42     0.76     0.53      0.77   0.32    0.85   0.71
Year 2025 Scenarios
Year 2025 Single Lane     1.36      1.18    0.10      0.60     1.13     0.88      1.05   0.49    1.19   1.02
Year 2025 (Interim A)     0.93      1.18    0.11      0.48     0.99     0.66      1.05   0.51    0.91   0.88
Year 2025 (Interim B)     0.74      0.65    0.11      0.52     0.63     0.48      0.59   0.51    1.02   0.73
Year 2030 Scenarios
Year 2030 (Interim A)     1.65      1.58    0.16      0.75     1.47     1.14      1.48   0.83    1.36   1.31
Year 2030 (Interim B)     1.26      0.82    0.16      0.79     0.94     0.84      0.77   0.83    1.47   1.05
Year 2030 Partial
Multi-Lane (Full Build    0.83      0.82    0.16      0.54     0.75     0.72      0.77   0.83    0.97   0.83
Out of Roundabout)


The results of the analysis, as listed in Table 10, indicated that a single-lane roundabout would
likely operate within the City's ideal operational standards (i.e., v/c ratios less than 1.0 for each
approach) through the year 2020 and could meet the minimum operational standard for an
additional few years (i.e., a design life of approximately 10 years). By the year 2025, one of the
interim phasing concepts would be needed. Both interim concepts would meet the City's
minimum operational standards (i.e., overall intersection v/c less than 1.0) through 2025, but
would fail under year 2030 conditions. Interim Concept A, which maintains a single lane entry
and exit on the east leg, would have significant congestion on the east leg and just meet the City's
minimum operational standard under year 2025 conditions (i.e., it would have a design life of 10
to 15 years). Interim Concept B, would provide additional capacity and almost meet the City's
ideal operating standard under year 2025 conditions (i.e., it would have a design life of 10 to
almost 20 years). Intersection operations for the 5-year incremental forecasts are listed in Table
10 (see Appendix L).
                                                            Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                              Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                   February 10, 2012
                                                                                       Page 31 of 35

Given the nature of these interpolated future traffic volume forecasts, it is important to note that
the actual construction of these improvements would not be needed precisely in 2025 or 2030.
Development patterns and rates in the area could fluctuate significantly as the Central Oregon
area recovers from the economic recession. Furthermore, there are key network changes that will
likely drive the timing of these improvements. For example, the Financially Committed network
evaluated in this interim phasing analysis assumes that NE Empire Avenue would be extended to
NE 27th Street and no other significant improvement projects would be constructed in the
immediate area. However, there are several other projects not included in this network scenario
that could occur in the area before or after the NE Empire Avenue extension, such as the
Yeoman Road extension to NE 18th Street, the NE Purcell Boulevard extension to Cooley Road,
or the Cooley Road extension to Deschutes Market Road.
To further explore the potential for corridor improvements in the area to affect the timing of
when the interim roundabout configurations would be needed (or what each scenario's design life
might be), additional travel demand model network scenarios were examined, including the Bend
MPO Metropolitan Transportation Plan (MTP) scenario and the Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-
District Mitigated scenario. In addition, some preliminary network testing (without formal full
4-step travel demand model runs26) was conducted to determine the potential for certain roadway
improvements in the area that might reduce the need for multi-lane configurations of the
roundabout. Observations from this sensitivity testing include:
     x   Traffic volumes at the NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street intersection would likely
         increase significantly if NE Empire Avenue was extended to NE 27th Street (especially if
         the NE Empire Avenue corridor was widened to 5-lanes). Therefore, this project would
         reduce the design life of the interim phasing concepts.
     x   Traffic volumes at the NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street intersection could potentially
         be reduced if Yeoman Road was extended west to NE 18th Street. If this improvement
         were to happen before NE Empire Avenue was extended to NE 27th Street (and without
         other corridor improvements in the area), the interim configuration concepts may have a
         substantially longer "design life". For example, Interim Concept A could potentially
         meet City operational standards for up to 15 to 20 years under this scenario.
     x   The extension of Purcell Boulevard to Cooley Road could reduce traffic volumes at the
         NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street intersection. However, this improvement would
         likely correspond to increased development at Juniper Ridge (as it is a condition of the
         ODOT/Bend IGA for later phases of development in the Juniper Ridge Employment Sub-
         District) and would therefore not likely represent a scenario that would increase the
         design life of the interim roundabout concepts.




26
  The Bend MPO regional travel demand model, which was developed and is maintained by ODOT's
Transportation Planning Analysis Unit (TPAU), follows a 4-step process that includes trip generation, trip
distribution, mode choice, and trip assignment. Creating new network scenarios and developing future year volume
estimates would require having TPAU run the full 4-step model. The preliminary testing completed was based upon
looking at trip assignment patterns in the model to observe the potential for network changes to shift traffic volumes.
                                                              Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                                Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                                     February 10, 2012
                                                                                         Page 32 of 35

Year of Opening Operations
As discussed in the previous section, a single lane roundabout would operate well within the
City's operational standards under year of opening (2012) traffic conditions if chosen as an
initial interim configuration. A single lane roundabout would operate with minimal delay on all
approaches and 95th percentile queue lengths would not be anticipated to exceed 125 feet during
the AM and PM peak hours. Table 11 lists the expected day of opening single-lane roundabout
traffic operations and queuing results (Appendix M).

Table 11: Alternative 1 ­ 2012 Year of Opening Single-Lane Roundabout Operations and Queuing Results
(AM/PM Peak Hour)
                                            NE Empire Ave./NE 18th St.
                                                                         2012 Year of Opening
                                                      AM Peak                                     PM Peak
Roundabout Operations
                                          North      East         South     West    North       East         South   West
                                           Leg       Leg           Leg      Leg      Leg        Leg           Leg    Leg
Volume/Capacity                            0.39      0.64         0.04       0.30    0.23       0.47         0.17    0.55
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)           8.7      11.2          4.2       6.3      6.0       8.5           6.7    9.8
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                            9.4                                        8.5
Intersection Level of Service                               A                                          A
Queuing Results (95th Percentile Queues)*
Peak 15 min. volume (ft)                    50       125           25        50       25        75            25     100
Peak Hour volume (ft)                       50       75            25        25       25        50            25      75
*Queue lengths are rounded to the nearest 25 feet.




Multimodal System Considerations
As described in the system context, there are pedestrian and utility facilities near the intersection
that should be considered during the design, including:
    x The Pilot Butte Canal trail crossing should be considered in the intersection design and
        the design team should coordinate with the Bend Park and Recreation District. Consider
        utilizing the roundabout as the crossing between the south side of NE Empire Avenue
        (with the trail running along NE 18th Street) and the north side of NE Empire Avenue
        (with the trail running along the east side of the canal). In addition, a shared
        pedestrian/bicycle facility should be considered on the north side of NE Empire Avenue
        that would connect the trail ends and provide for crossing of the canal bridge (e.g., a
        cross section of the bridge could include 10-foot multi-use path on the north side, two 12-
        foot travel lanes, and a 5-foot pedestrian facility on the south side).
    x Sidewalk should be provided along NE Empire Avenue between NE 18th Street and NE
        Purcell Boulevard to provide for pedestrian facilities towards Sky View High School and
                                                      Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                        Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                             February 10, 2012
                                                                                 Page 33 of 35

       Ponderosa Elementary School. As part of this project, a sidewalk should be designed and
       constructed, if possible, along the north side of NE Empire Avenue in combination with
       the improvements across the canal bridge.
   x   Sidewalks and curb ramps should be constructed per ADA requirements on all quadrants
       of the intersection.
   x   Where dual entry or exit lanes are planned in the design, the potential for installing
       pedestrian activated signals should be considered. This would include installing conduit
       as part of the street lighting design for future traffic control device installation on each
       approach.
   x   Sidewalks should be designed and constructed, if possible, on the north leg of NE 18th
       Street. Consideration should be made for constructing sidewalks to at least NE Primrose
       Place as part of this project to support the mixed land use and the school access in the
       area, which would complete the sidewalk network on the west side of NE 18th Street.
       Continuing the sidewalks on the east side of NE 18th Street to Brightwater Drive would
       be needed to complete the gaps in the corridor.
   x   Accommodate bicyclists since all approaches feature bike lanes.


Summary of Findings
Based on the Tier 1 Selection Criteria for the forecasted future year 2030 conditions, a partial
multi-lane roundabout would be recommended compared to traffic signal control at the
intersection of NE Empire Avenue/NE 18th Street. As described in Table 8, a roundabout would
provide safer operations and would result in shorter delays and vehicle queues during the AM
and PM peak hours. Although a partial multi-lane roundabout as shown in Figure 8 would be
necessary to meet City operational standards under the forecasted year 2030 conditions, there is
opportunity to phase the roundabout improvements over time. Phasing of improvements may be
desired by the City to reduce initial construction costs and right of way impacts, provide safer
operations for all modes under single lane configurations on some approaches for interim
periods, and provide flexibility to adapt to changing development trends and roadway system
improvements that could alter the need for the identified full build-out configuration under year
2030 conditions. If the City chooses to design for, and implement, a phased improvement
strategy, the following operational highlights should be considered:

   x   A single lane roundabout configuration is estimated to have approximately 10 years of
       operational design life (i.e., before capacity would be reached during peak periods).
   x   Interim Concept A, which expands the roundabout to add an eastbound left turn lane and
       a southbound right turn lane, is estimated to have approximately 10 to 15 years of
       operational design life. Under this configuration, the east leg (westbound approach)
       would be maintained as a single entry/exit lane configuration given the constraints of the
       current canal bridge width.
   x   Interim Concept B, which would expand beyond Interim Concept A to also include a
       westbound right turn lane, is estimated to have approximately 10 to almost 20 years of
       operational design life.
                                                       Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                         Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                              February 10, 2012
                                                                                  Page 34 of 35

   x    The design life of any of these interim options could vary significantly under changes in
        development patterns and rates or changes to the timing and/or order of constructing
        roadway improvements in the area. For example, if the Yeoman Road extension to NE
        18th Street was constructed and no other significant projects in the area were completed
        (e.g., the NE Empire Avenue extension to NE 27th Street, the NE Purcell Boulevard
        extension to Cooley Road, the Cooley Road extension to Deschutes Market Road, or the
        widening of NE Empire Avenue to 5-lane east of Boyd Acres Road), the design life of
        Interim Concept A may potentially extend to 15+ years.

If a phased implementation strategy is selected by the City, the roundabout footprint (and right-
of-way) under interim year scenarios should consider options such as:

    x   Building for an interim configuration and expanding the roundabout to add lanes in the
        future when needed;
    x   Building to accommodate the size of later phases and adding inner lanes in the future; or
    x   Building to accommodate the size of later phases and using striping to implement
        reduced lane configurations for interim conditions (restriping to add lanes in the future.

These choices would likely have a significant effect on the design elements of the roundabout,
such as drainage and right-of-way. The design team should coordinate with the City to
determine the preferred approach. Under any of the phased or full build-out configurations of the
roundabout improvements, the following items should be considered during design:

   x    A design vehicle of a WB-67 should be used for all approaches (allowing the truck cab to
        stay in-lane with the trailer potentially tracking onto the inner and/or outer truck apron).
   x    A double and triple trailer configuration should be accommodated for all approaches
        (with use of an inner and/or outer truck apron if necessary).
   x    The truck apron vertical profile should accommodate a lowboy trailer for all approaches
   x    Design for emergency response vehicles (ambulance and a hook/ladder fire truck) to stay
        in-lane for all approaches and exits.
   x    The Pilot Butte Canal trail crossing should be considered in the intersection design and
        the design team should coordinate with the Bend Park and Recreation District. Consider
        utilizing the roundabout as the crossing between the south side of NE Empire Avenue
        (with the trail running along NE 18th Street) and the north side of NE Empire Avenue
        (with the trail running along the east side of the canal). In addition, a shared
        pedestrian/bicycle facility should be considered on the north side of NE Empire Avenue
        that would connect the trail ends and provide for crossing of the canal bridge (e.g., a
        cross section of the bridge could include a 10-foot multi-use path on the north side, two
        12-foot motor vehicle travel lanes, and a 5-foot pedestrian facility on the south side).
   x    Sidewalk should be provided along NE Empire Avenue between NE 18th Street and NE
        Purcell Boulevard to provide for pedestrian facilities towards Sky View High School and
        Ponderosa Elementary School. As part of this project, a sidewalk should be designed and
                                                   Draft NE Empire Avenue at NE 18th Street
                     Intersection Traffic Control Determination and Design Recommendation
                                                                          February 10, 2012
                                                                              Page 35 of 35

    constructed, if possible, along the north side of NE Empire Avenue in combination with
    the improvements across the canal bridge.
x   Sidewalks and curb ramps should be constructed per ADA requirements all on quadrants
    of the intersection.
x   Sidewalks should be designed and constructed, if possible, on the north leg of NE 18th
    Street. Consideration should be made for constructing sidewalks to at least NE Primrose
    Place as part of this project to support the mixed land use and the school access in the
    area, which would complete the sidewalk network on the west side of NE 18th Street.
    Continuing the sidewalks on the east side of NE 18th Street to Brightwater Drive would
    be needed to complete the gaps in the corridor.
x   Where dual entry or exit lanes are planned in the design, the potential for installing
    pedestrian activated signals should be considered. This would include installing conduit
    as part of the street lighting design for future traffic control device installation on each
    approach.
x   Accommodate bicyclists to provide system connectivity since all approaches feature bike
    lanes.
                               Appendix A
Existing Intersection Turn Movement Counts (AM/PM)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 18th St -- Empire Ave                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10675705
 CITY/STATE: Bend, OR                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Nov 01 2011
                     267            296                          Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                                 3.4        2.0
                        89    67 111
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:25 AM -- 7:40 AM
                                                                                                                               2.2 4.5 3.6

       455   44                           228   619
                                                                                                                  2.0   0.0                       2.6      2.1
             161             0.80         363
                                                                                                                        0.0                       1.9
       253   48                           28    275
                                                                                                                  0.8   4.2                       0.0      1.5

                         3    24    3
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                     143            30
                                                                                                                               3.5        0.0



                              1                                                                                                 0    0    1


                                                                                                                        0                          0

             1                              1                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          0


                              2                                                                                                 0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                           NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                    18th St                         18th St                Empire Ave                   Empire Ave
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     7:00 AM        0           2       0    0          5       1       1   0     5      6      2      0     1       13      4       0           40
     7:05 AM        2           0       2    0          8       5       3   0     3     13      5      0     1       13      3       0           58
     7:10 AM        0           2       0    0          3       2       3   0     6     10      3      0     1       12     11       0           53
     7:15 AM        0           2       0    0         10       4       5   0     6      8      4      0     3       20     21       0           83
     7:20 AM        0           0       0    0         13       8       8   0     4      8      4      0     6       26     25       0          102
     7:25 AM        0           2       1    0          8       9       9   0     5     21      5      0     0       30     37       0          127
     7:30 AM        1           3       0    0         11       7     14    0     3     19      2      0     0       21     38       0          119
     7:35 AM        0           3       1    0          9       7     11    0     7      9      2      0     0       35     34       0          118
     7:40 AM        0           2       0    0         16       8     17    0     2     11      4      0     1       31     18       0          110
     7:45 AM        0           0       0    0          8       5       5   0     7     18      2      0     3       46     16       0          110
     7:50 AM        0           1       0    0         12       6       5   0     1     13      7      0     4       46      8       0          103
     7:55 AM        1           4       0    0          4       2       3   0     3     13      7      0     4       37      9       0           87             1110
     8:00 AM        0           2       0    0          5       6       4   0     2     17      4      0     4       28      9       0           81             1151
     8:05 AM        1           3       0    0          4       4       5   0     3      9      4      0     2       25      5       0           65             1158
     8:10 AM        0           2       1    0         11       1       3   0     1     15      3      0     1       18      8       0           64             1169
     8:15 AM        0           2       1    0          9       7       6   0     2     14      4      0     2       18      5       0           70             1156
     8:20 AM        1           1       1    0          8       3       3   0     1     19      0      0     2       25      2       0           66             1120
     8:25 AM        2           0       0    0         10       4       5   0     4     11      8      0     0       30      4       0           78             1071
     8:30 AM        0           4       1    0          7       2       6   0     0     16      4      0     3       27     12       0           82             1034
     8:35 AM        2           2       0    0         17       4       1   0     3     21      1      0     2       22     10       0           85             1001
     8:40 AM        0           3       1    0         13       7       7   0     4     26      3      0     0       28     15       0          107              998
     8:45 AM        0           2       0    0         18       5       9   0     2     15      6      0     0       28      8       0           93              981
     8:50 AM        0           1       1    0          9       5       6   0     3     24      0      0     2       31      7       0           89              967
     8:55 AM        0           2       0    0          5       3       4   0    12     23      4      0     0       33      8       0           94              974
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      4          32       8    0        112      92    136    0    60    196     36      0     0      344   436        0                  1456
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0               0       4       4         0      0      0            0        8     20                           36
  Pedestrians                   0                               0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles         0           0       0               0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/20/2011 2:51 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 18th St -- Empire Ave                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10675706
 CITY/STATE: Bend, OR                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Nov 01 2011
                     193            322                          Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                 2.6        0.9
                        53    43    97
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 4.7 3.1

       364   110                          163   454
                                                                                                                  1.1   0.9                       0.6      1.1
             405             0.89         277
                                                                                                                        1.7                       1.4
       556   41                           14    533
                                                                                                                  1.4   0.0                       0.0      2.1

                        34    49    31
                                                                                                                               0.0 2.0 3.2

                        98          114
                                                                                                                               2.0        1.8



                              1                                                                                                 0    1    0


                                                                                                                        0                          1

             4                              0                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          0


                              4                                                                                                 0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                           NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                    18th St                         18th St                Empire Ave                   Empire Ave
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        1           3       2    0         10       4       6   0     3     27      0      0     2       27     10       0           95
     4:05 PM        3           4       1    0          9       6       3   0     5     26      5      0     0       24      7       0           93
     4:10 PM        0           0       2    0          7       3       5   0     3     25      2      0     1       16     14       0           78
     4:15 PM        5           2       0    0          3       3       1   0     4     23      3      0     0       23      7       0           74
     4:20 PM        3           2       0    0          8       1       2   0     8     30      2      0     0       27     10       0           93
     4:25 PM        1           1       0    0          6       1       5   0     2     31      2      0     0       15     12       0           76
     4:30 PM        0           0       2    0          8       7       3   0     3     27      1      0     1       30     10       0           92
     4:35 PM        9           6       1    0         11       3       7   0    11     30      2      0     1       25     13       0          119
     4:40 PM        2           2       3    0          7       0       2   0     5     36      1      0     1       17      9       0           85
     4:45 PM        2           5       6    0          7       3       4   0     7     26      3      0     2       20     18       0          103
     4:50 PM        1           5       2    0          7       1       2   0    13     35      2      0     4       29     12       0          113
     4:55 PM        1           3       2    0          5       4       4   0     7     27      7      0     1       29     10       0          100             1121
     5:00 PM        1           3       1    0          9       2       2   0    10     35      3      0     0       20     13       0           99             1125
     5:05 PM        5           2       2    0          6       9       4   0    10     46      8      0     0       24     15       0          131             1163
     5:10 PM        0           4       1    0         11       5       7   0     9     27      3      0     2       37     19       0          125             1210
     5:15 PM        4           4       4    0          8       2       5   0    18     38      2      0     1       13     14       0          113             1249
     5:20 PM        5           7       0    0         11       2       5   0    10     39      2      0     1       29     15       0          126             1282
     5:25 PM        1           5       4    0          7       7       5   0     2     36      5      0     0       19     18       0          109             1315
     5:30 PM        3           3       5    0          8       5       6   0     8     30      3      0     1       15      7       0           94             1317
     5:35 PM        2           3       0    0         11       2       6   0     6     33      1      0     1       13     12       0           90             1288
     5:40 PM        0           7       2    0          7       1       2   0     8     29      2      0     2       27      9       0           96             1299
     5:45 PM        3           7       1    0          9       7       7   0     8     27      3      0     0       24      8       0          104             1300
     5:50 PM        0           1       0    0          4       5       3   0     6     20      1      0     1       16     12       0           69             1256
     5:55 PM        1           3       0    0          6       2       2   0     3     23      0      0     0       18     14       0           72             1228
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     36          40      28    0        100      64     64    0   148    444     52      0    12      296   192        0                  1476
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0               4       4       0         0      4      0            0        4      4                           20
  Pedestrians                   0                               0                        4                            0                                   4
   Bicycles         0           0       0               0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/20/2011 2:51 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Appendix B
Existing Tube Counts
Type of report: Tube Count - Volume Data                                                                                                   Page 1 of 1
 LOCATION: Empire Ave East of NE 18th St                                                                                QC JOB #: 10701003
 SPECIFIC LOCATION: 0 ft from                                                                                           DIRECTION: EB
 CITY/STATE: Bend, OR                                                                                          DATE: Jan 31 2012 - Jan 31 2012
                  Mon          Tue         Wed   Thu   Fri   Average Weekday    Sat   Sun       Average Week            Average Week Profile
Start Time                  31-Jan-12                          Hourly Traffic                   Hourly Traffic
 12:00 AM                        10                                 10                                  10
  1:00 AM                         6                                  6                                   6
  2:00 AM                         6                                  6                                   6
  3:00 AM                        11                                 11                                  11
  4:00 AM                         8                                  8                                   8
  5:00 AM                        31                                 31                                  31
  6:00 AM                        95                                 95                                  95
  7:00 AM                       292                                292                                 292
  8:00 AM                       305                                305                                 305
  9:00 AM                       211                                211                                 211
 10:00 AM                       247                                247                                 247
 11:00 AM                       251                                251                                 251
 12:00 PM                       302                                302                                 302
  1:00 PM                       285                                285                                 285
  2:00 PM                       350                                350                                 350
  3:00 PM                       406                                406                                 406
  4:00 PM                       463                                463                                 463
  5:00 PM                       467                                467                                 467
  6:00 PM                       304                                304                                 304
  7:00 PM                       215                                215                                 215
  8:00 PM                       148                                148                                 148
  9:00 PM                        79                                 79                                  79
 10:00 PM                        47                                 47                                  47
 11:00 PM                        18                                 18                                  18
 Day Total                     4557                               4557                                4557
% Weekday
                            100.0%
 Average
  % Week
                            100.0%                                100.0%
  Average
  AM Peak                    8:00 AM                             8:00 AM                             8:00 AM
   Volume                      305                                 305                                 305
  PM Peak                    5:00 PM                             5:00 PM                             5:00 PM
   Volume                      467                                 467                                 467
 Comments:

Report generated on 2/1/2012 10:15 AM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of report: Tube Count - Volume Data                                                                                                   Page 1 of 1
 LOCATION: Empire Ave East of NE 18th St                                                                                QC JOB #: 10701003
 SPECIFIC LOCATION: 0 ft from                                                                                           DIRECTION: WB
 CITY/STATE: Bend, OR                                                                                          DATE: Jan 31 2012 - Jan 31 2012
                  Mon          Tue         Wed   Thu   Fri   Average Weekday    Sat   Sun       Average Week            Average Week Profile
Start Time                  31-Jan-12                          Hourly Traffic                   Hourly Traffic
 12:00 AM                        10                                 10                                  10
  1:00 AM                         0                                  0                                   0
  2:00 AM                         4                                  4                                   4
  3:00 AM                         7                                  7                                   7
  4:00 AM                        19                                 19                                  19
  5:00 AM                        57                                 57                                  57
  6:00 AM                       157                                157                                 157
  7:00 AM                       573                                573                                 573
  8:00 AM                       390                                390                                 390
  9:00 AM                       234                                234                                 234
 10:00 AM                       232                                232                                 232
 11:00 AM                       295                                295                                 295
 12:00 PM                       335                                335                                 335
  1:00 PM                       287                                287                                 287
  2:00 PM                       358                                358                                 358
  3:00 PM                       433                                433                                 433
  4:00 PM                       414                                414                                 414
  5:00 PM                       421                                421                                 421
  6:00 PM                       245                                245                                 245
  7:00 PM                       145                                145                                 145
  8:00 PM                       192                                192                                 192
  9:00 PM                        75                                 75                                  75
 10:00 PM                        31                                 31                                  31
 11:00 PM                        19                                 19                                  19
 Day Total                     4933                               4933                                4933
% Weekday
                            100.0%
 Average
  % Week
                            100.0%                                100.0%
  Average
  AM Peak                    7:00 AM                             7:00 AM                             7:00 AM
   Volume                      573                                 573                                 573
  PM Peak                    3:00 PM                             3:00 PM                             3:00 PM
   Volume                      433                                 433                                 433
 Comments:

Report generated on 2/1/2012 10:15 AM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of report: Tube Count - Volume Data                                                                                                   Page 1 of 1
 LOCATION: NE 18th St South of Empire Ave                                                                               QC JOB #: 10701004
 SPECIFIC LOCATION: 0 ft from                                                                                           DIRECTION: NB
 CITY/STATE: Bend, OR                                                                                          DATE: Jan 31 2012 - Jan 31 2012
                  Mon          Tue         Wed   Thu   Fri   Average Weekday    Sat   Sun       Average Week            Average Week Profile
Start Time                  31-Jan-12                          Hourly Traffic                   Hourly Traffic
 12:00 AM                         2                                  2                                   2
  1:00 AM                         1                                  1                                   1
  2:00 AM                         3                                  3                                   3
  3:00 AM                         3                                  3                                   3
  4:00 AM                         5                                  5                                   5
  5:00 AM                         9                                  9                                   9
  6:00 AM                        21                                 21                                  21
  7:00 AM                        44                                 44                                  44
  8:00 AM                        41                                 41                                  41
  9:00 AM                        30                                 30                                  30
 10:00 AM                        37                                 37                                  37
 11:00 AM                        44                                 44                                  44
 12:00 PM                        69                                 69                                  69
  1:00 PM                        55                                 55                                  55
  2:00 PM                        59                                 59                                  59
  3:00 PM                        63                                 63                                  63
  4:00 PM                        57                                 57                                  57
  5:00 PM                        73                                 73                                  73
  6:00 PM                        59                                 59                                  59
  7:00 PM                        42                                 42                                  42
  8:00 PM                        28                                 28                                  28
  9:00 PM                        13                                 13                                  13
 10:00 PM                        11                                 11                                  11
 11:00 PM                         6                                  6                                   6
 Day Total                      775                                775                                 775
% Weekday
                            100.0%
 Average
  % Week
                            100.0%                                100.0%
  Average
  AM Peak                    7:00 AM                             7:00 AM                             7:00 AM
   Volume                       44                                  44                                  44
  PM Peak                    5:00 PM                             5:00 PM                             5:00 PM
   Volume                       73                                  73                                  73
 Comments:

Report generated on 2/1/2012 10:15 AM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of report: Tube Count - Volume Data                                                                                                   Page 1 of 1
 LOCATION: NE 18th St South of Empire Ave                                                                               QC JOB #: 10701004
 SPECIFIC LOCATION: 0 ft from                                                                                           DIRECTION: SB
 CITY/STATE: Bend, OR                                                                                          DATE: Jan 31 2012 - Jan 31 2012
                  Mon          Tue         Wed   Thu   Fri   Average Weekday    Sat   Sun       Average Week            Average Week Profile
Start Time                  31-Jan-12                          Hourly Traffic                   Hourly Traffic
 12:00 AM                         3                                  3                                   3
  1:00 AM                         1                                  1                                   1
  2:00 AM                         2                                  2                                   2
  3:00 AM                         6                                  6                                   6
  4:00 AM                        15                                 15                                  15
  5:00 AM                        19                                 19                                  19
  6:00 AM                        59                                 59                                  59
  7:00 AM                       123                                123                                 123
  8:00 AM                        89                                 89                                  89
  9:00 AM                        60                                 60                                  60
 10:00 AM                        54                                 54                                  54
 11:00 AM                        57                                 57                                  57
 12:00 PM                        85                                 85                                  85
  1:00 PM                        80                                 80                                  80
  2:00 PM                        95                                 95                                  95
  3:00 PM                       101                                101                                 101
  4:00 PM                        61                                 61                                  61
  5:00 PM                        92                                 92                                  92
  6:00 PM                        56                                 56                                  56
  7:00 PM                        16                                 16                                  16
  8:00 PM                        19                                 19                                  19
  9:00 PM                        18                                 18                                  18
 10:00 PM                        14                                 14                                  14
 11:00 PM                         3                                  3                                   3
 Day Total                     1128                               1128                                1128
% Weekday
                            100.0%
 Average
  % Week
                            100.0%                                100.0%
  Average
  AM Peak                    7:00 AM                             7:00 AM                             7:00 AM
   Volume                      123                                 123                                 123
  PM Peak                    3:00 PM                             3:00 PM                             3:00 PM
   Volume                      101                                 101                                 101
 Comments:

Report generated on 2/1/2012 10:15 AM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
                                   Appendix C
Existing Intersection Vehicle Classification Counts (AM)
                                                                                                     10690702 - Empire St & 18th St.xlsx                                                                                                          SBT

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: 18th St & Empire St
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Southbound Thru

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:05 AM        0              1                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:10 AM        0              3                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:15 AM        0              0                3           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:20 AM        0              1                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
7:25 AM        0              6                3           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                10
7:30 AM        0              4                2           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                7
7:35 AM        0              4                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                8
7:40 AM        0              3                6           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
7:45 AM        0              5                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
7:50 AM        0              1                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
7:55 AM        0              0                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:00 AM        0              1                3           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
8:05 AM        0              2                1           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:10 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:15 AM        0              1                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
8:20 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:25 AM        0              3                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:30 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:35 AM        0              1                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:40 AM        0              4                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
8:45 AM        0              1                3           0            0               0               0                1             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
8:50 AM        0              2                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:55 AM        0              3                0           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
Total          0              49              60           4            2               0               0                1             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     116
 %          0.00%          42.24%           51.72%      3.45%        1.72%           0.00%           0.00%            0.86%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                     10690702 - Empire St & 18th St.xlsx                                                                                                          SBL

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: 18th St & Empire St
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Southbound Left

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              1                6           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                7
7:05 AM        0              3                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                8
7:10 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:15 AM        0              1                9           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                10
7:20 AM        0              3               10           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                13
7:25 AM        0              4                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                8
7:30 AM        0              6                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                11
7:35 AM        0              3                6           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
7:40 AM        0              8                6           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                15
7:45 AM        0              4                3           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                8
7:50 AM        0              4                8           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                12
7:55 AM        0              2                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:00 AM        0              1                3           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
8:05 AM        0              2                2           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
8:10 AM        0              3                7           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                10
8:15 AM        0              1                8           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
8:20 AM        0              4                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                8
8:25 AM        0              3                7           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                10
8:30 AM        0              4                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                7
8:35 AM        1              5               11           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                17
8:40 AM        0              3               10           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                13
8:45 AM        0              8               10           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                18
8:50 AM        0              3                7           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                10
8:55 AM        0              2                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
Total          1              80              140          3            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     225
 %          0.44%          35.56%           62.22%      1.33%        0.44%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                     10690702 - Empire St & 18th St.xlsx                                                                                                          SBR

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: 18th St & Empire St
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Southbound Right

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:05 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:10 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:15 AM        0              3                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
7:20 AM        0              5                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                8
7:25 AM        0              4                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
7:30 AM        0              4                9           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                14
7:35 AM        0              3                8           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                11
7:40 AM        0              4               14           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                18
7:45 AM        0              0                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
7:50 AM        0              2                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
7:55 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:00 AM        0              3                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:05 AM        0              0                4           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
8:10 AM        0              0                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:15 AM        0              1                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
8:20 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:25 AM        0              1                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
8:30 AM        0              1                3           1            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
8:35 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:40 AM        0              1                4           2            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                7
8:45 AM        0              1                7           1            0               0               1                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                10
8:50 AM        0              2                3           0            0               0               0                1             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
8:55 AM        0              1                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
Total          0              42              94           5            2               0               1                1             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     145
 %          0.00%          28.97%           64.83%      3.45%        1.38%           0.00%           0.69%            0.69%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                     10690702 - Empire St & 18th St.xlsx                                                                                                          NBT

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: 18th St & Empire St
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Northbound Thru

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:05 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:10 AM        0              0                1           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:15 AM        0              0                1           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:20 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:25 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:30 AM        0              3                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:35 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:40 AM        0              0                2           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:45 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:50 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:55 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:00 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:05 AM        0              0                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:10 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:15 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:20 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:25 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:30 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:35 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:40 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:45 AM        0              0                1           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:50 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:55 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
Total          0              16              27           2            2               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      47
 %          0.00%          34.04%           57.45%      4.26%        4.26%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                     10690702 - Empire St & 18th St.xlsx                                                                                                          NBL

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: 18th St & Empire St
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Northbound Left

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:05 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:10 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              2               0              0               0                0                2
7:15 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:20 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:25 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:30 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:35 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:40 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:45 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:50 AM        0               0               1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:55 AM        0               0               1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:00 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:05 AM        0               0               1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:10 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:15 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:20 AM        0               0               1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:25 AM        0               0               2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:30 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:35 AM        0               1               2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:40 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:45 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:50 AM        0               0               0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:55 AM        0               0               1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
Total          0               1               9           0            0               0               0                0             0              2               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
 %          0.00%           8.33%           75.00%      0.00%        0.00%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%         16.67%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                     10690702 - Empire St & 18th St.xlsx                                                                                                          NBR

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: 18th St & Empire St
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Northbound Right

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:05 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:10 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:15 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:20 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:25 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:30 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:35 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:40 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:45 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:50 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:55 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:00 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:05 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:10 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:15 AM        0              0                0           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:20 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:25 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:30 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:35 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:40 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:45 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:50 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:55 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
Total          0              3                8           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
 %          0.00%          25.00%           66.67%      0.00%        8.33%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
