19
                                                                                               Attachment 1
                                                                                               O14-23
                                                                                               R14-106
                                                                                               R14-107
                                                                                               R14-113

                                                 BACKGROUND REPORT
COMMENTS:

This request includes two applications associated with Assessor’s Parcel 44-120B: (1) a reclassification
(RC1300290) of 2.92 acres from the A-1, Agricultural Zoning District, to the B-2, Urban Commercial Zoning
District; and (2) a Conditional Use Permit (CUP1300291) (CUP) to allow two drive-through facilities within the
Highway Corridor (HC) Overlay Zoning District, for the development of food service/restaurants with a drive-
through.




                                                Current Zoning Map

Existing Conditions

The property contains one single-family residence, built in 1958, on the northern corner of the property. Access to
the house is through a private driveway from Warrenton Road. The remainder of the site is primarily open and
gently slopes down toward the frontage along McWhirt Loop. There are no streams, drainages, or wetlands, and no
known cemeteries are located on the property.

Issue 1: Reclassification

The applicant is requesting reclassification from the A-1, Agricultural Zoning District, to the B-2, Urban Commercial
Zoning District for 2.92 acres for the development of food service/restaurants and general commercial facilities.
The property has been zoned A-1, Agricultural since zoning was established in Stafford County.
                                                                                             Attachment 1
                                                                                             O14-23
                                                                                             R14-106
                                                                                             R14-107
                                                                                             R14-113
                                                                                             Page 2




                                                Aerial Photograph

Generalized Development Plan

The Generalized Development Plan (GDP) (Attachment 6) depicts how the commercial development is proposed
on the site. The development will have two access points – a right-in/right-out off of Warrenton Road and a full
access point off of McWhirt Loop. An inter-parcel connection to the adjacent parcel (to the west) will also be
provided. The GDP shows three buildings proposed, including a coffee shop, fast food restaurant, and general
retail or sit-down restaurant. All proposed buildings front Warrenton Road. Two shared loading spaces are shown
to the rear of the buildings on McWhirt Loop. The coffee shop and fast food uses include drive-through facilities,
which require a CUP within the HC Overlay Zoning District (see Issue 2 below).
                                                                                               Attachment 1
                                                                                               O14-23
                                                                                               R14-106
                                                                                               R14-107
                                                                                               R14-113
                                                                                               Page 3




                                           Generalized Development Plan

Architectural Design

The applicant proffered that the primary exterior material for all buildings shall be brick, split block, stone, or
masonry construction; or use stucco or hardi-plank. Additionally, all buildings shall utilize compatible colors and
materials. Limited use of Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS) shall be permitted only for architectural
elements such as cornices, soffits, columns, accent areas, and building sign areas. The applicant also proffered that
the color, design, and materials used on all signs will be coordinated with the architectural design of the buildings
located on the site.

No specific architectural renderings were supplied with the application. However, due to the site’s location within
the HC Overlay Zoning District, all buildings must conform to the Neighborhood Design Standards Manual, which
includes architectural design standards. This allows for a review of the building designs at the site plan and
building permit stages of development, when specific users are known.

Transportation Impacts

The Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) Determination Form (Attachment 8) submitted with this application
calculated that the site would generate, at its highest volume, approximately 4,117 vehicle trips per day (VPD) and
458 AM and 272 PM peak vehicle trips per hour (VPH). The applicant submitted a TIA, which was sent to the
Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) for its review and comment (Attachment 9). The TIA evaluated the
site’s impact on the surrounding traffic network. Planned developments in the vicinity of the site and widening
plans for Warrenton Road were included in the TIA.
                                                                                              Attachment 1
                                                                                              O14-23
                                                                                              R14-106
                                                                                              R14-107
                                                                                              R14-113
                                                                                              Page 4

The TIA evaluated the impact on the following existing intersections: Warrenton Road and McWhirt
Loop/Litchfield Boulevard, and McWhirt Loop and CVS Pharmacy entrance. The TIA also evaluated the impact on
the following proposed intersections: McWhirt Loop and Site Driveway #1, and Warrenton Road and Site
Driveway #2. Time horizons included current existing conditions and future year 2017 background and build-out
conditions, both of which include the future widening of Warrenton Road to six lanes.

The Transportation Plan of the Comprehensive Plan recommends achieving a Level of Service (LOS) of C at
impacted intersections or road segments. Policy 6.7.7 states that if achieving LOS C is not practical, improvements
should be designed to not further degrade the LOS. LOS degradation can also include an increase in delay time. In
this area, there are several intersections along Warrenton Road that either currently experience a LOS below C or
will experience a LOS below C during peak AM/PM periods in future year conditions without this project. The
study findings show that the intersection of Warrenton Road and McWhirt Loop/Litchfield Boulevard would
operate at a LOS C (with a delay time of 34 seconds) during AM peak period and a LOS D (with a delay time of 40
seconds) during PM peak period in 2017 without this project. With full build-out of this project and the additional
northbound left turn lane onto McWhirt Loop, the same intersection would operate at a LOS D (with a delay time of
44 seconds) during AM peak period and a LOS D (with a delay time of 45 seconds) during PM peak period. Due to
the degradation in LOS and increase in delay, the project is inconsistent with Comprehensive Plan Policy 6.7.7.

Staff notes that the information presented here is from a revised version of the TIA, which was reviewed and
commented on by VDOT. The latest comments provided from VDOT are advisory in nature, but do express concern
with the development’s impact on the Warrenton Road and McWhirt Loop/Litchfield Boulevard intersection as
previously noted. Additionally, VDOT suggests examining the feasibility of a right-in/right-out shared driveway
between the subject parcel and the parcel to the west from Warrenton Road instead of the currently proposed
access point that only serves the subject parcel. The shared driveway would allow equal access to the two parcels.
In 2008, the adjacent parcel (to the west) was reclassified to permit commercial uses. Staff supports this idea, but
acknowledges the challenges of coordinating between two properties with different ownership and development
schedules. Also, the adjacent property did not anticipate shared access.

To accommodate dual-left turn lanes from northbound Warrenton Road as part of the widening project, this
project will include construction of an additional receiving lane along McWhirt Loop that would transition to a
dedicated right turn lane into the project. This addresses one of the major concerns expressed by VDOT when
initially reviewing the project. Staff notes that the development must comply with all established sight distance
requirements, which will be reviewed at the time of site plan submission.

Overall, the proposed development can be accommodated with marginal impact to the existing road network and
planned six-lane widening of Warrenton Road. The TIA suggests VDOT consider signal timing modifications along
the Warrenton Road corridor to maximize performance of the intersections as part of the road widening project.
                                                                                              Attachment 1
                                                                                              O14-23
                                                                                              R14-106
                                                                                              R14-107
                                                                                              R14-113
                                                                                              Page 5

Comprehensive Plan

The Land Use Plan designation for the property is commercial corridor within a suburban area. Commercial
corridors are intended to encourage commercial activities where there are adequate transportation facilities to
accommodate proposed uses. Infill development and the reuse of underdeveloped commercial sites are
encouraged.

The proposed development is consistent with the recommended future land-use. This proposal allows
neighborhood-serving commercial uses, consistent with recommendations in the Land Use Plan and does not affect
any nearby residential communities.

The site also lies within the Southern Gateway Redevelopment Area (RDA). The Southern Gateway RDA was
approved as a part of the Master Redevelopment Plan (RDA Plan), adopted by the Board of Supervisors in May,
2011. The RDA Plan includes a land-use concept for a portion of the Southern Gateway RDA, including a grid street
system to optimize pedestrian and vehicle circulation; mixed-use blocks with enclosed parking to foster residential
and office uses over first-floor commercial; open space, and pedestrian-friendly environments. In accordance with
the RDA land-use concept, staff was able to request that the proposed buildings be moved forward on the site with
more parking located to the rear. The applicant was able to comply with this RDA priority, and moved the
buildings closer to Warrenton Road.




                                               Future Land Use Map
                                                                                                Attachment 1
                                                                                                O14-23
                                                                                                R14-106
                                                                                                R14-107
                                                                                                R14-113
                                                                                                Page 6

Fiscal Impacts

The applicant’s Impact Statement (Attachment 7) estimates that the project at build-out will generate
approximately $16,082.75 annually in County real estate and business property tax revenue, and add new full and
part-time jobs. Sales and meals tax will add significantly to this revenue projection, but are not included in this
estimate because final users are not yet under contract. The costs associated with the project were not quantified,
but should be minimal, potentially increasing fire and rescue and utilities service demands.

Fire and Rescue

Staff with the Department of Fire and Rescue requested that the applicant provide and maintain National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) standards, including thirteen fire sprinkler systems in the three
commercial/restaurant buildings, where they may otherwise not be required, for the purpose of mitigating
impacts to Fire and Rescue Services. The applicant has not complied with this request.

Proffer Summary (for the Zoning Reclassification) (Attachment 10)

The applicant submitted proffers with their request establishing standards for the development of the site and
improvements and contributions to be made to mitigate the impacts of the development. The proposed proffers
would:

   •   Restrict ingress and egress to one full-service entrance on McWhirt Loop and one right-in/right-out
       entrance on Warrenton Road;
   •   Provide an inter-parcel connection to neighboring Tax Map Parcel 44-101A;
   •   Provide an additional through lane along McWhirt Loop with appropriate intersection transition;
   •   Provide additional easements and/or right-of-way for revised drainage construction by VDOT along
       Warrenton Road;
   •   Provide a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees in any screening areas, with a minimum of 50%
       evergreens;
   •   Restrict the combined uses constructed and/or operated on the property to those that generate no more
       than 4,117 average total vehicle trips per day, including 458 AM peak hour trips and 272 PM peak hour
       trips;
   •   Prohibit some uses, which would otherwise be allowed in a B-2 Zoning District;
   •   Restrict the maximum building height to 40 feet or less;
   •   Establish building architecture standards;
   •   Require that the color, design, and materials of all signs be coordinated with the architectural design of the
       buildings on site;
   •   Provide a directional sign at the McWhirt Loop full service entrance directing exiting traffic to utilize Banks
       Ford Parkway to reach northbound Warrenton Road;
   •   Require all fencing, including fencing surrounding the dumpster, to be constructed of brick, split block,
       stone or masonry materials, stucco, or hardiplank; and
   •   Require that the existing residence, well, and septic system be removed within 90 days of the approval of
       the first site plan for the property.
                                                                                                 Attachment 1
                                                                                                 O14-23
                                                                                                 R14-106
                                                                                                 R14-107
                                                                                                 R14-113
                                                                                                 Page 7

Evaluation Criteria (for the Zoning Reclassification):

County Code Section 28-206 lists twelve criteria to be considered at each public hearing for a reclassification. A
summary of the criteria is as follows:

1.     Compliance of the request with the stated requirements of the district or districts involved - The request is
       in compliance with the stated requirements of the B-2 Zoning District. The proposed layout also generally
       conforms to HC Overlay Zoning District standards.

2.     The existing use and character of the property and the surrounding property - An older residential dwelling
       is currently located on the property. The remainder of the site is open field. Surrounding properties are either
       currently developed with commercial and industrial use or planned to be in the near future.

3.     The suitability of the property for various uses - The conditions of the site make it suitable for a variety of
       uses. The size and existing conditions of the site allows for multiple land bays. There is no critical resource
       protection area or wetlands located on the site.

4.     The trend of growth and development in the surrounding area - The established trend of development is
       highway commercial development on properties fronting on Warrenton Road. To the west is a largely
       undeveloped parcel with an existing church and cell phone tower. In 2008, that parcel was rezoned and is
       planned to be redeveloped into an office and retail shopping center similar in nature to the current proposal.

5.     The current and future County land requirements - This project includes the dedication of right-of-way along
       Warrenton Road and McWhirt Loop to accommodate planned road improvements. No other County needs are
       identified on the site.

6.     The transportation requirements of the project and the County, and the impact of the proposed land use on
       the County’s transportation network - Despite the transportation improvements being offered, the proposed
       development would negatively impact the existing transportation network by reducing the LOS below C or
       further degrading failing LOS at certain locations. This does not comply with Policy 6.7.7 of the
       Comprehensive Plan.

7.     Requirements for schools, parks, recreational lands, and facilities, and other public services, potentially
       generated by the proposed classification - The proposal would reduce the potential impact on parks,
       recreational lands, and schools, while increasing potential impacts to utilities and Fire and Rescue.

8.     The conservation of property values in the surrounding area - Staff believes that the project would not have
       a negative effect on any property values in the surrounding area. The uses in the project would generate
       minimal noise dust or smoke emissions. The commercial uses proposed are typical of what is currently found
       along the Warrenton Road corridor.

9.     The preservation of natural resources and the impact of the proposed uses on the natural environment -
       The site does not contain sensitive natural resources.
                                                                                                Attachment 1
                                                                                                O14-23
                                                                                                R14-106
                                                                                                R14-107
                                                                                                R14-113
                                                                                                Page 8

10.    The most appropriate use of land - The Land Use Plan (Plan) recommends the area as commercial corridor in
       the suburban land-use designation. The proposed location and scale of the proposed uses in the development
       conform to the recommended location and density standards established in the Plan and fit in with the
       established development patterns on adjacent properties.

11.    The timing of the development of utilities and public facilities and the overall public costs of the
       development – Water and sewer utilities are in place to support this development. Upon development of the
       project, the applicant will be required to make any required transportation and utility improvements
       necessary for their project. Overall improvements associated with the widening of Warrenton Road will occur
       separately at a later date.

12.    The consistency, or lack thereof, of the proposed rezoning with the County’s Comprehensive Plan as in
       effect at that time - The proposal is not fully consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The type of development
       is consistent with the land use recommendations. The level of development is projected to negatively impact
       the transportation network and does not comply with Policy 6.7.7.

Issue 2: Conditional Use Permit

A CUP application was submitted concurrently with the rezoning application, for two drive-through facilities
serving a proposed fast food restaurant and coffee shop within the HC Overlay District. The purpose of the HC
overlay district is to prevent or reduce traffic congestion and distracting visual clutter, which may result in danger
on the public and private streets, through limiting certain automobile-oriented, fast service, quick turnover uses
and related signage. The proposed fast food restaurant and coffee shop would each have a drive-through window
located on the east side of the buildings.

Staff believes the layout of the drive-throughs for the fast food restaurant and coffee shop afford easy access and
provide adequate stacking areas. Other impacts of the drive-through facilities are projected to be minimal and
largely offset by the proposed conditions, as indicated below.

Proposed CUP Conditions

Staff proposes limited conditions with the CUP due to the reclassification of this property and associated proffers
that help offset any potential impacts from the project on the surrounding area. The proposed conditions are:

1.     This CUP shall be limited to two drive-through facilities within the HC, Highway Corridor Overlay Zoning
       District on Assessor’s Parcel 44-120B, as shown in the general locations depicted on the Generalized
       Development Plan (GDP), prepared by Foroughi and Associates Engineering, PLLC, dated June 3, 2014, and
       entitled “McWhirt Loop Commercial.”
2.     Loading spaces and truck delivery spaces shall be located outside of any required travel lane. Such spaces
       shall be designed to allow for an adequate turning radius to accommodate free-flowing turning movements
       to prevent temporary obstruction of travel lanes.
                                                                                                Attachment 1
                                                                                                O14-23
                                                                                                R14-106
                                                                                                R14-107
                                                                                                R14-113
                                                                                                Page 9

3.     Loading areas, dumpster pads, and trash compactors shall be located, and designed in a manner, so that
       they are completely screened from view from Warrenton Road.
4.     Drive-through lanes shall be oriented in a manner to minimize headlight glare onto state-maintained
       roadways. Where orienting the drive-through away from the corridor highway is not feasible, the applicant
       shall screen the drive-through utilizing berms and evergreen plantings to eliminate headlight glare on the
       corridor highway.
5.     Stacking lanes for drive-through facilities shall be designed so as to not impede traffic circulation.
6.     All drive-through facilities shall include a by-pass lane for vehicles not utilizing the drive-through area.
7.     All drive-through canopies shall be of coordinated color and materials as the primary structure on-site.
8.     Any canopy lighting shall be recessed within the canopy.
9.     No carnival style signs, banners, lights, balloons, or windsocks shall be utilized on the Property, except on a
       strictly temporary basis for the grand opening of a business. The use of temporary and portable electronic
       and variable message signs and flashing signs shall be prohibited at all times.
10.    This CUP may be revoked or conditions modified for violations of these conditions or any applicable
       federal, state, or County Code, law, ordinance, requirement, or regulation after applicant has been notified
       in writing by the County of said violation(s) and applicant is given a reasonable opportunity to cure said
       violation(s).

Staff believes, with the recommended conditions, this CUP will help to enhance the site’s compatibility with the
goals and standards set forth for the HC Overlay Zoning District. The general layout of the buildings, with a drive-
through as shown on the GDP, provides for adequate drive lanes and stacking areas in a manner that minimizes
transportation and visual impacts on the highway corridor.

Evaluation Criteria (for the CUP):

County Code Section 28-185 lists six criteria to be considered at each public hearing for a CUP. A summary of each
criteria are as follows:

1.     The use shall not change the character and established pattern of development in the vicinity of the
       proposed use - The proposed use does not change the character of the established pattern of development.
       The site is located in the proximity of several established commercial buildings, including a motor vehicle
       sales- facility and a pharmacy with drive-through.

2.     The use shall be in harmony with uses permitted by right under a zoning permit in the land-use district and
       shall not adversely affect the use of adjacent properties - The proposed use is in harmony with the permitted
       by right uses in the B-2 Zoning District. Staff recommended conditions to improve the quality and aesthetics of
       the proposed buildings, signs, and dumpster enclosures by conditioning consistent building design and
       materials and ensuring adequate screening.
                                                                                                        Attachment 1
                                                                                                        O14-23
                                                                                                        R14-106
                                                                                                        R14-107
                                                                                                        R14-113
                                                                                                        Page 10

3.        The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of walls and fences and the nature and
          extent of landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate
          development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof - The proposed drive-
          through facilities will not hinder or discourage appropriate development or impair the value of the land
          and/or buildings on adjacent properties. The surrounding properties are commercially zoned and include
          existing or planned highway oriented commercial uses. With the conditions proposed, staff believes the impact
          will be minimal.

4.        The use shall not adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the vicinity of the
          proposed use - The proposed use does not pose any health or safety risks to adjoining properties. Vehicle
          access points are limited through a proffer associated with the reclassification of the property. Staff
          recommends conditions to minimize attention-getting devices and other visual distractions for the safety of
          drivers on Warrenton Road.

5.        The use shall not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the
          neighborhood - The proposed use will be limited in its intensity due to the size of the property. Staff proposed
          conditions requiring that the drive-through be screened and minimizing visual distractions to Warrenton
          Road.

6.        The use shall be in accord with the purposes and intent of this chapter and the comprehensive plan of the
          county – Staff finds that the drive-through facilities with the proposed conditions are appropriate for the
          subject parcel. The proposed use of the property is in accord with the Land Use recommendations in the
          Comprehensive Plan.


SUMMARY OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE FEATURES (the reclassification and CUP applications):

POSITIVE:

     1.       The proposal is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan land-use recommendations.
     2.       THE PROPOSAL IS IN GENERAL CONFORMANCE WITH THE SOUTHERN GATEWAY REDEVELOPMENT
              AREA.
     3.       THE PROPOSAL IS CONSITITANT WITH THE COUNTY’S 2012 RETAIL STUDY, AND LIVES
              RECOMENDATIONS TO ENCOURAGE AND FACILITATE ADDITONAL QUALTIY OPPORTUNITES FOR
              RETAILERS TO BUILD IN STAFFORD.

2.        The proposal is consistent with the established and proposed development patterns on adjacent
          properties.

3.        Proffers would minimize potential visual impacts on surrounding properties.

4.        Proposed conditions would mitigate impacts to the road network and surrounding properties.
                                                                                              Attachment 1
                                                                                              O14-23
                                                                                              R14-106
                                                                                              R14-107
                                                                                              R14-113
                                                                                              Page 11
NEGATIVE:

1.     The proposal is not in conformance with the Transportation Plan of the Comprehensive Plan
       recommendations.

2.     The proposal does not meet all of the Fire and Rescue Department’s safety recommendations.

RECOMMENDATION:

Staff believes THIS PROJECT ADVANCES ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITES IN STAFFORD, AND THAT
THE benefits outweigh ANY OF the negative aspects. THEREFORE, STAFF recommends approval of proposed
Ordinance O14-23 with proffers, dated June 3, 2014. Subject to approval of the zoning reclassification, staff
recommends approval of CUP1300291 in accordance with proposed Resolution R14-107, with the proposed
conditions.

On June 11, 2014, the Planning Commission voted 4 to 1 (Mr. Gibbons voted no, and Mr. Rhodes and Mr. Coen were
absent) to recommend approval of the reclassification and CUP.
                                                                                           Attachment 2
                                                                                           O14-23
                                                                                           R14-106
                                                                                           R14-107
                                                                                           R14-113


                                          LAND USE ACTION REQUEST

                                           BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

                                                Date: July 1, 2014



[ X ] New                             [ ] Revised                    [ ] Unfinished

REQUEST:      (1) Reclassify 2.85 acres from the A-1, Agricultural Zoning District, to the B-2, Urban Commercial
              Zoning District; and (2) approve a CUP to allow two drive-through facilities within the Highway
              Corridor (HC) Overlay Zoning District.

Conforms with Comprehensive Plan? [X] Yes [ ] No [ ] N/A

CONDITIONS: See Proposed Ordinance O14-23 and Proposed Resolution R14-107

APPLICANT:

Name:         Eric Gordon
              Frontier Development, LLC

Agent:        H. Clark Leming
              Leming and Healy P.C.

Address:      223 Garrisonville Road, Suite 204
              Stafford, VA 22554



PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION:                         Approve [ X ]      Deny [ ]

At a meeting on June 11, 2014, the Planning Commission voted 4 to 1 (Mr. Gibbons voted no, and Mr. Rhodes and
Mr. Coen were absent) to recommend approval of the reclassification and conditional use permit.

TIMING:

Application Date                      April 16, 2014

Advertisement Date/s                  June 17, 2014 and June 24, 2014

Plan. Comm. Action Date               June 11, 2014                   (Required) August 11, 2014

Proposed Board Action Date            July 1, 2014                    (Required) April 16, 2015
                                                                                                                           Attachment 3
                                                                                                                             Page 1 of 1




                            VD
     M
      C




                          BL
                                                                                          RECLASSIFICATION RC1300290
      W




                                                              R
          H




                         D




                                                          D
          IR




                         EL




                                                      N
                                                                                       CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT CUP1300291
           T




                       FI




                                                      O
           LO




                                               TI
                     CH
                   _
                   ^



                                             TA
               O
                                                                                          McWHIRT LOOP COMMERCIAL

                   LI
               P




                                            AN
               R              W
                               AR




                                    PL
                                                                                          ASSESSOR'S PARCEL 44-120B
             YD

                                    R




                                                               NELMS CIR
                              TR        EN
           WA




                                   AD        TO
                                                  N
          LE




                                        E             R
                                            ST            D
               Y
               W
              PK




                       WA
                          R
          RD




                              RE
                                   NT
          FO




                                                                                           D
                                        ON



                                                                                          R
                                                                                        EE
                                                  RD
      S
    NK




                                                                                   TR
    BA




                                                                                  N
                                                                                EE
                                                                               R
                                                                              G




                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                     LV
                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                           EL
                                                                                                                      FI
                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                           LI


                                                                                          SITE




                                                                                                                                           SE BR
                                                                                       TM: 44-120B




                                                                                                                                            NG D I
                                                                           MCW HIR T
                                                                                       L OOP




                                                                                                                                                 R
          DR
      AY
     W
    LE




¯
0   125    250          500
                                                                Feet
                                                              750
                                                                                 07-01-14                         Stafford County Department of
                                                                                                                  Planning & Zoning
                                                                                                                  P.O. Box 339
                                                                                                                  Stafford, VA 22555
                                                                                                                  (540) 658-8668
                                                                                           Attachment 4
                                                                                            Page 1 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

2.     RC1300290; Reclassification – McWhirt Loop Commercial - A proposed reclassification from the
       A-1, Agricultural Zoning District to the B-2, Urban Commercial Zoning District, with proffered
       conditions, to allow for the development of commercial retail, service, and/or restaurant uses on
       Assessor's Parcel 44-120B, consisting of 2.92 acres, located on the south side of Warrenton Road
       at the intersection of McWhirt Loop, within the Hartwood Election District. (Time Limit:
       August 12, 2014)

3.     CUP1300291; Conditional Use Permit – McWhirt Loop Commercial - A request for a Conditional
       Use Permit (CUP) to allow two (2) drive-through facilities within the HC, Highway Corridor
       Overlay Zoning District. The drive-through facilities are for a proposed fast food restaurant and
       coffee shop. The site is on Assessor's Parcel 44-120B and is the subject of a concurrent
       reclassification request from the A-1, Agricultural to the B-2, Urban Commercial Zoning District.
       The property consists of 2.92 acres, located on the south side of Warrenton Road at the
       intersection of McWhirt Loop, within the Hartwood Election District. (Time Limit: August 12,
       2014)

Mr. Harvey: Yes Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Rhodes: Okay, very good. So the Reclassification and the Conditional Use Permit of McWhirt Loop
Commercial.

Mr. Harvey: Thank you Mr. Chairman. Please recognize John Harbin for the combined presentations for
items 2 and 3.

Mr. Harbin: Good evening Mr. Chairman, Planning Commissioners, my name is John Harbin. This is
items 2 and 3 on the agenda, Reclassification and Conditional Use Permit for McWhirt Loop Commercial.
Computer please. So, we will split this up between the reclassification and CUP, and to start off with the
reclassification, this is proposed to go from A-1 to B-2, Urban Commercial…

Mr. Gibbons: So you’re combining both public hearings?

Mr. Rhodes: Yes sir, we’ll do both presentations and then allow comments. Thank you very much Mr.
Gibbons for clarification.

Mr. Harbin: Yes, thank you. The applicant is Leming and Healy for Frontier Development and it’s on
Assessor’s Parcel 44-120B, just under 3 acres in size. So this is the location and zoning of the current
parcel. It is outlined here in the light blue, with the tag line of sight. It is located at the intersection of
Warrenton Road, McWhirt Loop, and Litchfield Boulevard. It’s currently zoned A-1, like I mentioned,
but it’s surrounded by B-2 and M-1 zoned properties. It is also, as you can see, within the Highway
Corridor Overlay District so certain regulations apply to this site that are included in that, in addition to
the underlying zoning. For the existing conditions, the site is undeveloped largely right now; it does have
one single-family house on it, circa-1970s or so. The rest of the site is in a field state with small trees and
shrubs, generally flat--there are no streams, wetlands, or any known archaeological resources at this time.
It is also directly across from the Wawa along Route 17, which is right here circled in red. There is a
CVS pharmacy located to the southeast. This area, located directly to the south, is an industrial office
park condo development. And then the property directly to the west is an undeveloped parcel of land
which underwent a rezoning back in the late 2000s to B-2 and M-1. That’s slated for kind of commercial
office uses as well. So this is the proposed Generalized Development Plan as it stands right now. There
                                                Page 1 of 22
                                                                                         Attachment 4
                                                                                          Page 2 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

are three buildings proposed; you have building A here, building B, and building C. There are two access
points; one full access point along McWhirt Loop to the south of the property. You have a right in/right
out proposed along Warrenton Road at the north end of the property. You also have sidewalk along the
perimeter of the site and internal access for pedestrians as well. You have dumpsters located for each
building generally close to the building. The loading spaces are located towards the rear of the property,
back here which recognizes a less than ideal location but because of the level of development that’s
included in here, that was generally the best site for it. Just to note, you do have an existing cell phone
tower located just offsite to the west. That is proposed to be there for the foreseeable future. So with this
reclassification, there are several proposed proffers the applicant has provided. Like I said, they will
restrict ingress and egress to those two entrances, one off McWhirt Loop, one off Warrenton Road. They
will provide an inter-parcel connection to the neighboring parcel there to the west. They will provide an
additional through lane along McWhirt Loop which we’ll talk about in greater detail; that’s basically a
new receiving lane as you make a left turn from Warrenton Road onto McWhirt Loop. They will provide
additional easements for the construction of the Route 17 project. They will provide a screening mix of
evergreen deciduous trees; restrict the uses that will be operated onsite to no more than 4,117 average
total vehicle trips per day. And they also proffered the peak a.m. and peak p.m. trips as well. They
prohibit some uses that would otherwise be zoned… or be allowed in B-2 zoning districts such as a flea
market, funeral service uses…

Mr. Gibbons: Are they in the proffers?

Mr. Harbin: Yes, all of these items are listed in the proffers. They also restrict the maximum building
height to 40 feet, establish building architectural standards, and they require all signs that will be built
onsite to be coordinated with the building design. All fencing, including that surrounding the dumpsters,
will be of brick or stone construction, and the existing residence well and septic will be removed as well.
So, for the transportation on this project, they did submit a Transportation Impact Analysis, like I
mentioned. That report stated that there would be 4,117 vehicle trips per day from this site; 458 a.m. and
272 p.m. peak vehicle trips per hour. Like I mentioned, those numbers are proffered so they should not
exceed that. This TIA did take into account the development of the subject site, all Route 17
improvements, and other planned projects in the vicinity. And they evaluated impacts on several
intersections. The one I think most important concern is the Warrenton Road, McWhirt Loop, and
Litchfield Boulevard intersection. The impacts to that are negative. There is a decrease in Level of
Service and an increase in delay time as a result of this project; specifically, a.m. Level of Service
decreases from C to D and there is an increase in about 10 seconds of delay time. The p.m. peak hour
trips of the Level of Service maintains a D but there is an increase in delay time from this project. All
things else held constant. This is inconsistent with our Comprehensive Plan Transportation Plan policy, I
think it’s 6.6.7 which states that if Level of Service C is not practical, any improvements should be… any
improvements should be made to not degrade Level of Service any more. They do propose improvements
which will discuss mainly that additional receiving lane onto McWhirt Loop, but even with that
improvement there is still an impact on the Level of Service. So, to get into details with what the
improvements they are providing as part of the Route 17 project, VDOT will build two left-turn lanes on
northbound Route 17 onto McWhirt Loop. The applicant will then construct an additional receiving lane
along McWhirt Loop which will then transition into a right turn lane into their development. This is
shown on their GDP here in the shaded area here. This is the receiving lane coming in and then a
dedicated right turn lane into their development. I will note that when they made this improvement on
their GDP, they actually moved the access point on McWhirt Loop approximately a hundred feet closer to
the intersection. VDOT commented on this requesting clarification as to why this change was made. We
haven’t received any information from the applicant at this time, but that’s certainly an issue to address
                                               Page 2 of 22
                                                                                       Attachment 4
                                                                                        Page 3 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

because in doing so there is no curb and gutter along the remaining portion of McWhirt Loop which is
inconsistent with the other part of the property.

Mr. Apicella: Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry…

Mr. Rhodes: Please.

Mr. Apicella: Before you go on, could you kind of give me a sense of where the CVS exit would be in
relationship to what you’re showing us here?

Mr. Harbin: I think my best guess would put it somewhere in this vicinity here, because it kind of comes
out right on the turn.

Mr. Apicella: Okay, the reason why I bring this up is because I use that CVS and, as you come off of 17
and you try to make a right turn into the CVS… I’m sorry, a left turn into the CVS… there’s sort of a
blind spot where you can’t see oncoming traffic and you actually have to edge forward slowly so you
make sure you’re not going to be hit as you turn into the CVS. So I’m curious if that was looked at and if
any mitigation measures were adopted as part of this plan.

Mr. Harbin: Specifically to that issue, I don’t believe so but I think with…

Mr. Apicella: Again, my concern is this might make the problem worse.

Mr. Harbin: You will have the additional clearing with the receiving lane coming off 17 onto McWhirt
Loop.

Mr. Apicella: Well, I don’t know if you’ve been there, John, but there’s a ridge…

Mr. Harbin: There’s a steep embankment, yes.

Mr. Apicella: You can’t see over that ridge as you’re coming around the bend and then you have to turn
left. You can’t see what’s coming so, even if you cut that off, unless you lower the ridge you’re still
going to have potentially the same problem.

Mr. Harbin: Right. And I think by building this receiving lane, they will have to grade out that ridge
significantly.

Mr. Apicella: But what I don’t know is how far in that ridge goes. So, yes, maybe you’re potentially
solving a problem… I’m not quite sure. Again, it is a concern. I’d like to know more about whether or
not that solves the problem or makes it worse.

Mr. Harbin: Okay. So this is the construction plan for Route 17 improvements. I just wanted to show
this for clarification purposes. You do have those two northbound left turn lanes that will feed onto
McWhirt Loop. On this plan, it only shows one lane on McWhirt Loop because, like I said, the applicant
will build that additional receiving lane on there to make it two lanes going that direction. Unfortunately
it doesn’t show the CVS entrance, but it does show the beginning of that turn as well.

Mr. Coen: Mr. Chairman?
                                               Page 3 of 22
                                                                                            Attachment 4
                                                                                             Page 4 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. Rhodes: Please.

Mr. Coen: Since you have this slide up, if I’m looking at… is it that top right-hand side, there’s the…
going east on 17, you have one lane that’s going left, the three going straight, and then there’s a definite
left-hand turn lane that goes down to the McWhirt Loop, correct?

Mr. Harbin: Yes. You’re talking about in here?

Mr. Coen: Yeah… well, actually a little bit farther up towards the right of the screen. And so just so I get
the feel, is the turn into this complex going to be in addition to that left lane or just sort of all the people
are going to come down to McWhirt, you’ll have some that are going to stop to get into here and then
there are others that will turn into the road?

Mr. Harbin: Are you speaking about that right in/right out entrance further…?

Mr. Coen: No. If I’m coming down from the right-hand side of the screen over towards McWhirt Loop,
and then you’ve gone past the entrance so hopefully we won’t back up on 17, but if I’m turning into this
complex up, you know, closer towards the right-hand side, I’m just curious how much, you know, is there
going to be like one whole lane of people who are mainly going to McWhirt Loop but all of a sudden
there’s going to be people stopping to make it in a pretty seems to be short entrance on the right. Do I get
that from the picture correctly?

Mr. Harbin: If I’m understanding correctly, you’ll have people coming southbound on Route 17. There’s
a dedicated right turn lane that runs the duration of pretty much 17… they will have the dedicated right
turn movement into the newly constructed receiving lane which will then turn into a right turn lane into
the development. That is an issue I think with the location of the current access point because it is closer
to the intersection, so that’s something to be noted for sure.

Mr. English: John, question. With all the construction stuff going on on 17, would they be doing that
anyway regardless of putting a property in there? Making that turn into McWhirt Loop because of the
CVS?

Mr. Harbin: Yes.

Mr. English: So that’s going to happen…

Mr. Harbin: Yes, those two left turn lanes are going to be built regardless.

Mr. English: No matter what.

Mr. Harbin: Correct. Now, if the current development does not build this additional receiving lane, they
would just block off that one left turn lane until it’s finally built. Okay. Another transportation issue,
during VDOT’s review of this project they requested the applicant examine the feasibility of a right
in/right out shared driveway between the subject parcel and the parcel to the west. This would be
opposed to the dedicated right in/right out only that would access the current subject property. And staff
is very supportive of this. It would provide equal access to both parcels and we think it would improve
pedestrian safety. However, it could be challenging to implement with the separate owners of these
parcels and the different development schedules. I do believe that the applicant has reached out to the
                                                 Page 4 of 22
                                                                                          Attachment 4
                                                                                           Page 5 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

property owner to the west over here, and I would ask that they provide an update on their conversation
with them regarding this shared driveway. But essentially it would just run down kind of the center of the
property line, just like that, and go straight to the inter-parcel connection allowing for very easy access to
both parcels and also prevent people turning into this right in/right out only and having pedestrians
walking out of their cars trying to get to the building, having that kind of conflict there. This is the
approved GDP for that adjacent property. The “X” is where we’re talking about tonight but, like I said,
the shared driveway, there is space here as well. They provided a 50 foot transitional buffer because at
the time of this rezoning, the adjacent property was in residential use. So that transitional buffer is no
longer necessary, so there certainly is space there for some sort of driveway. So that’s another issue to be
considered. The Comprehensive Plan -- this proposal is consistent with it. It’s designated as a
commercial corridor within suburban land use which encourages commercial activity such as this one.
There’s adequate transportation facilities which generally I believe that there is. So, as a summary for the
reclassification request, staff agrees that it’s in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan Land Use
recommendations, and that’s a key part of it, it is consistent with the established and proposed
development patterns on the adjacent properties like we talked about. The proffers would minimize
potential visual impacts with the buffers, and transportation improvements incorporate pedestrian safety
measures. However, it’s not in conformance with the Transportation Plan of the Comprehensive Plan and
does not meet all fire and safety… Fire and Rescue’s safety recommendations at this time. So, overall,
staff is generally supportive of this reclassification with the proposed proffers. We believe additional
consideration should be given to VDOT’s latest comments on the TIA and the inconsistency with the
Transportation Plan recommendations and Fire and Rescue staff recommends that you all please consider
their request regarding fire sprinklers. So, before I move onto the CUP, I’d like to address any questions
specifically regarding the reclassification.

Mr. Rhodes: On the VDOT’s comments, are there any of those comments that wouldn’t be addressed in
the subsequent discussions, technical discussion, technical review discussions of the site plan?

Mr. Harbin: Yes, such as like the shared driveway. That issue would not be addressed during the TRC.

Mr. Rhodes: That would not… okay. Thank you. Other questions? Mr. Gibbons.

Mr. Gibbons: Help me now in the proffers.

Mr. Harbin: Okay.

Mr. Gibbons: The proffer says prohibit some uses which would otherwise be allowed in the B-2 zoning
district. What uses?

Mr. Harbin: That would be such things as funeral services, flea market…

Mr. Gibbons: Yeah, but did you list them separate?

Mr. Harbin: It does list them out.

Mr. Gibbons: Where? I mean, just tell me what page it’s on. Why wouldn’t it be in the proffer?

Mr. Harbin: It is in the proffers.

                                                Page 5 of 22
                                                                                         Attachment 4
                                                                                          Page 6 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. Gibbons: I only see one statement in the proffer.

Mr. Rhodes: I think it’s attachment 8.

Mr. Apicella: It’s attachment 8, page 2 of 3.

Mr. Harbin: Thank you.

Mr. Gibbons: Page 2?

Mr. Apicella: Of 3, so it’s almost at the end of your package.

Mr. Gibbons: Okay. And then I didn’t see the GDP proffered. And then what doesn’t he meet about Fire
and Rescue? You say he doesn’t meet it.

Mr. Harbin: Fire and Rescue requested that the buildings use fire sprinklers up to a certain…

Mr. Gibbons: Yeah, but does the ordinance require that?

Mr. Harbin: No. It would be above and beyond.

Mr. Gibbons: Well how can you say he doesn’t meet it?

Mr. Harbin: I’m sorry?

Mr. Gibbons: How can you say by staff that he doesn’t meet it? If the ordinance doesn’t require it…

Mr. Harbin: The ordinance does not require the level of fire sprinkling.

Mr. Gibbons: But my question is that how can you say he doesn’t meet it?

Mr. Harbin: He doesn’t meet Fire and Rescue’s request.

Mr. Gibbons: I understand. But in the staff report it says he doesn’t meet the Fire and Rescue safety
standards when it’s not in the ordinance.

Mr. Harbin: Understood.

Mr. Gibbons: Now, he probably didn’t give you what you wanted which I tend to agree with. Thank you.

Mr. Rhodes: Other questions for staff? Mr. Apicella.

Mr. Apicella: Mr. Chairman, just kind of piggybacking off of your comment about VDOT’s comments,
again, I would like some greater clarification or specificity as to not the one that I think you’ve mentioned
may be impractical or beyond the applicant’s control, but there’s another six that VDOT mentioned in
their letter. I’d like to know how those would be dispensed with going forward, whether as the Chairman
indicated would that be part of the TRC process or is that something we need to talk about now to try to
see what is best going forward.
                                                Page 6 of 22
                                                                                         Attachment 4
                                                                                          Page 7 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. Harbin: Some of those other comments are certainly part of the (inaudible).

Mr. Apicella: I know, but for the other six, if we could just kind of understand if something wouldn’t be
discussed as part of the TRC process, maybe it’s number 2 or number 5… I don’t know… but again, they
offered up some important comments. I’d like to know what is best for this project going forward based
on their comments.

Mr. Harbin: I think… and I will have to get those comments out in front of me, I don’t have them.

Mr. Apicella: Again, we don’t have to do it right this second, but I’ve got some other questions or
concerns.

Mr. Rhodes: I just would clarify… the applicant will come forward so when they do, if you can just kind
of see if there’s any… I think the main point is which ones won’t get addressed at TRC. If they’re going
to get addressed at TRC then I think it’s less of an issue. If there’s not another opportunity, it just
probably should be made aware.

Mr. Harbin: Okay.

Mr. Rhodes: Thank you.

Mr. Apicella: So, again, I’m familiar with the area because I go to the CVS and both on Route 17 during
rush hour, 17 itself is pretty crowded. In fact, we call it blocking the box in D.C.; I don’t know what it’s
called here. But sometimes you can’t even make a right turn because there’s so many people who’ve
gone past the red light and are sitting there blocking drivers from being able to exit from McWhirt Loop
onto 17, either going left or right, even if the light is green. So that’s a concern of mine. But at the CVS
during rush hour, sometimes you can’t get out of the CVS because there’s so much traffic coming from
the other side of McWhirt Loop trying to get to 17. So, again, one of my concerns is the extent to which
this project, coming out of this project, will put more cars onto McWhirt Loop making it that much harder
for the folks who are exiting CVS to make a left or right turn, especially during rush hour, or the potential
that people will get frustrated and cause an accident because they want to get out… they’ve been waiting
a long time. And if you’re looking for that one opportunity, there’s just barely enough clearance and they
spring out and maybe get hit. I don’t know how to address that but it’s a concern of mine. I’m curious,
the CVS parcel… do we have an understanding of what the size of that parcel is? Just trying to get some
context.

Mr. Harbin: Two acres.

Mr. Apicella: Two acres. So it’s a little bit smaller than this parcel but there’s one use on that parcel,
right? It’s got two drive-throughs… it might even actually have three drive-throughs but they’re all in the
same area, they’re not spread out.

Mr. Harbin: Correct.

Mr. Apicella: Anywhere else in Stafford County on this kind of a small parcel, is there a situation where
there are two drive-throughs on a 2- or 3-acre parcel?

Mr. Harbin: Nothing immediately comes to mind.
                                               Page 7 of 22
                                                                                            Attachment 4
                                                                                             Page 8 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. Apicella: Yeah, that’s a concern of mine.

Mr. Harbin: Yes.

Mr. Rhodes: I know on 610 you got… right there you got the Popeye’s, you got the Taco Bell, and then
you got the Burger King just across from the entrance to the… just down there across from iHop.

Mr. Apicella: But it’s a fairly spread-out. It’s a very confined space with three uses, two of which are
drive-throughs. So I’m just trying to… I know there are conditions in the CUP that talk about being able
to, I’ll call it inter-parcel circulation, but the reality may be that that might be difficult on a 2+ acre site.

Mr. Harbin: And we will discuss that in much greater detail when I get to the CUP as well.

Mr. Apicella: Mr. Gibbons went kind of towards the next kind of issue that I was concerned about. I
realize that they’re proffering out anything that’s over, what was it 4117 or some number like that. It’s
hard for me to visualize what that means when I look at the list of uses, B-2 uses. They’ve excluded a
few, three that come to mind; building materials, funeral home, indoor flea market. But there are lots of
other uses that haven’t been proffered out, some of which may not necessarily be compatible with the
growth pattern in that immediate vicinity. For example, warehouse mini storage… I mean, I know there
are warehouse mini storage in Stafford County but I don’t see any in that immediate vicinity, so I guess
I’m asking you from a staff perspective, seeing what you know about how 17 is developing or has
developed, are there any of the vast majority of the uses that would be of concern to you that have not yet
been excluded in the proffers?

Mr. Harbin: I think a mini warehouse would not be appropriate at this site certainly.

Mr. Apicella: Right, but there’s lots of others; car wash, night club. Again, I don’t know how those
translate into number of vehicles entering the parcel but I think we might want to take…

Mr. Gibbons: Dog kennels, you know…

Mr. Apicella: What’s that? Dog kennels? Again, you know, part of job here is to try to make sure, as
things progress going forward, to make sure that the…

Mr. Gibbons: Wouldn’t it be better if he proffered what he’s going to build rather than exclude it?

Mr. Apicella: That’s certainly one way to do it. You did mention that the GDP wasn’t proffered so I
think that’s an important issue. That’s it for now Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Rhodes: Okay. Other questions for staff? What do you think is the best way to do this? Have the
applicant come up now and just actually do them independently?

Mr. Harvey: Mr. Chairman, I’d recommend that Mr. Harbin finish his presentation…

Mr. Rhodes: Okay, thank you.

Mr. Harvey: …then come back for applicant presentation.

                                                 Page 8 of 22
                                                                                           Attachment 4
                                                                                            Page 9 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. Rhodes: Address the full picture; okay. Thank you.

Mr. Harbin: Alright, moving on to just the request for a Conditional Use Permit, this would be for two
drive-through facilities at the site. Obviously the same applicant, same site, same location in zoning as
well. We’ll breeze over that part and get into the GDP. The proposed drive-throughs would be on
buildings B and C located here. They have proposed (inaudible) right there and the drive isles would
wrap around the building such as this. So that is what the CUP would permit, these two drive-throughs
only. Generally, I believe that the drive-through facility for building C provides the adequate access and
stacking; however, building B’s drive-through is a concern of mine, particularly with the full access point
located basically directly south of it right here. You have cars coming in stacking to order to that drive-
through. That can cause serious issues with flow of traffic throughout this site. It would make it hard if
you enter the site, come in and want to come down through here if there’s cars blocking it. In addition, if
you’re coming back through here and you’re trying to get out of the site, you could have traffic blocking
you as well. It’s just a very tight to put two drive-throughs in and especially with the location of this full
access point where it is now which, like I said, they moved it about a hundred feet closer to the
intersection. It creates additional issues. The original GDP as was first submitted, had the access point a
little further down McWhirt Loop, kind of in this vicinity, which, if it was there, it would allow for a little
bit better flow although that would require a separate kind of analysis. So that’s certainly an issue to
consider in the CUP.

Mr. English: John, did they say why they moved that?

Mr. Harbin: No, and VDOT actually… that’s one of the comments VDOT provided in their analysis of
the resubmittal of the TIA and we did not receive a response from the applicant on that. So that’s a great
question. So obviously there are some proposed conditions on this CUP. The drive-throughs shall be
located in the general locations as shown on the GDP. Loading spaces and truck delivery spaces shall be
located outside of any required travel lane. Loading areas, dumpster pads, trash compactors shall be
located and designed so that they’re screened from view. Drive-through lanes shall be oriented in a
manner to minimize headlight glare onto state maintained roadways; that’s largely accommodated through
a berm that they’re providing along Warrenton Road. Additional ones -- stacking lanes for drive-through
facilities shall be designed to not impede traffic circulation which is contradictory. All drive-through
facilities shall include a bypass lane for vehicles not utilizing the drive-through. All drive-through
canopies shall be coordinated in color and materials with the primary structure. And any canopy lighting
shall be recessed within the canopy. We also included a condition about no carnival-style signs, banners,
lights, balloons, windsocks; this is kind of a new thing that we’re addressing as well. So staff findings --
the CUP is in general conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. It’s consistent with the established
proposed development patterns. The conditions will mitigate impacts to the road network; however, the
location and configuration of that one drive-through is of particular concern and presents some potential
access issues. So, should the current reclassification be approved, staff recommends approval of the CUP
with the proposed conditions. However, I do recommend that the Planning Commission consider
requesting the applicant relocate that full access point along McWhirt Loop in order to facilitate site
access and traffic flow in that site as you enter. And, at this time I’ll be happy to take any questions for
the CUP.

Mr. Rhodes: Questions for staff? Yes, please Mr. Coen.




                                                Page 9 of 22
                                                                                       Attachment 4
                                                                                       Page 10 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. Coen: Real quickly, because one of the things that Mr. Gibbons pointed out, which I agree with, is
we ask so many questions that the people don’t get to talk for quite a while. But I was zipping through
trying to find the information about the wind sock items. So can you pull that up again so I can read it?

Mr. Harbin: Sure.

Mr. Coen: Because I didn’t see it when I was speed reading. Okay, I just want to make sure I understand,
there’s none of that unless it’s just the grand opening. I mean, because when you were talking, it was like
use of temporary things are okay. But what you’re saying is they can do it on the grand opening but then
they can’t do a special one or whatever later on.

Mr. Harbin: Correct.

Mr. Coen: Okay, I just want to make sure I got that. Thank you.

Mr. Rhodes: Okay, any other questions for staff before the applicant comes forward? Okay, thank you
very much. Applicant please.

Ms. Karnes: Good evening Mr. Chairman, members of the Planning Commission and staff, my name is
Debrarae Karnes. I’m an attorney and land use planner with Leming and Healy, here representing the
applicant, Frontier Development. You guys kept me busy back there writing down all your questions, and
hopefully I’m going to answer every one of them in my hopefully brief presentation. Okay, so staff did a
good job of discussing the basic application and the issues. I want to start out by telling you about
Frontier Development. This is a company that develops retail properties all up and down the east coast
from New York to Florida. In the audience is one of their executives, James Leach. I also have Ryan
Foroughi, the engineer, and Doug Kennedy, the traffic engineer, and at pertinent times I’m going to have
them address some of the questions, particularly the site circulation and Mr. Kennedy will go through the
specific six issues that you questioned about VDOT’s response. Alright, first of all, this rezoning, when
we just look at the rezoning proposal alone, going from A-1 to B-2, I think that’s a pretty easy concept.
This area is all developing commercially and a proposed retail development would be consistent with the
surrounding developments in the neighborhood. Obviously the big issue here is transportation. Route 17,
Warrenton Road, is a regional roadway. It’s at below desirable Level of Service right now and it’s
currently being expanded from 4 lanes to 6 lanes. And when we sat down and looked at what would be
proposed, that was the crucial issue both for the good of Stafford County and frankly the future users of
the site. They want their customers to be able to get in and get out easily and efficiently. So one of the
questions that was raised, you have a GDP in front of you that shows the development of a little less than
11,000 square feet of uses. Why isn’t the GDP proffered? And there’s an easy reason for that. We
believe we are being innovative in the way we’re doing it. Right now, when we did the traffic study, we
chose the most traffic intensive uses because we wanted… that would likely be on the site… because we
wanted to accurately model the traffic in order to devise mitigation measures. And we chose the less than
2,000 square foot coffee shop, which is going to be a Starbucks by the way, a fast food restaurant
totaling… so we’re going to have two drive-throughs… and then a general retail or sit-down restaurant. If
we proposed other uses consistent with that site, if we made it say all general retail, we could build
additional square footage. The limiting factor here is the amount of traffic the site can handle. We
believe it makes more sense and gives Stafford County greater protection not to proffer the building size,
but instead to proffer the amount of traffic to be generated. And that’s how we handled the commitment
for what we build. Instead of proffering footprints necessarily, we’re going to proffer the maximum
traffic to be generated which, by the way, I think will serve to hold down total development of the site
                                              Page 10 of 22
                                                                                         Attachment 4
                                                                                         Page 11 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

more so than any square footage proffer. To give you an idea of how this would work, every time they
come in for a site plan for the building, they would have to certify the amount of traffic to be generated by
each user, almost like a parking lot calculation. And so the first user would come it… that’s going to be a
Starbucks… they would show how much traffic they would generate. The second user and then the third
user. And if, in fact, that third user generated served to push the total number of trips over this limit of
4,117 per day average, or the peak morning or afternoon rates, then they wouldn’t be able to get approved
at site plan. We’ll be happy to discuss that or work with you in any way, but we believe this is the first
time this approach has been done and I think it’s going to better meet the needs of Stafford County. As
you heard, we have proposed mitigation strategies to mitigate the impact of the traffic; the additional turn
lane onto McWhirt Loop. We feel that our traffic study, and you can talk at more detail to the traffic
engineer, we feels this substantially mitigates the impact of the traffic. Now, one thing we ordinarily
would’ve agreed to is doing a timing change on the traffic signals. We believe that would further mitigate
the impact of the traffic. VDOT did not want to do that for the simple reason that they are currently
building their road improvements and they prefer to do the study and change of signal timing after the 6
lanes have been completed. The other thing that’s innovative that I wanted to stress here, in the current
VDOT plans, they are doing some work on drainage issues along Route 17. Our client went ahead and
dedicated right-of-way now, not waiting to see whether this plan would be approved, in order to allow
VDOT to complete their work now. And so that’s one of the unusual things about this case; I was on the
line with the County, do you mind if they dedicate this additional small amount of right-of-way now?
That’s quite unusual and, again, innovative. The only other thing I want to mention about the rezoning is
that… well, two things... first of all, you do see architectural standards proffered and they are consistent
with the County’s Comprehensive Plan suggestions on site design and further someone asked questions
about the Fire Marshal’s recommendation. Indeed, as Commissioner Gibbons pointed out, our proposal
meets the state building guidelines, the state building code I should say. And there is no requirement for
sprinklers in buildings of this size and my client tells me they never put sprinklers in buildings of this
size. As always, they’re willing to work with you on anything but that’s where we came from. Okay.

Mr. Rhodes: Mr. English?

Mr. English: Debrarae, let me ask you why did the Fire Marshal want to increase the fire sprinklers? Did
they say why?

Ms. Karnes: They always recommend sprinklers and so I don’t think there was a finding of a particular
need as much as this is just a routine recommendation. Now, one more thing about transportation that I
forgot to mention. You heard staff say that this proposal is inconsistent with the Comp Plan’s
transportation chapter. And what that says, it’s the non-degradation policy and what it says is if the roads
serving the project are already operating below capacity based on current needs, what they expect staff…
what they expect the applicant to do is mitigate and so the conditions are not worsened. We largely
mitigated the issue; however, there is a delay of an additional six seconds in the intersection movement in
the a.m. and an additional five seconds in the p.m. And I’m going to… five seconds.

Mr. Rhodes: Was it ten seconds in the a.m.?

Ms. Karnes: Let’s see, my notes, and I’ll defer to the traffic engineer…

Mr. Rhodes: Thirty-four to forty-four?

Ms. Karnes: It’s six seconds in the a.m.
                                               Page 11 of 22
                                                                                        Attachment 4
                                                                                        Page 12 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. Rhodes: Okay.

Ms. Karnes: Okay. And that’s without signal timing adjustments and that’s without factoring into the
fact that a coffee shop has an 85% at least pass-by capture. In other words, if you can capture traffic that
are normally passing by the route anyway, it has less impact than if you’re bringing new customers totally
on their own making a separate trip just to utilize your product. I think at this point, unless someone has
questions, I’d like you to hear from the traffic engineer to give you…

Mr. Rhodes: Mr. Gibbons.

Mr. Gibbons: Debrarae, you kind of opened up a Pandora’s box when you’re innovative. Now tell me
how you’re going to meet that traffic going in and out of your property. Are you going to put gates up
and a traffic counter so when you hit a certain amount of traffic you’re going to drop the gate and
everybody goes up 17? You’re innovative now, so how are you going to handle that?

Ms. Karnes: We are innovative. The way it does… the way it works is that when they submit the site
plan, they will list the amount of traffic as calculated in the ITE Traffic Manual.

Mr. Gibbons: I got that. Boy, I got that down. Now how are you going to enforce it?

Mr. Rhodes: I think what she’s saying is she wouldn’t be able to construct it if it goes over the ITE guide
if the number of cars that would be attributed to that use would take you over the 4,117 a day. So you
wouldn’t even build that type of a use; you’d have to go to a less intensive use to build. So it would be up
front at the site plan piece.

Mr. Gibbons: Well, you can tell me another fairytale too and I’ll believe it.

Ms. Karnes: Of course, you know, the ITE manual is the source of all of our planning assumptions.

Mr. Gibbons: I was just saying that you’re innovative and I was just wondering how you were going to
count, that’s all.

Ms. Karnes: I’m going to rely on the ITE manual. I think what I’d like to do, Mr. Chairman, is bring up
the traffic engineer who can answer any other questions based on his assumption.

Mr. English: I have a question.

Mr. Rhodes: Yes, please Mr. English.

Mr. English: Debrarae, why did you all move the entrance? The entrance is up further on McWhirt Loop
(inaudible). Just like you said, there’s going to be… if you put two drive-throughs in there, that’s going
to back up (inaudible). Why was it moved on that?

Ms. Karnes: First of all, I’m going to say we’re certainly willing to work with the Planning Commission
on this. But the reason was simply that they wanted as much of the traffic as possible to utilize the
McWhirt entrance and they wanted it to be somewhat visible from 17.

Mr. English: I agree with you, but I’m saying for McWhirt Loop…
                                               Page 12 of 22
                                                                                           Attachment 4
                                                                                           Page 13 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Ms. Karnes: I mean, that’s why they moved it.

Mr. English: Okay.

Ms. Karnes: They thought it made more sense.

Mr. English: And the business, the second business, you said Starbucks is coming in, correct?

Ms. Karnes: Starbucks is going to be in building C.

Mr. English: And then the second business is…?

Ms. Karnes: Neither the second or third business has been identified yet.

Mr. English: Okay. Alright.

Mr. Rhodes: Okay.

Ms. Karnes: So, as I said before, the traffic engineer is Doug Kennedy with Pennoni Associates and he is
going to answer your question concerning VDOT’s comments and any other technical question you have.

Mr. Rhodes: Okay.

Ms. Karnes: And Ryan Foroughi seems to be coming up.

Mr. Foroughi: Good evening Mr. Chairman, members of the Commission, my name’s Ryan Foroughi.
I’m the site engineer on this project, actually a resident of Stafford County. I’d like to address any
questions that you have regarding… Doug will get into the specifics regarding timing and mitigation and
so on and so forth that you guys… that you have… but I would like to address any site specific issues. I
know, if I was taking my notes correctly, obviously the entrance is a concern or something that has been
brought up. Internal circulation, something that was also brought up, and so I just wanted to take a few
minutes and go over some things. I haven’t used this before but I will try. May I have the computer
please?

Mr. Rhodes: Computer please.

Mr. Foroughi: I’ll try to bring up this map for you. This slide. Okay. So, the first… let me start off first,
I guess VDOT or staff must not have received… we did respond to the six comments that VDOT had
generated in their letter dated April 4, 2014. We did respond to that on April 11, 2014. Was the
Commission not given that response? Have you not seen that? I guess not? Okay. So, regarding the six
comments, so what we are… we’ll kind of wrap all this into one regarding the site entrance and the
intersection and the turn lane. Debrarae is correct; the reason that we started with the site… we situated
the site entrance at this location is to maximize visibility to get as much traffic off of 17 onto McWhirt
Loop so that that… we don’t want anybody making a U-turn up at 17 at the next entrance up to the north
or to the west to try and come back in the right in/right out. Staff actually, through our review process,
made a recommendation to move all the buildings forward to maximize visibility. So we thought that as
that progressed, it made more sense to relocate the entrance to fit with the internal circulation of the site. I
will say the entrance will be required to meet all VDOT standards. We currently meet intersection
                                                Page 13 of 22
                                                                                      Attachment 4
                                                                                      Page 14 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

spacing on a local road; McWhirt Loop is considered a local road. We meet intersection spacing. We are
outside of the functional area of the intersection of McWhirt Loop and 17. And we are beyond the 17
entrance… we are offset from the 17 entrance… I’m sorry, the CVS entrance on McWhirt Loop as well.
Also, something else was brought up regarding the grade and the inadequate site distance on McWhirt
Loop when you’re trying to turn left into the CVS. If you look… I don’t know if we can -- can we zoom
this in? Actually, with the improvements on VDOT’s plan, on the 17 plan… can I draw on this? There is
an existing entrance in the lower right… there is an existing easement in the lower right-hand corner.
That there is an existing site distance easement that VDOT has taken already with the improvements of 17
to help mitigate that specific problem. The development of this site will also address at TRC any
entrances; if we don’t meet site distance, we will have to grade back banks or anything that we need to
meet site distance.

Mr. Apicella: I’m sorry, I need you to speak to me in a little bit more English. So, when you say
VDOT’s going to do something here, what are they going to do and when are they going to do it, in
relationship to when this project would be built?

Mr. Foroughi: VDOT, when they make all their frontage… when they do all the improvements on 17
when they get to this intersection, that’s when these improvements will be made.

Mr. Apicella: And when is that supposed to happen?

Mr. Foroughi: I believe the construction has already started on 17 and they’re working north and coming
south already, if I’m not mistaken. So, I think VDOT has indicated they’ll probably be around this
intersection in the next 12 to 18 months is when they’re going to be at this intersection.

Mr. Apicella: So, bottom line, will the grade be cut down so that that problem of not being able to see
oncoming traffic from McWhirt Loop, will that be abated?

Mr. Foroughi: Either through our application process or through VDOT’s development, the site distance
will be addressed.

Mr. Apicella: I’m worried about reality on the ground, Ryan. So again, if this project were built before
VDOT does whatever its going to do, you still have the potential issue of people making… swinging
around, myself included, trying to go into CVS with oncoming cars from McWhirt Loop coming from the
other direction of McWhirt Loop. And you’re going to have more cars coming as a result of this project,
coming back onto McWhirt Loop; not necessarily going this way, but coming around this way. So, again,
my concern is the potential for or the probability of accidents occurring because people can’t see
oncoming traffic.

Mr. Foroughi: I believe…

Mr. Apicella: You didn’t create this problem, but I’m worried that it may exasperate the problem.

Mr. Foroughi: Yeah, exactly, I understand. I believe we’ve actually spoken several times with VDOT
about coordinating the development of our project with their project, specifically regarding sidewalk and
tapers and all the frontage improvements that we are proposing and not overlapping… basically not
wasting taxpayer dollars to rip up and tear up things that VDOT’s doing and we’re doing and so on and so

                                             Page 14 of 22
                                                                                        Attachment 4
                                                                                        Page 15 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

forth. I believe VDOT feels that they’re going to be at this site doing the improvements before our
application is approved and before we have a building permit.

Mr. English: Ryan, question for you.

Mr. Foroughi: Yes sir.

Mr. English: Do you have a site plan for that, what VDOT’s telling you or saying they’re going to do?
Can you get that for us?

Mr. Foroughi: We could, yes, we have… I think it’s in this set.

Mr. English: It’s from VDOT saying that they’re going to do the cut-downs and all that.

Mr. Foroughi: VDOT plans admittedly are very tough to read; they don’t do a lot of grading on their
plans. But they are showing… they are making significant improvements to that intersection, drainage
and so on and so forth.

Mr. English: They don’t, you are.

Mr. Foroughi: Correct. We will be required to meet the site distance.

Mr. English: Okay.

Mr. Foroughi: And Mr. Apicella, so… back to kind of addressing what you had indicated, I believe
VDOT’s going to be there first. If they’re not there first, we are going to be required to make our site
meet site distance throughout the project. So, if the entrance has to move a couple of feet here or there or
however we have to do it, we will have to meet site distance, intersection spacing, and so on and so forth.
But we do think that VDOT’s going to be there first on this plan.

Mr. Apicella: Okay, I appreciate that. But I still have the concern of the traffic that’s already on
McWhirt Loop, again, exiting from the CVS going left or right especially during rush hour. Cars are
stacked up and someone wanting to turn, one way or another, is prohibited because there’s a long line of
traffic already on McWhirt Loop prior to this development occurring, this will only make that situation
that much more arduous for people. So, what can be done about that, if anything?

Mr. Foroughi: Doug, if you want to step up.

Mr. Kennedy: Doug Kennedy with Pennoni Associates. I think the major difference and the major
change of the improvements and what you’ll see at CVS is that the concern is VDOT plans do resurface
and adjust the grades on McWhirt with their project. And, as Ryan said, we expect them to be working on
that southbound direction next summer is what they had told us in terms of the work.

Mr. Apicella: I hear ya and I appreciate the response. So that deals with one of my concerns. The other
concern is just the amount of traffic that’s already on McWhirt Loop absent this project.

Mr. Kennedy: Right. And I think the major… the reason why, you know, in terms of innovative and
what we’re doing here, by adding the second receiving lane, today the problem is that traffic comes onto
                                              Page 15 of 22
                                                                                           Attachment 4
                                                                                           Page 16 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

McWhirt Loop and, if there is backing up there in the peaks, they (a) have a site distance concern and (b)
they’re worried about someone coming behind them from the signal and running into them because
they’re waiting for a gap in traffic. The proposed improvements as shown in the improvements actually
widens McWhirt Loop on our side of the road which VDOT was never doing to allow two receiving
lanes. That’s the unique and the, I think, the innovative improvements we’re making to accommodate
what’s out there today, but also to accommodate the additional traffic when we are adding our uses on
here. So, instead of having one lane as you’re turning in there having to stop two cars in to make the left
turn to CVS, you’ll have two lanes to come in there. So the road improvements will be improved for site
distance but you’ll have two receiving lanes to come in there. So traffic coming into the CVS, again, we
would expect when we coordinate with VDOT, if they want to put up a Do Not Block Intersection sign
for CVS, that’s something VDOT could coordinate on. But we’ve set it up to allow for two receiving
lanes where today you only have one. And I think that’s the major change you’ll see out there to
accommodate the growth and to accommodate this proposed use.

Mr. Apicella: Sir, I see that as partial remediation for this situation of, again I’m sorry, I’m coming up 17,
I make a right-hand turn, come swinging around potentially going to your project or CVS. I’m a driver.
I’m at CVS. I want to turn right or left. I’ve got cars already coming up McWhirt Loop going in this
direction, let’s say it’s north, to try to get to 17. A long line of cars already there. I can’t turn left. I
heard one potential solution is some kind of VDOT requirement to not block the exit but, again, without
that being there, someone is going to get into an accident because they’ve been sitting there waiting to get
out of CVS and they can’t. That’s a problem already. It’s only going to get worse and people make a
right-hand turn outside of this project and you have even more cars trying to get onto McWhirt Loop, also
making that northbound route.

Mr. Kennedy: If I could have the computer.

Mr. Rhodes: Computer please.

Mr. Kennedy: Again, the arrows, in terms of what we’re showing in gray, the two arrows heading say
westbound on McWhirt Loop is improvement of what you have today. You’ve got the lane coming
towards this traffic signal at the CVS entrance… and this is the CVS entrance generally in here. So, the
issue’s going to be, as VDOT does the improvements out there, if we were not coming in today, the only
thing that would be changing after the VDOT project is that it’d be adjusting the grade to the roadway
with the improvements. So, you’d still have the same condition that you have out there today where
traffic is going to have look at getting gaps in traffic to make the right turn out or, if they want to go back
over to the, in terms of going to the Lowe’s, they’re going to have to get a gap in traffic to make the left
turnout. That’s really what it is today in terms of the improvements. The CVS entrance doesn’t meet the
VDOT access management spacings. So that’s, in a sense, one of the reasons why we are focusing on
moving our entrance to the west along McWhirt Loop so we’re not creating the same problems we have
today with CVS. But, in terms of our improvement, I think adding the two lanes in will help drivers
getting into the site, which was one of your concerns about the site distance. They may be able to see
down here along the intersection; I think that will improve. But, at this stage, we, as part of this
development, I don’t think can solve the existing constraints with the CVS access.

Mr. Apicella: Again, I understand what you’re saying. I only think it’s going to get worse as a result.
And I don’t dispute that commercial is probably the best use of this parcel, but putting another 4,000 cars
on McWhirt Loop, especially as they’re more likely to turn left on McWhirt Loop and go up in an easterly
direction, is going to make this problem with CVS that much more problematic.
                                                Page 16 of 22
                                                                                           Attachment 4
                                                                                           Page 17 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. Kennedy: And again, the 4,000 cars is the total site. We also do have the driveway on 17 as a right
in/right out which will capture a lot of the pass-by for these uses to get in and out of the site. But it is
balanced.

Mr. Apicella: I appreciate what you’re saying. I’m sorry to keep beating this drum. But, again, as you
have Route 17 blocked during rush hour traffic, you’re not going to get that many people turning right
because someone’s not going to let them out. So, if you’re standing there waiting to get out onto Route
17 during rush hour traffic, you’re going to be waiting a long time.

Mr. Kennedy: Again, and that’s why I think that the timing is very good for this project because that’s
going to change and there will be improvement in the queues and stacking with the additional through
lanes as part of the VDOT project. So that will change over what there is today, out there today. And so I
think, from our point of view in terms of looking at the impacts, and we spent a lot of time working with
VDOT and County staff to talk about the circulation and impacts associated with this property. We
actually met with VDOT to discuss the entrance on 17 and the location of the elements there to try and
maximize it away from the site in terms of what we can control with this particular land use application.
It provided the alternatives to get in and out of the site and try to allow the choices. So the drivers will
find, just like a water flow problem, the drivers will find the best ability if they’re going north or south on
17. It’s not a perfect solution but the way the design was set up was to satisfy the VDOT access
management standards and coordinate with the existing traffic and let’s project in the future with this site.

Mr. English: Sir, a quick question. The entrance that you have right now, that you’ve got circled at the
CVS, what’s the distance?

Mr. Kennedy: This entrance in here is over 300 feet away from the stacking queue here, Route 17.

Mr. English: No, I’m talking from the CVS.

Mr. Kennedy: The CVS in here, it’s going to be probably about, around 200 feet. I can’t give you the
exact number.

Mr. English: Okay. Wasn’t your entrance earlier moved up further?

Mr. Kennedy: Well, the original entrance was over in this area here further to the west. As mentioned,
the entrance, as part of the improvements, there was not the double receiving lane. So, as part of the
improvements, there was only one travel lane which you have today, what VDOT was doing here. As we
move the entrance and committed to VDOT that we would provide a continuous lane to the entrance, we
looked at the volumes coming in and out of the site and looked at we’re going to be providing a
continuous lane from the traffic signal which VDOT wasn’t doing, so that’s why we came up with the
access and also to improve the internal circulation.

Mr. English: But you can’t move the entrance up a little further is what I’m probably (inaudible).

Mr. Kennedy: As Debrarae mentioned, we thought this made the best location for the needs, the property,
as well as satisfying the VDOT access management standards. But I think we’re willing to work with you
on the coordination on that.


                                                Page 17 of 22
                                                                                        Attachment 4
                                                                                        Page 18 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. English: Because what I’m thinking is if move that entrance up a little further, it’s going to help you
with your drive-throughs and it may relieve some of, what Mr. Apicella was saying, may relieve some of
this over here at CVS if you move the entrance up a little further.

Mr. Kennedy: Well, we didn’t want to be in any position of doing access points in this area in here,
because VDOT has said we are getting too close. They don’t want another CVS situation.

Mr. Rhodes: Yeah, he’s talking the other direction.

Mr. English: I’m talking about (inaudible).

Mr. Kennedy: Moving this way?

Mr. English: Yes.

Mr. Kennedy: Okay. Again…

Mr. Rhodes: That’s certainly a point for consideration.

Mr. Kennedy: Yes.

Mr. Rhodes: Alright.

Mr. Kennedy: Just additionally, as part of the work, a lot of the comments in the VDOT referral were
clarifications on the traffic study. We did look at those impacts and we’ve coordinated with VDOT to
look at the language, the stacking, and I think VDOT wanted to clarify some of the text in the
improvements that we had suggested (inaudible) to share that the comments, really 1 through 6, are really
details that really would be addressed as part of the site plan review in terms of length of tapers,
clarifications in text. We talked about the overall intersection impacts; VDOT wanted to talk about the
impacts in the northbound left-turn lanes and so we’ve looked at what those volumes are with and without
the pass-by traffic, and that’s how we looked at the overall Level of Service impacts. So, I think a lot of
the comments, the first five, are really more details in terms of… or the first four in terms of the traffic
impact elements. I think we’ve addressed those and, again, I think it’s a clarification. The intent is
making sure the land use works appropriately. As the other thing on the Level of Service, in terms of the
County Comprehensive Plan, as Ms. Karnes mentioned, the Level of Service does change in the a.m. peak
by 10 seconds, as mentioned in the staff report. The 6 seconds was for particular movement. The Level
of Service change, as VDOT mentioned… or as we mentioned, VDOT said don’t change the signal
timing. We did look at different options in our reports from last year for the application. What we could
do to change the timing about 10 seconds; the signal on 17 is timed to move as much traffic as possible
there and VDOT was very protective of that and we understood that. So we showed the Level of Services
without making green time changes. And typically, I think, through timing and the overall corridor, there
are ways to improve. And the reason the Level of Service overall degrades is because with the extra
traffic with our site and growth on McWhirt Loop there’s no change in the signal timing. So therefore, as
you’re adding more traffic there, then the delays do slightly increase. And the overall grade of the
intersection, while it’s at D, does have some movements in there based on the existing constraints. So we
felt, at least in the study corridor, we were satisfying the intent of (inaudible) improvements, and again,
the innovation is that we have spent a good amount of time working with VDOT, and I think the unique

                                              Page 18 of 22
                                                                                        Attachment 4
                                                                                        Page 19 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

element of this project is adding the receiving lane so that VDOT can stripe the double left turns on 17…
which is needed now.

Mr. Rhodes: Okay.

Ms. Karnes: Mr. Chairman, I know you want to get to the public hearing portion, but if… could we give
Mr. Foroughi about 2 minutes to talk about internal site circulation?

Mr. Rhodes: Sure.

Mr. Foroughi: Regarding the internal site circulation…

Mr. Rhodes: Computer please.

Mr. Foroughi: Regarding the internal site circulation that we’ve shown, each of the drive-through
buildings, A and B, do meet the minimum centerline stacking requirement that Stafford County requires
which, I believe, is 150 feet -- maybe it’s 160 feet, I’m not sure. But we do meet the minimum stacking
requirements. The internal circulation is a way to… is a way to mitigate the concern that staff has
regarding the entrance and basically jamming the traffic right into the stacking lane. We could easily
solve that problem; instead of showing striping, we could easily show a 2 foot wide concrete median or
hot sticks, which are basically the white sticks, the reflector sticks that stick up, which would then force
traffic to circle the building and then come back around and come into the drive-through so that we
wouldn’t have those conflict points with the entrance and with the drive-through lane. And I believe the
applicant, when we submit this plan to TRC, assuming everything goes favorably, the applicant is willing
to look at the entrance, you know, with the internal circulation and all the other concern -- site distance
and so on and so forth. So, he is committed to reviewing that location to help, you know, alleviate any
concerns that the Planning Commission may have.

Mr. Apicella: Mr. Chairman?

Mr. Rhodes: Yes, please.

Mr. Apicella: And I’m not a transportation expert, but I’m just going to throw it out there. Would it be
possible for the entrance/exit on McWhirt Loop to make it right in/right out only? You’d have a much
longer length capability of putting cars stacking onto McWhirt Loop going in a westerly direction then
you do no matter where the entrance is then going in an easterly direction.

Mr. Foroughi: I don’t believe the applicant would be in favor of that. Most of… it’s really a detriment to
these retail uses if they don’t have one full access.

Mr. Apicella: Well, when you say a full access, again, they have a way to ingress and a way to egress,
they just wouldn’t be turning left. It’s a much shorter distance, again, going out of this site and going in
an easterly direction along McWhirt Loop. Going back to the whole CVS problem here of people trying
to get out of CVS, a conflict that this project might cause or exacerbate by people turning left onto
McWhirt Loop from the project.




                                              Page 19 of 22
                                                                                          Attachment 4
                                                                                          Page 20 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. Foroughi: Okay, so if I’m understanding correctly, if you had a right in/right out at McWhirt Loop,
someone coming in 17 south would come in our right in/right out entrance and then you would want to
force everybody to Banks Fords?

Mr. Apicella: Yes.

Mr. Foroughi: And not have anybody go left to the signal at McWhirt Loop?

Mr. Apicella: Right.

Mr. Foroughi: I don’t believe the applicant would be in favor of that.

Ms. Karnes: Well, I think the answer is that we’re certainly willing to look at how best to make the site
function based on your concerns. And it’s not really clear to me whether that would be right in or right
out, or maybe moving the entrance as we’ve talked about. But basically we’re here to work with you and
we believe this is a good application, it’s consistent with the land use designations, it meets all the County
requirements, you heard staff say they were generally in support, and, in fact, VDOT basically felt we
resolved the comments. And so I’ll be here to talk more to you after the public hearing.

Mr. Rhodes: Any other questions for the applicant before we move into the public comment portion of
the public hearing?

Mrs. Bailey: Mr. Chairman, I did have one question.

Mr. Rhodes: Yes, please Mrs. Bailey.

Mrs. Bailey: Concerning the GDP, there’s a comment in there in regards to the highway corridor and the
extenuation of curb and gutter past the entrance there on McWhirt Loop. Was that addressed in the
response back to the staff?

Ms. Karnes: I believe I wrote a response back to the Stafford County staff on that. Basically, our team
had a concern, an engineering concern that extending curb and gutter might cause a drainage problem,
water draining into the entrance where it’s located on McWhirt Loop. We were not sure, and so we didn’t
want to promise something that we weren’t sure we would do. But we were willing to look at that at site
plan and do it if it could be engineered reasonably.

Mr. Rhodes: Okay, any other questions? Okay, thank you very much. We will now move onto the
public comment portion of the public hearing. So if any member of the public hearing would like to
speak on either item number 2 or item number 3, both dealing with the McWhirt Loop Commercial
reclassification and Conditional Use Permit, you may come forward and do so at this time. I would ask
that you state your name and your address. Once you do so, a light will turn on, a green light, indicating 3
minutes to speak. A yellow light will come on when there’s 1 minute remaining and then a red light will
come on and we would ask that you wrap up your comments. Would anyone like to come forward?
Very good. I will close the public comment portion of the public hearing and bring it back to the
Planning Commission. If there are remaining questions that folks want to circle back on, we can always
address those. I did take note of certainly a significant number of questions dealing with the… seen from
different angles… dealing with that entrance off of McWhirt Loop, whether the implications on the
second drive-through, whether the implications on some of the queuing, whether the implications on some
                                               Page 20 of 22
                                                                                        Attachment 4
                                                                                        Page 21 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

of the flow, a lot of different dynamics associated with that one, and certainly heard willingness the
applicant think it further.

Mr. Gibbons: I’m in the position to second that deferral.

Mr. Rhodes: Okay, well this is in the Hartwood Election District.

Mr. English: Yeah, I want to recommend deferral for 30 days because I’d like to meet with staff and the
applicant because there’s some questions about the entrances and stuff, so, yeah, a 30 day deferral.

Mr. Rhodes: That would be… just to confirm, 30 is a little different then… the next session would be
about 29 days I think. The 11th of June, is that correct? So, that would be the 11th of June.

Mr. English: That’s fine, the first meeting in June is fine.

Mr. Rhodes: So the 11th of June. So there’s a motion to recommend deferral till the 11th of June,
seconded in advance by Mr. Gibbons. Any further comment Mr. English?

Mr. English: No sir.

Mr. Rhodes: Mr. Gibbons? Any other member?

Mr. Coen: If I could.

Mr. Rhodes: Yes please, Mr. Coen.

Mr. Coen: I sort of held in reserve some of my questions till after the throng spoke. But I have some
internal questions as well. I didn’t know if, when this goes back, if the flow would be better if you
switched buildings A and B, and that might alleviate the backup of traffic onto McWhirt to go into that. I
have a concern with the dumpsters and the location of the dumpsters. If I understand, and I bothered staff
on this over the weekend, but if the entrance to the Starbucks is basically looking over at the dumpster and
I’m just a little concerned with that, especially when the trash is being collected. You’re going to be
having the trash trucks coming in to get the trash when people are going to be going. Again, with the
flow, if people are going to be going in and out, to swing around these restaurants and fast food places,
where there’s limited parking, I was really concerned. For example, at the Starbucks, there’s what, 8 in
front, a couple up on 17 and then a handful over on the side. But then the people have to cut across there
to get to that. And then the last one that I asked staff about was the loading dock. And just sort of the
flow of it is that the loading dock is in the back part of the parcel, and then that would mean that the
Starbucks would have to park there and then bring stuff in all the way through the parcel across traffic.
And then lastly, the dumpster for the restaurant is across what hopefully, theoretically might be the nice
entrance off of 17 that feeds both parcels. So then you’ll have people carrying trash across trying to get
across that area. So, those are just some of the concerns that sort of jumped out at me. Thank you.

Mr. Rhodes: Very good. Any further comments? Anyone else? All those in favor of the motion to defer
to the first meeting in June signify by saying aye.

Mr. Apicella: Aye.

                                                Page 21 of 22
                                                                        Attachment 4
                                                                        Page 22 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
May 14, 2014

Mr. Coen: Aye.

Mrs. Bailey: Aye.

Mr. English: Aye.

Mr. Boswell: Aye.

Mr. Gibbons: Aye.

Mr. Rhodes: Aye. Any opposed?    None opposed; thank you very much and thank you for the
presentation by staff tonight.




                                     Page 22 of 22
                                                                                        Attachment 4
                                                                                        Page 23 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
June 11, 2014

2.     RC1300290; Reclassification – McWhirt Loop Commercial - A proposed reclassification from the
       A-1, Agricultural Zoning District to the B-2, Urban Commercial Zoning District, with proffered
       conditions, to allow for the development of commercial retail, service, and/or restaurant uses on
       Assessor's Parcel 44-120B, consisting of 2.92 acres, located on the south side of Warrenton Road
       at the intersection of McWhirt Loop, within the Hartwood Election District. (Time Limit:
       August 12, 2014) (History: Deferred on May 14, 2014 to June 11, 2014)

3.     CUP1300291; Conditional Use Permit – McWhirt Loop Commercial - A request for a Conditional
       Use Permit (CUP) to allow two (2) drive-through facilities within the HC, Highway Corridor
       Overlay Zoning District. The drive-through facilities are for a proposed fast food restaurant and
       coffee shop. The site is on Assessor's Parcel 44-120B and is the subject of a concurrent
       reclassification request from the A-1, Agricultural to the B-2, Urban Commercial Zoning District.
       The property consists of 2.92 acres, located on the south side of Warrenton Road at the
       intersection of McWhirt Loop, within the Hartwood Election District. (Time Limit: August 12,
       2014) (History: Deferred on May 14, 2014 to June 11, 2014)

Mr. Harbin: Good evening Mr. Chairman and Planning Commissioners, my name is John Harbin. These
are items 2 and 3, McWhirt Loop Commercial Reclassification and conditional use request. This is a
reclassification request going from A-1 to B-2 and a conditional use for two drive-through facilities in the
Highway Corridor Overlay District. To give you some background, this went to public hearing at the
May 14th Planning Commission meeting and was deferred until tonight. And, at that public hearing,
several issues were brought up regarding this project. Staff met with the applicant and other associated
people with this application, along with Mr. English to address some of those issues. So we’ll go through
that at this time. The applicant has submitted a revised Generalized Development Plan. It addresses two
main issues that were stated at the last public hearing, the first one being the location of the loading
spaces. In the original GDP, those were shown at the rear of the property, kind of in this vicinity. Those
have now been moved up closer to the proposed buildings in hopes that delivery trucks will actually make
use of those loading spaces. They’re a bit more functional where they’ve been placed at in this GDP.
Additionally, the applicant has moved the full access point along McWhirt Loop further to the west to its
current location here. This addresses a couple of the main issues stated, one of them being the proposed
drive-throughs and the layout of those. Now when the cars enter and exit this site from this access point,
you won’t be entering and headed straight into the drive-through located here at building B and also
building C. In addition, the location of this access point kind of facilitates the movement and flow
throughout this site a bit better than where it was originally proposed. The location of this access point
also helps with the existing uses along McWhirt Loop, namely the CVS entrance there which is located in
this general vicinity, putting it further away from that access point. The applicant has also submitted
revised proffers. To highlight some of those changes with these revised proffers, they have restricted
delivery times for building A, which is the largest building without a drive-through, so that no deliveries
shall take place during the peak a.m. and peak p.m. times to help alleviate the congestion of the site. They
will also erect directional signs to use Banks Ford Parkway to reach U.S. 17 North. And to show you
where that’s planned, there’s actually a little dot there… that’s where that directional sign is planned.
And the hopes there is that traffic exiting this property through that access point will make a right onto
McWhirt Loop, reach Banks Ford Parkway and make a right and then an eventual left to get back onto
Route 17 North. That will help direct some of the traffic away from the already congested Warrenton
Road/McWhirt Loop/Lichfield Boulevard intersection and help alleviate some of the backup that does
occur along McWhirt Loop at that light. They’ve also added a few other materials to the fencing that will

                                                Page 1 of 8
                                                                                          Attachment 4
                                                                                          Page 24 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
June 11, 2014

be screened around the dumpsters. One of the other issues that was stated for this project were the site
distances coming out of both the access point to this property and the access point to the CVS. As part of
this project… well, as part of the VDOT project for the widening of the road, they will be grading back a
significant area within the site distance easement that will alleviate any sort of obstruction including trees
or the actual grade of the land in that site distance easement. And I’ll show you where that is on this slide
here. It’s hard to see but this line here is the site distance easement that continues back as well a good
ways. Also, as part of the proffered receiving and turn lane, additional area will have to be graded to
accommodate that turn lane. This is just a Google view of that steep embankment that has been
referenced a few times here and that sharp curve on McWhirt Loop. But, as I’ve mentioned, between the
VDOT project and what’s proposed in this project and then what’s proffered in this project, that
embankment will be graded back significantly and I think will actually improve the site distance and the
safety of this turn right here.

Mr. Apicella: John, I’m not trying to be flipping, but when was this picture taken?

Mr. Harbin: October 2012.

Mr. Apicella: Because it’s far more overgrown at this point in time than I see in this picture. And while
not necessarily a condition, I guess I would, as a matter of good faith, ask the applicant if they would be
willing to just cut down the brush once they take ownership of the property. So again, in the interim,
before VDOT does whatever it’s going to do, at least that would help mitigate some of the site distance
issues that I see in that area.

Mr. Harbin: Okay. The Commission also requested that we provide crash data for the intersection of
Warrenton Road and McWhirt Loop. We did obtain VDOT crash data from the years 2010, 2011, and
2012, in which there were 35 reported crashes within a 500 foot radius of that intersection. Most of those
were rear-end collisions during the peak travel times. As you know, traffic backs up there. None of the
reported crashes were associated with that CVS access point along McWhirt Loop. Another issue that
was stated was just kind of the overall intensity of this development and so I’ll just run through a couple
facts and figures here and then some examples of other development within the County. For the B-2
zone, you are allowed a maximum of 0.7 Floor Area Ratio and you must have a minimum 25% open
space. This proposal… or this GDP actually shows a far less Floor Area Ratio; it’s just actually 0.08 and
is providing, actually that should be 33% open space in the GDP. They are exceeding minimum parking
requirements at this time, but these details could be flushed out at site plan stage as well. Just to go
through some other development that’s of similar nature…

Mr. Gibbons: Can you back up to that one?

Mr. Harbin: Yes sir.

Mr. Gibbons: Okay, do you think that there, as a staff, do you think that this is too much for this area
with the way 17 is being reconfigured and any changes? Sometime you’re trying to shoehorn everything
into something and it just can’t happen. And I don’t know how you’re going to handle the traffic here.

Mr. English: I think he’s got some answers to your questions.


                                                 Page 2 of 8
                                                                                           Attachment 4
                                                                                           Page 25 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
June 11, 2014

Mr. Gibbons: Oh, he does?

Mr. English: Yeah, with some pictures.

Mr. Harbin: I will address that Mr. Gibbons.

Mr. Gibbons: We spent all that money to widen 17 and now it’s going to be filled up. It looks like the
New Jersey Turnpike.

Mr. Harbin: So, this is along Garrisonville Road. You have a Chik-Fil-A with a drive-through and
adjacent to that a multi-tenant building with about 3 or 4 tenants in it. That’s about 14,000 square feet
and that’s on 1.86 acres site along a very busy road. You have the newly built…

Mr. Gibbons: I mean, that’s a bad one to use because it’s a mess and we had to make them go around in
the drive-in. So, are you going to do the same thing over there to that property that you did to Chik-Fil-
A? I mean, that is a complete mess out there. You can’t even get in and out of the shopping center at
lunchtime.

Mr. Harbin: Right. That’s a much tighter site than what we’re dealing with and a higher level of
building. That has 14,000 square feet and in their GDP they have about 10,000 square feet and a larger
site. But just to look at a couple other examples, you have the Panera Bread along 17 and a future multi-
tenant building as well that has one drive-through, also about 14,000 square feet on 2.7 acres. So that’s
about a comparable size to the size we’re dealing with tonight. Just down the road from this site, you
have… this is actually the CVS and you have McWhirt Loop right here… you have a bank, a McDonald’s
and a multi-tenant building about 10,000 or so square feet or 12 or so, and two drive-throughs on 2.3
acres of land. I’m not saying that this isn’t a high level of development for the site, but there’s certainly a
precedence that has been established for this kind of use. The applicant…

Mr. Gibbons: Yeah, but you can’t use Chik-Fil-A on 610 as an example because the traffic does not go
through there. All you’ve got is… you’ve got Staples and the nursery and now you’ve got Mary
Washington, but you don’t have the traffic flow that you do at McWhirt Loop. I mean, there’s no
comparison.

Mrs. Bailey: (Inaudible) echo of Mr. Gibbons, there’s no direct access right off of Garrisonville Road
either to those pads.

Mr. Harbin: That is true. Yes, you have to enter (inaudible).

Mr. English: (Inaudible - microphone not on) from 17 on both sides of the McDonald’s and the…

Mr. Harbin: You do have an access point here and then an exit there.

Mr. English: Right. Plus you’ve got something on the backside.

Mr. Harbin: Yes. You have an access point for each parcel. Now this is a little bit different as each of
these buildings is on its own parcel, as opposed to three buildings on one larger parcel. The advantages to

                                                 Page 3 of 8
                                                                                           Attachment 4
                                                                                           Page 26 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
June 11, 2014

that, well there are disadvantages and advantages to it, mainly for the owner if they wanted to sell the
property, it’s already been subdivided so they could easily do that. I believe the owners here are looking
to lease the property, so that’s not as much of an issue.

Mr. Apicella: I’m just going to echo what Mr. Gibbons has said because the difference is the direction the
traffic is going at this site and the intensity of that traffic at any point in the day as compared to the
intensity of traffic on the other side which, in the evening, is a madhouse and it’s bumper to bumper
traffic. And again, the only access points are either back onto McWhirt Loop or onto 17 which is
chockablocked. Bob, you might be able to help because… I mean, I come at a certain time around 6:30-
ish and again, it’s bumper to bumper traffic. I imagine that’s, you know, from four o’clock on until
maybe seven o’clock. So, again, folks visiting that other parcel, if there’s three intense… two especially
intense uses… again, my concern is traffic trying to get back onto 17. But, I’m just kind of throwing that
out there. I think it’s fair to ask the question whether these are representative type projects and that’s I
think what we were asking for is the amount of uses on that specific parcel given the traffic that abuts it, is
there anything like that in the County and I’m not quite sure that the circumstances are similar. Just my
perspective as somebody who lives in that area.

Mr. English: I think the similar is going to be your McDonald’s compared to that I think. And with the
17 widening, that’s going to alleviate a whole lot too up there, won’t it? As far as…

Mr. Harbin: Alleviate… well, it will add additional capacity. And then this is the proposed site. Like I
said, 2.86 acres, about 10,000 square feet with two drive-throughs.

Mr. Apicella: John, can you remind us what’s going to happen with the parcel immediately to the west of
this site?

Mr. Harbin: I can. This is the GDP for that adjacent property. It was rezoned, I believe, in the late
2000’s for general commercial, retail, and I believe some M-1, Light Industrial, as well.

Mr. Apicella: So the bottom line is, if this gets approved, both these parcels will definitely have an
impact on 17 and McWhirt Loop collectively, if and when this actually comes through fruition.

Mr. Harbin: Correct. Are there any other questions that the Commission has at this point?

Mr. Apicella: Any questions of staff? Again, I have the same question I asked for an earlier project, and
you’ve mentioned it a couple times. The GDP indicates a certain amount of Floor Area Ration but, in the
absence of the GDP being proffered, how do we know that that’s what we’re going to get? Again, in this
case, we’ve got entrances that have changed, the configuration within the site has been modified, but I’m
not quite sure how we get the assurance that, at the end of the day, that’s what it’s going to turn out to be.

Mr. Harbin: Right. To speak directly to the access point on McWhirt Loop, that is proffered in the
general location as to how it’s shown on this GDP. And they did update that in their revised proffers. But
you’re right; in terms of the amount of construction the square footage of the Floor Area Ratio, that is not
proffered. They have proffered the vehicle trips per day which we recommended that they do to set the
maximum limit for the use of that site. That’s what the TIA was based on and what they’re proposed
mitigations of that impact are.

                                                 Page 4 of 8
                                                                                          Attachment 4
                                                                                          Page 27 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
June 11, 2014


Mr. Apicella: Any other questions to staff? No, okay. Will the applicant please come up?

Ms. Karnes: Good evening Commissioners and staff. My name is Debrarae Karnes; I am an attorney and
land use planner with Leming and Healy. We were here before and we generally discussed the project,
and I’m not going to waste your time getting into most of those details. We did discuss the fact that this is
both a request for a rezoning from A-1 to B-2, as well as a request for a conditional use permit for the two
drive-throughs. And we talked about the fact that the change of zoning is overall consistent with the
Comp Plan and compatible with the neighborhood. And the big issues from last time were transportation
and the internal site circulation from the two uses. We’d like to thank Commissioner English for meeting
with us and allowing us to work through the problems. What we did was to relocate the access, the full
service access, on McWhirt Loop approximately a hundred feet further away from the Route 17
intersection, which does a couple of things. It improves circulation on McWhirt Loop; it improves
internal site circulation as staff requested to get the vehicle traffic through the two drive-through uses. By
the way, access, as staff said, is proffered. We did a couple of other things. We redesigned some of the
internal aspects of the site, and this included relocating the parking for deliveries and also moved around
some of the parking at the rear of the site in order to provide a more of a, I guess, an efficient and safe
circulation period. And provided for the directional sign for the rear exit. I want to talk about
transportation for a minute. I think this site, this project, is innovative. I talked about this a little bit
before. Instead of normally focusing on the maximum amount of square footage for the site, instead we
proffer to restrict uses as stipulated in the proffers, and also to ensure that the uses generate no more than
the maximum amount of traffic that our traffic study says will be allowed on the… that can be handled
efficiently at the site. And so, you’ll see that in proffer 3, and it says, the combined uses constructed
and/or operated on the property shall not result in more than 4,117 average vehicle trips per day. And I’m
not going to read the whole thing, but we even go in to specify that we won’t exceed the maximum traffic
our traffic study shows at both a.m. and p.m. peak periods because our client, the applicant, it’s important
that his site can handle the traffic generated from Route 17; which, by the way, is being expanded and the
engineers have designed traffic improvements that mesh with the improvements to be done by VDOT.
And so you will see proffered an additional through lane onto McWhirt from Route 17. You’ll also see,
in advance of even approval, additional dedication of right-of-way to streamline VDOTs drainage
construction for their ongoing plan. Someone also raised the issue of site distance. And, as staff reported,
this project will be built with safe site distance. It will be done in combination with VDOTs project and
with the installation of this through lane. Additional grading will be done and there is actually a site
easement reflected on the GDP. I think there was a request that the applicant cut back the existing
growth, I’ll call it, along the property and, on behalf of the owner of the property, we are willing to
promise some good faith to cut that back now. The last issue, I think, is the level of development on the
site. I think you heard staff say it’s comparable to other buildings in the County but also I submit to you
that this site has been engineered to handle the traffic generated from this development. A question came
up before about proffering the GDP. We’re proffering key components. We’re proffering the
transportation improvements. We’re proffering the inter-parcel access to the adjoining site. And most
importantly, we’re proffering the relocated access. Again, I think it’s more important, instead of making
sure the exact buildings are built exactly as shown, that the extent of traffic generated from the site is
proffered and will not exceed a maximum level. I think there was one question before, well how are you
going to measure that? But indeed, the proffer does go ahead and at each time a new occupant comes in,
they must present to staff the calculation of the amount of vehicles that will be engendered by that use in
accordance with the ITE manual. I’ve never seen this type of proffer before. I can’t say it’s never been

                                                Page 5 of 8
                                                                                           Attachment 4
                                                                                           Page 28 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
June 11, 2014

done but staff recommended it and it seemed to be directly responsive to the concern about traffic. I think
this is a good use. We’ve tried to work with the Commissions’ concern. I will be happy to answer any
questions you have, but I ask for a vote for approval tonight.

Mr. Apicella: Any questions?

Mr. English: They’ve come through with everything I’ve asked them to do when we met with them.

Mr. Apicella: Seeing no other questions, again, I still have concerns about some of the things that you
mentioned that are on the GDP but aren’t in some way proffered or assured. For example, the parking,
the internal site configuration, and circulation. So, while I hear what you’re saying about the maximum
number of vehicles dumping onto and off of Route 17 and McWhirt Loop, we still have the issues of the
site itself and vehicles being able to get around without having any problems. So, again, without the GDP
being proffered, I’m not quite sure how to assure myself, much less the community, that what you’re
suggesting here, what the applicant is suggesting here, is going to come to fruition. We spent a lot of time
talking at the last meeting about this, about our concerns, on the site itself. And it’s easy to say that those
things will be done and to see on a GDP that those things will be done, but in the absence of it being part
of the package formally, I don’t know how we get there from here.

Ms. Karnes: And I only have two comments to respond to you. First of all, we did hear what you were
saying and we did sit down to try to see if we could give you any other assurances. I still believe, just for
the record, that you’re getting greater protection based on the commitment of maximum traffic generation.
But I will tell you this, that it’s easier to commit to an entire GDP when you’ve got known users and
you’re defining… you’re designing the GDP and the project for those known users. In this case, we only
have one established user, and that’s Starbucks. We don’t know who the other two will be.

Mr. Apicella: Again, I respect that you need some flexibility and I guess I’m throwing it out there. What
other ways can we address my concerns? And, again, I think it wasn’t just my concern because it came
up from some other members. How are we going to deal with the internal circulation issues and the
parking issues and the possibility that there could be some conflicts on the site itself when vehicles are
travelling around from one place to another? Hey, someone might want to go to one drive-through and
then go to another drive-through. Again, it’s not the buildings per se that concern me or necessarily what
the ultimate uses are, but the traffic problems that might happen on that site. I appreciate that you’ve
proffered the entrance; I think that’s a great thing and moved it. But I’m still concerned about what
happens on the site itself. Just throwing it out there… what other measures can we incorporate? And to
staff… what can we do to ameliorate at least my concern, if not the concern of other members of this
panel?

Mr. Harbin: Mr. Chairman, I will just reiterate the location of this parcel; within the Highway Corridor
Overlay District. That, beyond proffers, is probably the most restrictive in terms of the development of a
parcel of any zoning district or overlay district the County has. There are twelve development standards
within the Highway Corridor Overlay District. The first one being access and internal circulation shall be
designed so as to not impede traffic on a public street, and the developer of all parcels or lots within the
Highway Corridor shall submit an access and internal circulation plan to the County for approval which
addresses access for the project and surrounding area. So, without it being actually proffered, they will


                                                 Page 6 of 8
                                                                                         Attachment 4
                                                                                         Page 29 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
June 11, 2014

have to go through a fairly rigorous site review process, site plan review process when they do submit
something to the County beyond the GDP itself. Does that…?

Mr. Apicella: And you’re saying the County will continue to work with them and not approve their final
plan until you’re confident there are not internal circulation issues?

Mr. Harbin: Absolutely. It is subject to County approval.

Mr. Harvey: And Mr. Chairman, conditions 5 and 6 of the proposed CUP speak to that to some degree. It
says that condition 5, stacking lanes for drive-through facilities shall be designed as to not impede traffic
circulation. So, we have an ordinance requirement that there be specific standoff between drive-through
window and how many cars can back up in the stacking lane. We’d also have to ensure that that’s not
going to have any impact on any of the travel lanes onsite. Also, we have a condition that all drive-
through facilities shall include a by-pass lane for vehicles not using the drive-through area. So, that
allows again further circulation onsite. Those things certainly will help. But, as Mr. Harbin said, some of
it will be more site plan specific kind of review comments.

Mr. Apicella: Thank you. Anything else from…?

Ms. Karnes: You saw my engineer come up and whisper to me. Those were the exact things he was
saying. These are, to some degree, site plan issues and staff is usually extremely diligent in ensuring
circulation.

Mr. Apicella: Thank you. Any other questions? Okay, seeing none I’m going to bring it back to the
Commission. Mr. English, this is in your district and, just as a matter of order, we would take up the
reclassification first and then the CUP.

Mr. English: What I recommend, that we approve RC1300290, Reclassification of McWhirt Loop
Commercial.

Mr. Boswell: Second.

Mr. Apicella: Okay, there’s been a motion and properly seconded. Any further comment? Okay, seeing
none all in favor say aye.

Mrs. Bailey: Aye.

Mr. English: Aye.

Mr. Boswell: Aye.

Mr. Apicella: Aye. All opposed? Okay, the motion passes.

Mr. Gibbons: I vote no.

Mr. Apicella: Okay.

                                                Page 7 of 8
                                                                                      Attachment 4
                                                                                      Page 30 of 30
Planning Commission Minutes
June 11, 2014


Mr. English: Okay.

Mr. Gibbons: (Inaudible - microphone not on). If you’re widening 17 now and we don’t even have that
completed, and you can’t move on 17. You can’t move on it between Thursday and Sunday afternoon.
And to put this amount of intense traffic in that small of… I can’t… it’s ludicrous. And why we spent all
that money to widen 17 without improving it through-put is beyond belief. So, I’m just… sorry.

Mr. Apicella: Okay, so for further clarification, the motion passes 4 to 1.

Mr. English: I’d like to make a motion to approve the Conditional Use Permit, CUP1300291, McWhirt
Loop Commercial.

Mr. Boswell: Second.

Mr. Apicella: Okay, any further comments? Okay, all in favor say aye.

Mrs. Bailey: Aye.

Mr. English: Aye.

Mr. Boswell: Aye.

Mr. Apicella: Aye. All opposed?

Mr. Gibbons: No.

Mr. Apicella: Okay, the motion passes 4 to 1. Thank you.




                                                Page 8 of 8
                                                                                                                                Attachment 5
                                                                                                  .    ..-
                                                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
                                             (
STAFFORD COUl\!TY
Department ot Planning and Zoning


                                          Project Information & Primary Contacts                                ~ ~~            Nfs-
       PROJECT INFORMATION                                                 PROJECT#                     ~Z'i()
        Mdiilhj r.t. I      .cup    Ct1••• ....~ja]
       PRQJECT X-\;\ IE                                                                                SECTio;.;
                                                                                                       2.826
      ADDRESS (IF .-\\"..UL\l!LE)                                                                     TOT•.U. SITE .-\eRE-\GE
        44-120B                                                                                        A-1 proposed to be              1   ~ oned to B-2
      I •.;.~ !\l-\P :P•.l.RCEUS)                                                                     ZO:"L\"G DISTRICT
       On comer of                  warrenton         Road and ~ Loop
      LOCATIO)\ OF PROJECT




      APPliCANT/AGENT (Pro"ide attachment if                               Primary Contact Person lXI
                      Applicant and Agent differ)
       Ho Clark Laning and Leming and Healy P .C.          Lan:inq and Heal~ P .C •
      :J.l~ Frontier Developnent, LLC             CO:\ lP.·\.XY
       233 Garrisonville Road, SUite 204, Stafford, VA 22554
     ADDRESS                                                      CIIT                  ST.o\TE                 :JP
       540-659-5155                               540-659-1651               laningandhealyl@msn. can
     PHONE ;-;L-~mER                             FAX~"L!>.IBER             HL-\IL-mDRESS



     OWNER (Pro,ide attachments if multiple o"vners)                       Primary Contact Person 0
      .BaJ:bara Snellings Lewis, Trustee and Maynard E. T. Lewis, Trustee                                                                  .
     ~A."\ IE                                                              CO:-.IPA."\.··y

       1335 TruslCM Road, Fredericksbw:g, VA 22406
                                                                  CJIT                  STATE                   ;:IP
     ADDRESS


     PHO:K'E :-..T;\mER                          FAX >.I..~IBER            E:\L-\IUDORESS
                                                                                                                                            ..'


     PROFESSIONAL (Engineer. Surveyor, etc.)                               Primary Contact Person 0


                                                                           CO~JP.-\.\.1"
     :-;.....:\IE

                                                                                                      ST.-\lE             ~JP
     ADDRESS                                                      crrr


                                                 FAX Nn iBER               D.l-'JLWDRESS
     PHO?\.""E Xl.:;\·mER




                                                                   PageS
                                                                                                                               Attachment 5
                                                                                                                                Page 2 of 20
                                            (                                                            (

5TAFFORD COL").jTY
Department of Planning and Zoning


                                           Proj ed Information & Prima!! Contacts
                                                                                                                               Ct1P
      PROJECT INFORMATION                                                               PRO[ECftf.              \~Zt\\
      .Mdolhirt Loop Ccmnercial
      PROJECT :".-'....\.IE                                                                                    SECTIO:-;"
                                                                                                                2.826
      :\I:'DRESS I, IF .-\.\'..lJL-\BLE)                                                                       TOL.1J.. SITE ACRE-\GE
      44-120B                                                                                                  A-1 proposed to be re ;. ,oned to
      T.-'....\: :\L-'.P . P.-\RCEL(S)                                                                         :O!\l~G
                                                                                                                    DISTRICT              B-2
     On corner of Wa.rrentoo Road                           am McWhirt Loop
      L~:HIO~ OF PROJECT




      APPUCANT/AGENT (Pro"ide attachment if                                            Primary Contact Person :Ia
                                           Applicant and Agent differ)

     Ho Clax:K Lem:im and tanim ·arrl Heal~ ;e.c.    Lani.nq am Healy P.c.
     &u:JEFrantier Developnent, LIC                 cmJPA.\T
     233 Garrisawille Road, SUite 204, Staffo:r:d, VA 22554 '
     :illl:'RESS                                                      CITI"                     STA'VE                   2IP

     §4Q-6§9-§;J;§§                                §4Q-(;§9 16§1                        l enj ngandheal ¥1 @msn                ( '!t'n
     PHOXE XC:\ffiER                             E-\.'\ :-.:c;~.mER                    EH.ULIDDRESS



     0\~'NER             (PrO\ide attachments if multiple owners)                            , Contact Person 0
                                                                                       PrimarY
   !Barbara Snellings Lewis, Trustee and Maynard E. T. Lewis,
                                                              T.nlstee
     ~A\.IE                                                                            cmiP:\.'\oT
        1335 Truslow Road, Fredericksburg, VA                                 22406
     .-illDRESS                          em·                                                    ST.-HE                   :IP



     PHO~E      :'\T:\ ffiER                     F.\:\ ~l:).JBER                      E).L\IL.JaDDRESS




     PROFESSIONAL (Engineer, Surveyor, etc.}                                          Primary Contact Person 0

    XA\.lE                                                                             CO~IPA':Y




    .-'.DDRESS                                                        em·                       :    -       ST.·\TE             .:IP



    PHO:\"E~C:\ffiER                            f:\,'\:'\1::\IBER                     E:\l-\IUDDRESS
                                                                                            Attachment 5
                                                                                             Page 3 of 20



STAFFORD COUNTY
D~parlmcml of Plar'inln~ and ZuninK



                                      Statements of Understanding,



I, as owner/co-owner of the property subject to this application, do hereby certify that I have read and
understand the requirements for the submission of a conditional use permit as provided under the Stafford
County Code, and further, that this submittal is in compliance with the requirements and applicable
provisions of the Stafford County Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 28 of the Stafford County Code.




Signature of Owner/Co Owner                 Printed Name                        Date




Signature of Owner/Co Owner                 Printed Name                        Date




Signature of Owner/Co Owner                 Printed Name                        Date




I, as applicant or agent for the ~~~~'ifue property subject to this application, do hereby certify that 1 have
read and understand the requirements for the submission of a conditional use permit as provided under the
Stafford County Code, and further, that this submittal is in compliance with the requirements and applicable
provisions of the Stafford Cou ty Zonin.g Ordinance, Chapter 28 of the Stafford County Code.



                                                 H. Clark Laning             5/24/13
                                            Printed Name                        Date




* Additional sheets may be used, if necessary.




                                                   Page7
                                                                 Attachment 5
                                                                  Page 4 of 20
STAFFORD COC:\T\
Department ot Planning and Zorung


                                         General Information

Clearly indicate all information that applies to this project:

DEI AILED DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT
       Propozed rezoning fran A-1 to B-2




INFORMATION FOR FEE CALCULATIONS


     2. 9324
--==-=-==~--
                    ;; of Acres

Type of Rezoning:
QJ       Standard Rezoning
0        Planned Development
0        Proffer Amendment
0        Minor Proffer Amendment



INFORMATIONAL

Previous Ordinance# _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Previous Resolution if _ _ _ _ _ _ __

~of    Lots (if rezoning to residential) _ __
Original Zoning _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
Proposed Zoning _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Proposed Cse(s) general ccmnercial




                                                  Page 7
                                                                                                 Attachment 5
                                                                                                  Page 5 of 20



STAFFORO Cot.~"! \
Oeputment of l'lanrung   ~   Zonan,


                                             General Information

Clearly indicate all information that applies to this project:

DEIAILED DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT
  Conditional Use Pennit for up to 2 drive-thru                    wj_ndn.zs for
  ccmnercial devel.Of:ltlent.




INFORMATION FOR FEE CALCULATIONS


_2_·9_3_2_4___ it of Acres

Ty pe of Conditional Use Permit:
        Standard Conditional Use Permit (including ammdments)
        Minor Conditional Use Permit Amendment
~ See Background         Information on page 3 to determine if the request qualifies as a minor amendment.




INFORMATIONAL

Previous Resolution tf - - - - - -- -

Zoning District          A-1 concurrent application to reclassify to B-2

Proposed Use(s)           oc:mrercial




                                                     PageS
                                                                                                               Attachment 5
                                                                                                                Page 6 of 20




                                       OWNE~S CONSENT FORM



         I, Eric Grodon, manager of Frontier Development, LLC, contract purchaser of

Assessors Parcel44-120B as shown on the land records of the Commissioner of the

Revenue for Stafford County, Virginia, authorize H. Clark Leming of Leming and Healy

P.C. to apply for a rezoning reclassification and one or more conditional use permits for

this parcel.



                                                       Eric Gordon



CQl\ofMONWEAL I R/STATE OF _ __.t:._-_LG'_v-_~,_A.-_"-_ _ _ __
COUNTY/C-ITY OF MLti..ht,i Va..vtc., to wit:


      I the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the county and state aforesaid, do
hereby certify that Eric Gordon, whose name is signed to the foregoing document, has
personally acknowledged the same before me in my aforesaid jurisdiction.

         GIVEN under my hand and seal this              J.L day of May, 2013.

                                                              Gtt w (\IV£)~-(~)
                                                            Notary Public

My Commission Expires:._,-41--.1+-ltJ_.._'_.._   ~f.____
                                          ·\ .......
                                                                                      -
                                                                        ,,,....,,,             LUCIA M 011,'1 1\SCtO
                                                                •    •'' " ' ~~~ ,,,                              I ft d
                                                                   .~~.
                                                                     ,··•m       e,,-:,.  Notary Public- State 0      Oil a
                                                                · ; . : •: '"'•~§ My comm. Expires Jan 25, 20 14
                                                                '
                                                                  ~"'~              ~.;     commission 11 00 949705
                                                                • ·-,:~f.flt.r.~<f..,•'' Bonded Through National Notary Assn
                                                                                                                                            Attachment 8
                                                                                                                                           Page 67 of 103
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd) -- Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop                                                                      QC JOB #: 10913401
 CITY/STATE: Fredericksburg, VA                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Apr 09 2013
                      1530          1922                          Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM
                             0.98                                                                                                     9.6         9.4

                       4 1403 123
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                      0.0 9.8 7.3


       73      5                           195    343
                                                                                                                       17.8   60.0                        6.7      8.5
        0.92   21            0.95           16   0.91
                                                                                                                              4.8                        12.5
       60      34                          132    164
                                                                                                                       20.0   23.5                       10.6     12.2

                       56 1701 40
                                                                                                                                      19.6 9.6 25.0

                      1571          1797
                             0.94                                                                                                     10.2        10.3



                              1                                                                                                        0     0     0



                                                                                                                              0                            1

               0                             0                                                                                0                            1

                                                                                                                              0                            0

                              0                                                                                                        0     0     0




                             NA                                                                                                              NA




               NA                          NA                                                                                 NA                          NA




                             NA                                                                                                              NA



 15-Min Count         Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd)               Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd)   Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop   Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop Total                    Hourly
    Period                (Northbound)                        (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                   Totals
 Beginning At       Left Thru Right       U             Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U      Left Thru Right        U
    6:00 AM          17    144      8     0               7    192      0     4     0       0      4     0       18       3      5     0    402
    6:15 AM          22    219     16     0              12    213      0     3     1       0      8     0       35       9     13     0    551
    6:30 AM          22    249     18     1              15    250      1     6    10       3     14     0       30       3     12     0    634
    6:45 AM          14    369      8     1              14    273      2     5     3       4     10     0       34       3     18     0    758                         2345
    7:00 AM          10    350      4     1              21    292      0     5     3       3      9     0       36       0     20     0    754                         2697
    7:15 AM          11    420     10     1              22    354      0     3     0       4     10     0       30       3     29     1    898                         3044
    7:30 AM          11    443     15     1              26    341      0     3     0       4      9     0       39       2     62     0    956                         3366
    7:45 AM          15    451     10     1              28    357      1     3     1       4      9     0       34       6     60     0    980                         3588
    8:00 AM          16    387      5     0              26    351      3    12     4       9      6     0       28       5     44     0    896                         3730
    8:15 AM          21    391      9     0              18    322      2     1     2       4     15     0       35       4     56     0    880                         3712
    8:30 AM          16    405     23     1              25    309      3     3     2       5      9     0       31       4     64     0    900                         3656
    8:45 AM          15    366     23     2              29    307      4     6     4       4     13     0       25       4     60     0    862                         3538




 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                          Southbound                  Eastbound                      Westbound
   Flowrates        Left Thru Right     U               Left Thru Right    U      Left   Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right    U                         Total
  All Vehicles       60 1804     40     4               112 1428      4   12       4      16    36     0        136      24   240     0                         3920
 Heavy Trucks        12  144     12                      12  156      0            4       0    12                8       0    12                                372
  Pedestrians              0                                   0                           0                              0                                       0
    Bicycles          0    0      0                       0    0      0            0       0      0               0       0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/15/2013 6:05 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                           Attachment 8
                                                                                                                                          Page 68 of 103
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd) -- Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop                                                                     QC JOB #: 10913402
 CITY/STATE: Fredericksburg, VA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Apr 09 2013
                      1805          1798                          Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM
                             0.89                                                                                                    6.6        8.5

                       22 1585 198
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                                     4.5 7.2 2.0


       92      22                          174    291
                                                                                                                       19.6   0.0                     1.7      4.1
        0.85   59            0.93           21   0.93
                                                                                                                              0.0                     9.5
       212     131                          96    324
                                                                                                                       5.2    8.4                     7.3      1.9

                       52 1579 90
                                                                                                                                     28.8 9.5 2.2

                      1815          1721
                             0.91                                                                                                    7.3        9.7



                              0                                                                                                       0    0    0



                                                                                                                              0                        0

               0                             0                                                                                1                        0

                                                                                                                              0                        0

                              0                                                                                                       0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                            NA




               NA                          NA                                                                                 NA                      NA




                             NA                                                                                                            NA



 15-Min Count         Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd)               Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd)   Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop   Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop Total               Hourly
    Period                (Northbound)                        (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At       Left Thru Right       U             Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U      Left Thru Right        U
    4:00 PM          13    336     26     2              38    417      4     1     7      14     31     0       23       6     59     0     977
    4:15 PM          19    330     17     4              43    363      3     4     6      15     26     0       15       8     64     0     917
    4:30 PM          12    406     21     1              39    454     11     3     8      21     40     0       19       5     44     0    1084
    4:45 PM          19    367     21     1              50    365      5     7     3      20     44     0       28       7     54     0     991                    3969
    5:00 PM          11    358     28     1              39    380      4     5     6       7     32     0       32       4     39     0     946                    3938
    5:15 PM           7    448     20     0              47    386      2     8     5      11     15     0       17       5     37     0    1008                    4029
    5:30 PM           5    354     27     1              37    345      5     9     6      13     32     0       28       8     31     0     901                    3846
    5:45 PM          16    361     30     0              48    357      1     3     7      10     22     0       27      10     40     0     932                    3787
    6:00 PM          17    308     17     0              36    289      5     4     8       6     25     0       15       6     40     0     776                    3617
    6:15 PM          11    303     24     2              32    308      7    12     5      10     10     0       24       8     35     0     791                    3400
    6:30 PM           7    305     29     1              29    323      4     6     7       6     22     0       28       7     25     0     799                    3298
    6:45 PM          10    266     23     0              36    274      2     5     3       9     11     0       17       6     21     0     683                    3049




 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                          Southbound                  Eastbound                      Westbound
   Flowrates        Left Thru Right     U               Left Thru Right    U      Left   Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles       48 1624     84     4               156 1816     44   12       32     84   160     0         76      20   176     0                     4336
 Heavy Trucks        12  220      8                       8  100      0             0      0    12                4       4     0                            368
  Pedestrians              0                                   0                           0                              0                                   0
    Bicycles          0    0      0                       0    0      0            0       0      0              0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/15/2013 6:05 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                        Attachment 8
                                                                                                                                       Page 69 of 103
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: CVS Entrance -- McWhirt Loop                                                                                          QC JOB #: 10913403
 CITY/STATE: Fredericksburg, VA                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Apr 09 2013
                           0          0                           Peak-Hour: 8:00 AM -- 9:00 AM
                               0.00                                                                                               0.0         0.0

                           0    0     0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 8:15 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0


       74      0                            0     94
                                                                                                                   23.0   0.0                         0.0      20.2
        0.71   66              0.94        71   0.78
                                                                                                                          24.2                       23.9
       69      3                           23     77
                                                                                                                   24.6   33.3                        8.7      23.4

                           3    0     11
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 18.2

                         26           14
                               0.58                                                                                               11.5        14.3



                                0                                                                                                  0     0     0



                                                                                                                          0                             0

               0                            0                                                                             0                             1

                                                                                                                          0                             0

                                0                                                                                                  0     0     0




                                NA                                                                                                       NA




               NA                          NA                                                                             NA                          NA




                                NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min Count                  CVS Entrance                   CVS Entrance              McWhirt Loop               McWhirt Loop                      Total        Hourly
    Period                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                    Totals
 Beginning At       Left        Thru Right       U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right     U    Left   Thru Right            U
    6:00 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0       4      0     0     0      20      0            0            24
    6:15 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0       9      0     0     0      30      0            0            39
    6:30 AM          0            0     1        0      0        0     0     0    0      25      0     0     1      24      0            0            51
    6:45 AM          1            0     1        0      0        0     0     0    0      17      0     0     2      17      0            0            38              152
    7:00 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0      15      0     0     0      12      0            0            27              155
    7:15 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0      14      0     0     0      14      0            0            28              144
    7:30 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0      13      0     0     1      13      0            0            27              120
    7:45 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0      15      1     0     2      18      0            0            36              118
    8:00 AM          1            0     2        0      0        0     0     0    0      17      1     0     4      19      0            0            44              135
    8:15 AM          0            0     1        0      0        0     0     0    0      19      1     0     6      20      0            0            47              154
    8:30 AM          1            0     5        0      0        0     0     0    0      13      1     0     6      16      0            0            42              169
    8:45 AM          1            0     3        0      0        0     0     0    0      17      0     0     7      16      0            0            44              177




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates        Left       Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right    U     Left    Thru Right    U                          Total
  All Vehicles       0           0      4     0         0       0      0     0    0      76      4    0      24      80     0     0                          188
 Heavy Trucks        0           0      0               0       0      0          0      32      0            4      28     0                                 64
  Pedestrians                    0                              0                         0                           0                                        0
    Bicycles         0           0      0               0       0      0          0       0      0           0        1     0                                  1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/15/2013 6:05 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                       Attachment 8
                                                                                                                                      Page 70 of 103
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: CVS Entrance -- McWhirt Loop                                                                                         QC JOB #: 10913404
 CITY/STATE: Fredericksburg, VA                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Apr 09 2013
                           0          0                           Peak-Hour: 4:00 PM -- 5:00 PM
                               0.00                                                                                              0.0        0.0

                           0    0     0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 4:45 PM -- 5:00 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


       74      0                            0    117
                                                                                                                   18.9   0.0                      0.0      13.7
        0.88   190             0.88        49   0.91
                                                                                                                          7.9                     28.6
       201     11                          68    235
                                                                                                                   7.5    0.0                      2.9       6.8

                         25     0     42
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 2.4

                         76           67
                               0.80                                                                                              2.6        1.5



                                0                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

               0                            0                                                                             1                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                                0                                                                                                 2    0    0




                                NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                          NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                                NA                                                                                                     NA



 15-Min Count                  CVS Entrance                   CVS Entrance              McWhirt Loop                McWhirt Loop                  Total        Hourly
    Period                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Totals
 Beginning At       Left        Thru Right       U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right     U    Left    Thru Right         U
    4:00 PM          4            0    11        0      0        0     0     0    0      45      2     0     18       7      0         0           87
    4:15 PM          7            0     4        0      0        0     0     0    0      37      4     0     16      15      0         1           84
    4:30 PM          6            0    14        0      0        0     0     0    0      53      3     0     14      13      0         2          105
    4:45 PM          8            0    13        0      0        0     0     0    0      55      2     0     17      14      0         0          109              385
    5:00 PM          2            0     4        0      0        0     0     0    0      39      5     0     10      12      0         0           72              370
    5:15 PM          4            0     9        0      0        0     0     0    0      25      1     0      7       6      0         1           53              339
    5:30 PM          2            0     7        0      0        0     0     0    0      41      1     0     11       7      0         0           69              303
    5:45 PM          1            0     8        0      0        0     0     0    0      27      3     0     10      10      0         0           59              253
    6:00 PM          2            0     8        0      0        0     0     0    0      32      2     0     16      16      0         0           76              257
    6:15 PM          3            0     6        0      0        0     0     0    0      20      2     0     18       8      0         0           57              261
    6:30 PM          5            0    13        0      0        0     0     0    0      22      0     0     11       7      0         0           58              250
    6:45 PM          4            0     6        0      0        0     0     0    0      16      3     0      6      10      0         0           45              236




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates        Left       Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right    U     Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles       32          0     52     0         0       0      0     0    0     220      8    0      68      56     0     0                       436
 Heavy Trucks         0          0      0               0       0      0          0      12      0            4      16     0                              32
  Pedestrians                    0                              0                         0                           0                                     0
    Bicycles         0           0      0               0       0      0          0       1      0           0        0     0                               1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/15/2013 6:05 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
