Project Team                   Acknowledgements
          City of Sherwood     The 2014 Sherwood Transportation System Plan was
                               a collaborative process among various public
          Julia Hajduk
                               agencies, key stakeholders and the community.
          Bob Galati
                               Input, assistance and outreach by the following
          Brad Kilby
                               helped make the Plan possible:

                                      Citizen Advisory Team
          ODOT
           Ross Kevlin                Technical Advisory Team
           Seth Brumley        A special acknowledgement goes out to all the
                               Sherwood residents, business owners, and visitors
                               who attended community meetings or submitted
          DKS Associates       comments. Your input helped make this Plan
                               possible.
           Chris Maciejewski
           Garth Appanaitis
           Ben Fuller

          Angelo Planning
          Group
           Darci Rudzinski
           Shayna Rehberg



                               This project is partially funded by a grant from the
                               Transportation and Growth Management (TGM)
                               Program, a joint program of the Oregon Department
                               of Transportation and the Oregon Department of
                               Land Conservation and Development. This TGM
                               grant is financed, in part, by federal Moving Ahead
                               for Progress in the 21st Century (“MAP-21”), local
                               government, and the State of Oregon funds.

                               The contents of this document do not necessarily
                               reflect views or policies of the State of Oregon.
Contents
Section A. Plan and Policy Summary Report (DKS, 2013) 

Section B. Existing Conditions Technical Report (DKS, 2013) 

Section C. Needs, Opportunities, Constraints and Tools Technical Report (DKS, 2014) 

Section D. Project Options Technical Report (DKS, 2014) 

Section E. Aspirational Project List 

Section F. Traffic Calming Toolbox 

Section G. Policy Code and Implementation 

Section H. Compliance Checklists 

Section I. Title VI Requirements                                                        

Section J. Traffic Counts 

Section K. Glossary                                                                     



                                 




                                                                                            
(This page left intentionally blank)         




                                         
 
(This page left intentionally blank) 

 




                                   




                                         
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




This report summarizes the planning documents, policies, and regulations that are applicable to the
City of Sherwood Transportation System Plan (TSP) update (see Appendix A for a complete list). The
City’s current TSP will serve as the foundation for the update process, upon which new information
obtained from system analysis and stakeholder input will be applied to address changing
transportation needs through the year 2035. Policies and requirements reviewed here will guide
the TSP update; new strategies for addressing transportation needs and TSP recommendations will
need to be coordinated with, and in some cases comply with, the plans, policies, and regulations
described herein.

Transportation System Planning in Oregon
The Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP)1 establishes goals, policies, strategies and initiatives that
address the core challenges and opportunities facing transportation in Oregon. These are further
refined in the Oregon Highway Plan (OHP) and implemented through the adopted targets and
standards in this plan.2 In addition, TSPs for cities within metropolitan planning organizations
(MPOs) must also comply with the regional transportation plan, which is adopted to meet specific
Federal requirements.

Transportation System Planning in Oregon is required by state law as one of the 19 statewide
planning goals3 (Goal 12- Transportation). The Transportation Planning Rule (TPR), OAR 660-0124,
defines how to implement State Planning Goal 12. Specifically, the TPR requires:

●   The state to prepare a TSP, referred to as the Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP);
●   Metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) to prepare a Regional Transportation Plan (RTP)
    that is consistent with the OTP (the Metro RTP5 applies to the City of Sherwood); and
●   Counties and cities to prepare local TSPs that are consistent with the OTP and RTP.
The TPR directs TSPs to integrate comprehensive plan land use with transportation needs and to
promote systems that serve statewide, regional and local transportation needs. These
requirements aim to improve community livability by encouraging land use patterns and
transportation systems that make it more convenient for people to walk, bicycle, use transit and
drive less to meet their daily needs. An evaluation of how the existing TSP and implementing code
language meet requirements of the TPR and specific recommendations for changes will be included
in the Needs, Opportunities, Constrains and Tools Report.



1
  Oregon Transportation Plan: http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/ortransplanupdate.shtml
2
  Oregon Highway Plan: http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/orhwyplan.shtml
3
  Statewide Planning Goals: http://www.oregon.gov/LCD/goals.shtml
4
  Transportation Planning Rule: http://arcweb.sos.state.or.us/rules/OARS_600/OAR_660/660_012.html
5
  Metro Regional Transportation Plan: http://www.oregonmetro.gov/index.cfm/go/by.web/id=25038

                                           11/20/13
                       Transportation System Planning in Oregon | Page 1
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




Why does the City of Sherwood need an Updated TSP?
The City's current TSP was adopted in 2005. Since then, new requirements have been made in the
OTP, OHP and Metro RTP. Several regional planning efforts have also taken place since the TSP was
adopted, and several Sherwood plans have also been updated or completed, including the Parks
Master Plan, the Town Center Plan and concept plans for areas brought into the Urban Growth
Boundary. The last 10+ years of regulatory, land use and transportation system changes will be
considered in this TSP update.

ODOT’s Transportation System Plan Guidelines6 direct TSP
updates to address recent policy and regulatory changes, and
                                                                        Oregon Transportation
calls out changes to the OTP, OHP, TPR, and federal changes
implemented into the RTP. Since adoption of the 2005 City of                 Plan (OTP)
Sherwood TSP, the OTP was updated (2006) to emphasize
maintaining assets in place, optimizing existing system
performance through technology and better system integration,
                                                                         Oregon Highway Plan
creating sustainable funding, and investing in strategic capacity
enhancements. Policy 1F (Mobility Standards) of the OHP was
                                                                                (OHP)
amended in 2011 to recognize and emphasize opportunities for
developing alternative mobility targets where such a tool better
identifies transportation needs and solutions and better                    Metro Regional
balances state and local community needs and objectives. OHP
                                                                          Transportation Plan
Goal 3, Access Management, and its associated policies and
                                                                                (RTP)
standards were also modified in 2011, with text changes
touching on balancing local economic development and state
mobility needs, jurisdictional transfer agreements, and medians.
                                                                            Metro Regional
                                                   7
Metro’s Regional Transportation Functional Plan (RTFP)                      Transportation
directs how the City of Sherwood should implement the RTP                Functional Plan (RTFP)
through the TSP and land use regulations. The RTFP codifies
existing and new requirements that local plans must comply
with to be consistent with the RTP. If a TSP is consistent with the
RTFP, Metro will find it to be consistent with the RTP.                   Local Transportation
                                                                           System Plans (TSP)
The RTFP provides guidance on several areas including
transportation design for various modal facilities, system plans,
regional parking management plans and amendments to
comprehensive plans. The following directives specifically pertain to updating local TSPs:

6
 ODOT Transportation System Plan Guidelines: http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/pages/plans.aspx
7
 Metro Regional Transportation Functional Plan:
http://www.oregonmetro.gov/index.cfm/go/by.web/id=274

                                           11/20/13
                 Why does the City of Sherwood need an Updated TSP? | Page 2
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




●   Include regional and state transportation needs identified in the 2035 RTP along with local
    needs
●   Local needs must be consistent with RTP in terms of land use, system maps and non-SOV modal
    targets (portion of trips that are not “drive alone” in a single occupant vehicle)
●   When developing solutions, local jurisdictions shall consider a variety of strategies, in the
    following order:
        ●    TSMO (Transportation System Management Operations)
        ● Transit, bicycle and pedestrian improvements
        ● Traffic calming
                                                          8
        ● Land use strategies in OAR 660-012-0035(2)
        ● Connectivity, including pedestrian and bicycle facilities
        ● Motor vehicle capacity improvements
●   Local jurisdictions can propose regional projects as part of RTP process
●   Local jurisdictions can propose alternate performance and mobility standards, however,
    changes must be consistent with regional and statewide planning goals
●   Local parking regulations shall be consistent with the RTFP




8
 As part of the TSP update effort, general strategies that have the potential to impact land use designations,
densities, and design standards will be considered to meet local and regional transportation needs.

                                            11/20/13
                  Why does the City of Sherwood need an Updated TSP? | Page 3
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




How is the Transportation System Defined?
The following sections summarize the state highway classifications and regional land use
designations for areas in the City of Sherwood. This information ultimately determines the adopted
standards and regulations that apply to state highways in the city.

ODOT State Highway Classifications
OHP Policy 1A (State Highway Classification System) categorizes state highways for planning and
management decisions. In Sherwood, OR 99W (Highway 99W) is classified as a Statewide Highway,
National Highway System (NHS), National Network, Freight Route, and Reduction Review Route. It
is intended to provide mobility, safe and efficient, high-speed, continuous-flow operation, and
connections between and within cities and regions in the state, including connections to larger
urban areas and areas that are not directly served by Interstate Highways. The designations can
limit reductions to vehicle-carrying capacity and (under the Reduction Review Route designation)
subjects proposed reductions to review.

State Highway Freight System: OHP Policy 1C addresses the need to balance the movement of
goods and services with other uses. It states that the timeliness of freight movements should be
considered when developing and implementing plans and projects on freight routes. OR 99W is a
classified Freight Route and Truck Route.

Updates to the TSP will support the existing OR 99W state classifications and will enhance the
ability of the highway to serve in their defined functions.

Metro Land Use Designations
Metro’s 2040 Growth Concept9 in the RTP applies land use designations to the Portland region. The
2040 Growth Concept is the region’s long range plan for managing growth by integrating land use
and transportation. The concept concentrates mixed use and higher density development in areas
of the region designated as “Centers,” “Station Communities,” and “Main Streets.” The 2040
Growth Concept land uses are arranged in a hierarchy, with the primary and secondary land uses,
referred to as 2040 Target Areas, as the focus of RTP investments. The hierarchy also serves as a
framework for prioritizing RTP investments.

Primary land uses in Sherwood include:

●      Tualatin-Sherwood Industrial Area10



9
    Metro 2040 Growth Concept: http://www.oregonmetro.gov/index.cfm/go/by.web/id=29882
10
     This area is shown on Metro’s 2040 Growth Concept Map along the SW Tualatin-=Sherwood Road corridor.


                                               11/20/13
                          How is the Transportation System Defined? | Page 4
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




Secondary land uses in Sherwood include:

●     The Sherwood Town Center.11
●     The “Main Streets” along SW Pine Street and SW 1st Street in Old Town.
●     The “Barbur Boulevard/Highway 99W/I‐5 Corridor,” generally running down Highway 99W
      from the northeast, turning south down Sherwood Boulevard to Old Town, and then moving
      back to the northeast along Railroad Street and turning east on Oregon.12
●     “Employment Land,” generally located west of Langer Farms Parkway and north of Tualatin-
      Sherwood Road, as well as an area along Highway 99W west of Cedar Brook Way.
The remaining areas of Sherwood are designated as Neighborhood land uses. These areas have the
lowest priority for RTP investments.

     Figure 1: Excerpt of the 2040 Metro Growth Concept Map, Land Use in the City of
                                      Sherwood, OR




11
  As noted later in this document, the Sherwood Town Center designation and accompanying plan is
currently being considered for local adoption.

12
   Note that this corridor designation generally follows the Southwest Corridor Plan study area, reviewed later
in this document.


                                              11/20/13
                         How is the Transportation System Defined? | Page 5
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




How is the Transportation System Managed?
State Highway Mobility Targets: OHP Policy 1F sets mobility targets for ensuring a reliable and
acceptable level of mobility on the highway system. The following targets are applicable to OR
99W in Sherwood (pursuant to Policy 1F, Table 7). These targets relate to the “peak first hour”
(hour of the day with the most traffic) as well as the “peak second hour” (hour with the second
most traffic during the day):
●     In the designated Town Center the mobility target indicates that the highway should operate at
      or below a volume to capacity (v/c) ratio of 1.1 during the peak first hour, and 0.99 during the
      peak second hour.
●     Outside of the Town Center, the target for OR 99W is to operate at or below a volume to
      capacity (v/c) ratio of 0.99 during the peak first and second hours.
City and County Mobility Standards: The City of Sherwood Transportation System Plan (TSP)13
identifies level of service (LOS) as the primary indicator of performance, measured by letter grade
(ranging from A through F), similar to a report card rating. The City identifies LOS D as the
minimum performance standard for both signalized and unsignalized intersections under the city’s
jurisdiction. In addition, the Roadway Element of the Washington County TSP sets target and
acceptable performance measures (based on volume-to-capacity or V/C ratios) for different
locations following Metro’s 2040 Design Types. The V/C ratio performance measures range from
0.9 to 0.99 depending on location and first/second peak hour of congestion. These standards are
applied for signalized and unsignalized intersections on roadways under county jurisdiction.

Access Management on State Highways: The Oregon Access Management Rule14 (OAR 734-051)
attempts to balance the safety and mobility needs of travelers along state highways with the access
and economic development needs of property and business owners. ODOT’s rule sets guidelines for
managing access to the state’s highway facilities in order to maintain highway function, operations,
safety, and the preservation of public investment consistent with the policies of the OHP. Access
management rules allow ODOT to control the issuing of permits for access to state highways, state
highway rights of way and other properties under the State’s jurisdiction

In addition, the ability to close existing approaches, set spacing standards and establish a formal
appeals process in relation to access issues is identified. These rules enable the State to set policy
and direct location and spacing of intersections and approaches on state highways, ensuring the




13
     Sherwood TSP, p. 3-22, Adopted March 2005.
14
   Access Management Rule:
http://arcweb.sos.state.or.us/rules/OARS_700/OAR_734/734_051.html

                                              11/20/13
                         How is the Transportation System Managed? | Page 6
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




relevance of the functional classification system and preserving the efficient operation of state
routes.15

OHP Policy 3A sets access spacing standards for driveways and approaches to the state highway
system.16 The standards are based on state highway classification and posted speed.

Access Management on Local Roadways: The adopted City of Sherwood TSP identifies minimum
intersection and driveway spacing standards for public roadways under the city’s jurisdiction.17
Washington County also provides minimum access spacing requirements for County facilities.18
Access spacing guidelines for both jurisdictions are shown in Table 1.

      Table 1: City of Sherwood and Washington County Intersection Spacing Standards

                   Street Facility                     Maximum Spacing of               Minimum Spacing of
                                                         Roadways and                 Roadways and Driveways
                                                           Driveways

 City of Sherwood, [Washington County]

 Arterial                                             1,000 feet                     600 [600]* feet

 Collector                                            400 feet                       100 [100] feet

 All roads                                            Require an access report stating that the driveway/
                                                      roadway is safe as designed meeting adequate stacking,
                                                      sight distance and deceleration requirements as set by
                                                      ODOT, Washington County and AASHTO.

Note: * Direct access to County arterials shall be from collector or other arterial streets.



15
  Amendments to OAR 734-051 were adopted in early 2012 based on passage of Senate Bill 1024 and Senate
Bill 264 in the 2010 and 2011 Oregon Legislature respectively. The amendments were intended to allow more
consideration for economic development when developing and implementing access management rules, and
involved changes to how ODOT deals with approach road spacing, highway improvements requirements with
development, and traffic impact analyses requirements for approach road permits. Senate Bill 408, which
passed in the 2013 legislative session and becomes effective January 1, 2014, is expected to result in further
rulemaking. This bill provides new requirements for development of facility plans and directs ODOT to
develop an access management strategy for each highway modernization or improvement project.

16
  ODOT Access Management Standards (Appendix C):
http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/orhwyplan.shtml
17
     2005 City of Sherwood TSP, Table 8-12: Access Spacing Standards for City Street Facilities

18
     Article V: Public Facilities and Services, 501 Public Facilities and Service Requirements.


                                                 11/20/13
                            How is the Transportation System Managed? | Page 7
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




RTP Performance targets: The Metro RTP established new performance targets (see Table 2) for
safety, congestion, freight reliability, climate change, active transportation, sidewalk/trail/transit
infrastructure, clean air, travel, affordability, and access to daily needs. The performance targets
are regional goals that the updated City of Sherwood TSP should work toward achieving.

                             Table 2: 2035 RTP Performance Targets

       Objective                                          Target by 2035


                         Reduce serious injuries and fatalities in all modes of travel by 50% (vs.
 Safety
                         2005)


 Congestion*             Reduce vehicle hours of delay (VHD) by 10% per person (vs. 2005)


 Freight reliability     Reduce VHD per truck trip by 10% (vs. 2005)


 Climate change          Reduce transportation greenhouse gas emissions by 40% (vs. 1990)


 Active
                         Triple walking, biking and transit mode share (vs. 2005)
 transportation


 Basic infrastructure    Increase by 50% access times to sidewalks, trails and transit (vs. 2005)


 Clean air               Ensure 0% population exposure to at-risk levels of pollution19


 Travel                  Reduce vehicle miles traveled per person by 10% (vs. 2005)


                         Reduce average household combined cost of housing and transportation
 Affordability
                         by 25% (vs. 2000)


 Access to daily         Increase by 50% the number of essential destinations within 30 minutes by
 needs                   bike, transit for low-income, minority, disabled pop. (vs. 2005)


19
  The region is expected to meet the target for carbon monoxide and ozone (VOC and NOX) exposure from
transportation sources. Carbon monoxide is estimated at 836,484 lbs/day, 29% below the regional motor
vehicle emissions budget for 2035; Hydrocarbons (VOC) is estimated at 17 tons/day, 58% below the regional
motor vehicle emissions budget for 2035. A regional standard for air toxics is under development. For more
information see RTP Table 2.3 and Metro’s 2010 Air Quality Conformity
Determination http://www.oregonmetro.gov/index.cfm/go/by.web/id=6502.


                                             11/20/13
                        How is the Transportation System Managed? | Page 8
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report



* Interim volume-to-capacity ratio (v/c) measures still apply

In addition to supporting the performance targets, the TSP will need to incorporate transportation
system management and operations (TSMO) into planning. The following RTP policies provide the
foundation for TSMO in the region:

●    Use advanced technologies, pricing strategies and other tools to actively manage the
     transportation system
●    Provide comprehensive real-time traveler information to people and businesses
●    Improve incident detection and clearance times on the region’s transit, arterial and throughway
     networks
●    Implement incentives and programs to increase awareness of travel options and incent change
RTP Non-Single Occupancy Vehicle (SOV) Target: The RTP also established regional mode share
targets that are intended to be goals for cities and counties to work toward as they implement the
2040 Growth Concept at the local level. Increases in walking, bicycling, ridesharing and transit
mode shares will be used to demonstrate compliance with per capita travel reductions required by
the state Transportation Planning Rule. The following modal targets apply to RTP land uses in
Sherwood:

●    Town Centers and Corridors: Non-SOV (non-drive alone) modal target of 45 to 55 percent
●    Industrial areas, Employment areas and Neighborhoods: Non-drive alone modal target of 40 to
     45 percent
As required by the RTP and the TPR, jurisdictions within the Metro region must adopt policies and
actions that encourage a shift towards non-SOV modes. The Metro Non-Single Occupancy Vehicle
(SOV) Target Actions Study summarizes the required non-SOV strategy requirements for local
jurisdictions to implement:

●    Adopt 2040 modal targets in TSP policies
●    Adopt street connectivity plans and implementing ordinances
●    Adopt maximum parking ratios to implement the parking requirements of Title 2 of the Urban
     Growth Management Functional Plan
●    Adopt transit strategies, including planning for adequate transit facilities and service;
     pedestrian facility planning and infrastructure that support transit use; location and design of
     buildings in transit zones that encourages transit use; and adoption of a transit system map,
     consistent with Metro requirements.




                                                11/20/13
                           How is the Transportation System Managed? | Page 9
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




The following measures are additional strategies to be considered in the City of Sherwood TSP
update:20

●    Continue to require transportation-efficient development through efforts to meet density and
     other land use targets in centers and corridors as part of compliance with Metro’s RTFP and
     related requirements.
●    Construct bicycle and pedestrian improvements, consistent with state, federal and local
     government requirements. Local governments and Metro should prioritize improvements that
     enhance connectivity of the bicycle and pedestrian system and access to transit.
●    Continue to support TriMet and other transit agencies in providing frequent, reliable and
     comprehensive transit service, and local implementation of pedestrian and bicycle
     infrastructure to improve access to transit. Credit local jurisdictions with efforts to support
     transit agencies in these efforts.
●    Support and encourage efforts to implement employer-based transportation demand
     management (TDM) strategies that reduce reliance on single occupant motor vehicles.
     Coordinate with employers even in areas where the formation of transportation management
     associations (TMAs) that have organized TDM plans is not required.
●    Encourage and assist in implementing parking cash-out programs or other techniques to
     eliminate employer subsidies for parking. Consider requiring local governments to eliminate
     free employee parking and provide informational materials and technical assistance to
     employers interested in implementing such programs.
●    Support and coordinate Safe Routes to School programs and projects. Local jurisdictions and
     Metro should support and help coordinate these efforts through project funding and technical
     assistance.
Major Improvements: OHP Policy 1G requires maintaining performance and improving safety by
improving efficiency and management before adding capacity. The intent of policy 1G and Action
1G.2 is to ensure that major improvement projects to state highway facilities have been through a
planning process that involves coordination between state, regional, and local stakeholders and the
public, and that there is substantial support for the proposed improvement.

Off-System Improvements: OHP Policy 2B establishes ODOT’s interest in improvements on local
roads that maintain or improve safety and mobility performance on state roadways, and supports
local jurisdictions in adopting land use and access management policies. The TSP development will
consider existing and future land use patterns, access management, and implementation measures.



20
  From Metro’s 2005 non-SOV Target Actions Study, Evaluation of Potential Measures for Achieving Modal
Targets.


                                             11/20/13
                       How is the Transportation System Managed? | Page 10
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




Traffic Safety: OHP Policy 2F identifies the need for projects in the state to improve safety for all
users of the state highway system through engineering, education, enforcement, and emergency
services. One component of the TSP is to identify existing crash patterns and rates and to develop
strategies to address safety issues. Proposed improvements will aim to reduce the vehicle crash
potential and/or improve bicycle and pedestrian safety by providing upgraded facilities that meet
current standards.

Alternative Passenger Modes: OHP Policy 4B, Action 4B.4 requires that highway projects
encourage the use of alternative passenger modes to reduce local trips. The TSP will develop ways
to support and increase the use of alternative passenger modes to reduce trips on highways and
other facilities. This will include improvement to bicycle and pedestrian facilities and consideration
of transit movement along roadways.

Improvements on State Highways: The Highway Design Manual21 (HDM) provides uniform
standards and procedures for ODOT and is in general agreement with the 2001 American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) A Policy on Geometric Design
of Highways and Streets. Some key areas where guidance is provided are the location and design of
new construction, major reconstruction, and resurfacing, restoration or rehabilitation (3R) projects.
The HDM should be used for all projects on OR 99W to determine design requirements, including
the maximum allowable volume to capacity ratios for use in the design of highway projects.

Other Background Information for the TSP Update
The following sections summarize additional background information or guidance documents that
will be used in updating the City of Sherwood TSP.

Projects to be considered in Future Transportation Analysis
Several of the documents reviewed identified transportation improvement projects that will be
considered in future transportation analysis in Sherwood. The projects are listed below, under the
documents in which they are found, and include:

2010-2013 Statewide Transportation Improvement Program22 (STIP) projects:

●     Pavement preservation on OR-99W from Tualatin River Bridge to Sunset Boulevard.
●     Traffic Signal Modernization on OR-99W from milepost 14.66 to 19.92.
●     Cedar Creek/Tonquin Trail: Roy Rodgers Road, Bicycle trail construction to better accommodate
      pedestrian access.



21
     ODOT Highway Design Manual: http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/HWY/ENGSERVICES/hwy_manuals.shtml
22
     ODOT STIP: http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/HWY/STIP/

                                           11/20/13
                    Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 11
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




●      Traffic operation improvements: Upgrade traffic signal systems and install video detection
       system on various Highways.
Metro RTP: Needed improvements were identified along Metro Mobility Corridor #20, Tigard to
Sherwood and Sherwood to Newberg. Investment strategies prioritize the following:

Near-term (1-4 years)

          System and demand management along mobility corridor and parallel facilities for all
           modes of travel
          Address arterial connectivity and crossings
          Complete mobility corridor refinement plan.
          Complete alternatives analysis for high capacity transit (HCT) corridor. High capacity
           transit, as defined by Metro is “any form of public transit that has an exclusive right of way,
           a non-exclusive right of way or a possible combination of both. High capacity transit
           vehicles make fewer stops, travel at higher speeds, have more frequent service and carry
           more people than local service transit such as typical bus lines. High capacity transit
           includes options such as light rail, commuter rail and bus rapid transit.”23
          Complete land use planning of HCT corridor as part of HCT System Expansion Policy.
          Complete gaps and make crossing improvements in the sidewalk and bike network.
          Implement the Tigard OR 99W Corridor Improvement and Management Plan.
Medium-term (5-10 years)

          Complete gaps in the arterial network.
          Intersection improvements, consistent with refinement plan.
          Coordinate TSM/TDM strategies.
          Implement the Tigard OR 99W Corridor Improvement and Management Plan.
Long-term (10-25 years)

          Implement the Tigard OR 99W Corridor Improvement and Management Plan.
TriMet Transit Investment Plan24 (TIP): Sherwood is served by TriMet bus lines 93 (local service
between Sherwood and Tigard via OR 99W) and 94 (weekday service between Sherwood and




23
     Defining high capacity transit, http://www.oregonmetro.gov/index.cfm/go/by.web/id=28462

24
     TriMet Transit Improvement Plan: http://trimet.org/tip/index.htm


                                             11/20/13
                      Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 12
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




Tigard and express service between Tigard and Portland City Center).25 TriMet’s Transit Investment
Priorities (TIP) program is the organization’s roadmap for investments in bus and rail service, capital
projects and customer information, as well as financial stability and partnerships over the next five
years. Over the long term, TIP priorities are to:

     1. Build the Total Transit System - Safe, secure trips on frequent, reliable and convenient
        service, easy access to transit, amenities at stops and stations, and clear customer
        information.
     2. Expand high-capacity transit - Invest in MAX Light Rail, Commuter Rail, Bus Rapid Transit
        and Streetcar service along key corridors to connect Regional Centers.
     3. Expand Frequent Service - Add to TriMet’s network of bus lines that run every 15 minutes
        or better, every day.
     4. Improve local service - Work with local jurisdictions to improve transit service in specific
        local areas.

Once existing Frequent Service lines have been restored to a basic level of 15-minute or better
service seven days a week, TriMet will work toward expanding the number of bus lines that are
included in Frequent Service and extending service on current lines. The extension of Line 12 –
Barbur/Sandy from Durham Rd to Sherwood is a Tier 3 Priority for Frequent Service expansion,
based upon criteria of ridership productivity, transit/pedestrian friendly streets, density of transit-
dependent population, RTP designation, relationship to existing or proposed high-capacity transit,
land use connectivity, and transportation demand management.

Tualatin-Sherwood Road Improvements: Tualatin-Sherwood Road between Adams Avenue and
Borchers Drive currently experiences heavy traffic congestion, primarily during peak travel hours. In
addition, this section of roadway intersects with OR 99W which is also heavily traveled. The
Tualatin-Sherwood (Adams to Borchers) project26 funded by Washington County through Major
Streets Transportation Improvement Program (MSTIP) proposes to make needed enhancements to
this section of roadway in order to improve traffic circulation in the area, address safety for all
modes of transportation and accommodate existing and future capacity needs.




25
  TriMet service changes became effective September 1, 2013. New Line 93-Tigard/Sherwood runs between
Sherwood and the Tigard Transit Center. It serves all stops and run weekdays and weekends. Line 94-Highway
99W/Sherwood runs weekdays between Sherwood and downtown Portland from approximately 5:45 a.m. to
7:30 p.m. The line no longer serves Tigard Transit Center and does not run weekends.
http://trimet.org/alerts/service-change/index.htm

26
  Washington County link: http://www.co.washington.or.us/LUT/TransportationProjects/tualatin-sherwood-
adams-to-borchers.cfm


                                          11/20/13
                   Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 13
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




In addition to the planned road improvements through the MSTIP project, the county also has plans
to implement the second phase of an Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) upgrade on Tualatin-
Sherwood Road. ITS helps improve traffic flow by adapting traffic signals in real time as traffic
conditions change. Phase 1 upgraded the signals between Teton Avenue and Interstate 5 in 2011.
Phase 2 would upgrade the signals between Teton Avenue and Highway 99W beginning in 2013.

Sherwood Capital Improvement Plan: Sherwood’s Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) includes
planned improvements based on current needs and priorities of the City. The CIP includes planned
allocation of funds for projects through year 2018 in transportation, storm, sanitary, water, and
general construction. Construction of projects in future years is subject to funding. The following
transportation projects and year of planned budget allocation are currently included in the CIP:

         Cedar Brook Way Analysis (2013/2014)

         Adams Avenue North Construction (2013/2014)

         Kruger-Elwert/Hwy 99W Design and Construction (2014/2015, 2015/2016)

         Oregon St/Tonquin Rd (2016/2017)

         Pine St Phase 2 (2014/2015)

Sherwood Town Center Plan: The draft Town Center Plan, once adopted, will update the
comprehensive plan and established a vision and implementing strategies for growth and
improvement in an area designated as the city’s Town Center. The plan includes recommendations
for “complete streets” along Langer Drive and Sherwood Boulevard, as well as specific
improvements to the bicycle and pedestrian system.27 The plan also has updated policies and
strategies pertaining to parking and transit.

The recommended bicycle and pedestrian improvements are shown on Map 2 of the Town Center
Plan and include:

         General bicycle/pedestrian improvements throughout central Old Town Sherwood (#1)

         Neighborhood Greenway improvements on Gleneagle Drive and 10th Street (#11)

         Shared use path on east side of Sherwood Blvd. between Langer Drive and Old Town (#12)

         Shared use path connecting Langer Dr. and Trumpeter Dr. (#13)


27
     http://www.sherwoodoregon.gov/sherwoodtowncenter/page/sherwood-town-center-plan


                                           11/20/13
                    Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 14
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




       Neighborhood Greenway improvements on Holland Lane (#16)

       Neighborhood Greenway improvements on Baler Way (#17)

       Shared use path on north side of Hopkins Elementary School (#18)

       Shared use path on east side of Hopkins Elementary School (#20)

       Shared use path on east side of Sherwood Middle School (#21)

       Neighborhood Greenway improvements on Oregon Street (#22)

The Town Center Plan lays out policies and strategies to guide future planning and development
within the town center. Town center goals, policies, and strategies will be incorporated into the
City’s Comprehensive Plan.

Policy 8 of the Town Center Plan reads: “The City will balance the need for vehicular mobility within
and adjacent to the Town Center with the other transportation and land use goals and priorities
identified in the Town Center Plan.” Strategies relevant to this policy include:

       Through the TSP update, examine changes to the City’s OR 99W Capacity Allocation
        Program (CAP) to ensure that it doesn’t restrict future growth that supports and
        implements the Town Center vision and recommendations. (Strategy 8.1)

       Through the TSP update, identify strategic road capacity improvement projects to address
        congestion within and adjacent to the Town Center. Necessary transportation
        improvements will be analyzed and evaluated for how they support a vibrant walkable
        Town Center. (Strategy 8.2)

       Through the TSP update, establish transportation mobility targets for new development
        within and adjacent to the Town Center that are appropriate for a Town Center context and
        capture the community’s priorities. (Strategy 8.3)

       The City will work with the County, ODOT, and local stakeholders to enhance vehicular and
        pedestrian access from the Town Center to developments adjacent to the Town Center.
        (Strategy 8.4)

Ice Age Tonquin Trail Master Plan (2013): A three pronged network of trails will eventually connect
Tualatin, Sherwood and Wilsonville. One section has been completed within Metro’s Graham Oaks
Nature Park in Clackamas County. The northern prong of the trail connects with the Westside Trail
at a proposed ped/bike bridge over the Tualatin River near King City. The western prong passes
through the City of Sherwood as the Cedar Creek Trail.


                                         11/20/13
                  Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 15
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




The Trail Master Plan identifies a conceptual alignment alternative, trail type, and recommended
improvements and opportunities across several jurisdictions. Recommended improvements and
opportunities within the City of Sherwood can be found on Tile Maps 7-13 in the plan; selected
items are listed below with reference numbers:

      Trail alignment could follow existing unimproved roadway; final alignment to be
       determined in coordination with Sherwood’s Tonquin Employment Area Concept Plan
       (which includes a future east-west road in this area) (7D)
      Widen sidewalk on Oregon Street’s south side between Tonquin Road and Murdock Road
       to accommodate trail (8B)
      Widen sidewalk on SW and southeast (SE) sides of roundabout to accommodate trail (8C)
      City of Sherwood to coordinate shared roadway treatments on Railroad Street (including
       wayfinding) (8L)
      City of Sherwood to conduct further analysis to determine specific trail alignment in this
       area; trail design to be based on guidance provided in the Ice Age Tonquin Trail Master Plan
       specific to the Cedar Creek corridor (9E)
      Proposed trail/wildlife undercrossing of Pacific Highway/Oregon 99W (subject to ODOT
       approval) (9G)
      Potential to create future trail/wildlife undercrossing of Edy Road (10D)
      Potential motorist sight distance issues on horizontal curve of Roy Rogers Road;
       signalization proposed to provide protected bicyclist/pedestrian crossings (10E)
      Widen existing sidewalk on east side of Roy Rogers Road to accommodate trail (vegetation
       removal necessary) (11A)
      Widen existing bridge over Chicken Creek to accommodate trail, or construct cantilevered
       bridge or independent structure immediately east of Roy Rogers Road; retaining walls/bank
       stabilization necessary immediately north and south of creek crossing (11B)
      Trail alignment to follow Oregon Street’s east side between Tonquin Road and Tualatin-
       Sherwood Road; alignment to be sited immediately east of power line corridor (vegetation
       removal necessary in several locations); property easements/acquisitions could occur as
       part of Tonquin Employment Area Concept Plan implementation. (12A)
      Use existing signalized intersection of Tualatin-Sherwood Road and Oregon Street;
       potential need to relocate existing signal poles and utility boxes on intersection’s SE and
       northeast (NE) corners to accommodate trail (12E)
      Tualatin’s Transportation System Plan proposes widening Cipole Road to three vehicle
       travel lanes, plus bike lanes and sidewalks; trail alignment to follow Cipole Road’s west side
       between Tualatin-Sherwood Road and Pacific Highway/OR 99W; trail should be constructed
       in lieu of a sidewalk on the roadway’s west side (13A)



                                         11/20/13
                  Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 16
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




          Vegetation removal and utility pole/mailbox relocation necessary in several locations to
           accommodate future Cipole Road widening and trail development between Tualatin-
           Sherwood Road and Herman Road (13B)
          Use existing at-grade railroad/roadway crossing at Cipole Rd; upgrade crossing treatments
           on roadway’s west side (in tandem with future roadway widening) to accommodate trail
           (13D)

The Trail Master Plan also describes design guidelines for shared use paths, shared use paths
adjacent to roadways, on street facilities, trail-roadway intersections, grade separated crossings,
and special design requirements such as Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) requirements for
trails within powerline corridors, Westside Express Service (WES) commuter rail, trail features and
signage, educational elements, and environmentally sensitive construction. The following table
describes plan actions for which Sherwood is responsible.

                                Table 3: Tonquin Ice Age Trail Plan Actions

  Segment           Responsibility     Funding        Operation/             Issues                    Actions         Responsibility
                                                     Maintenance                                                        for Actions


Immediately         Sherwood         To be           Sherwood      Sherwood will work with         Refine cost         Sherwood, Metro,
west of Tonquin                      determined in                 Metro and ODOT to               estimates for
Road/OregonSt                        coordination                  determine if 2014-15            Cedar Creek trail   ODOT
reet intersection                    with Metro                    Regional Flex Funds             project to see if
to immediately                       and ODOT.                     award for Cedar Creek           the award amount
north of Park                                                      trail will include design and   will cover
Street (Old                                                        construction of this            proposed
Town                                                               segment. Need to acquire        improvements.
Sherwood)                                                          easement/land for trail         Sherwood and
                                                                   from 2 land owners.             Metro to
                                                                                                   determine
                                                                                                   acquisition
                                                                                                   strategy.


Immediately         Sherwood         Design and      Sherwood      None                            Sherwood will       Sherwood with
north of Park                        construct.                                                    design and          involvement of
Street to                                                                                          construct by 2016   Metro and
immediately                                                                                                            partners as
south of Hwy 99                                                                                                        needed.


Immediately         Sherwood         To be           Sherwood      Sherwood to work with           Public              Sherwood
south of                             determined in                 Metro and ODOT to               involvement
Highway 99 to                        coordination                  determine scope of work         needed to           Sherwood, ODOT
Roy Rogers                           with Metro                    for this segment pursuant       determine
Road, including                      and ODOT.                     to 2014-15 Regional Flex        alignment in this   Sherwood, ODOT
Roy Rogers                                                         Funds award for Cedar           area. Sherwood      with support of
                                                                   Creek trail. Hwy 99             may need to         Metro and


                                               11/20/13
                        Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 17
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




  Segment           Responsibility    Funding     Operation/                     Issues                   Actions           Responsibility
                                                 Maintenance                                                                 for Actions

intersection)                                                          undercrossing not             acquire land for       partners.
                                                                       included in 2014-15           trail. Sherwood
                                                                       Regional Flex Funds           will apply in 2012
                                                                       award.                        for ODOT/ STIP
                                                                                                     Enhance funds to
                                                                                                     design/construct
                                                                                                     Hwy 99
                                                                                                     undercrossing.


Roy Rogers          Sherwood or      None       Sherwood may           Segment is in                 Sherwood and           Sherwood,
Road north to       Washington                  consider role in       unincorporated                Washington             Washington
Tualatin River      County                      owning/building/o      Washington County, no         County determine       County
National Wildlife                               perating and           obvious trail provider.       ownership and
Refuge                                          maintaining once       Need to acquire land from     O&M agreements.
trailhead                                       the Cedar Creek        one land owner.
                                                portion of the trail
                                                is built.


Immediately         Sherwood         None       Sherwood               Funding not identified for    Sherwood to            City of Sherwood
east of Tonquin                                                        design/construction. Need     identify funding
Road/Oregon                                                            to acquire land from 8 land   strategy Include
Street                                                                 owners between Tonquin        trail in Sherwood’s
intersection to                                                        Rd. and Oregon St.            TSP update.
immediately                                                                                          Update trail
north of                                                                                             description in
Tualatin-                                                                                            Metro’s 2035
Sherwood                                                                                             RTP, including the
Road.                                                                                                Financially
                                                                                                     Constrained list.
                                                                                                     Sherwood to
                                                                                                     acquire trail.


Immediately         Sherwood         None       Sherwood               Trail is recommended on       Include trail in       Sherwood,
north of                                                               north side of road in Right   Sherwood and           Tualatin,
Tualatin-                                                              of Way. Funding not           Washington             Washington
Sherwood Road                                                          identified for                County TSP             County, Metro
to immediately                                                         design/construction           updates. Update
west of Cipole                                                                                       trail description in
Road                                                                                                 Metro’s 2035
                                                                                                     RTP, including the
                                                                                                     Financially
                                                                                                     Constrained list.
                                                                                                     Sherwood to
                                                                                                     identify funding
                                                                                                     strategy




                                               11/20/13
                        Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 18
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




Approved Ordinances: Since its adoption, the TSP has been amended by ordinance several times
by City Council. Amendments have included modifications to support adopted concept plans for
urban growth boundary (UGB) expansion areas and reclassification of local roadways to support
development. The following is a brief summary of land use amendments and the associated
adopted transportation system changes that will need to be incorporated into the plan
development (and alternatives analysis) in the updated TSP document.

          Area 59.28 Area 59, bordered on Elwert and Edy Road, is an area that was designated by
           Metro and brought into the Sherwood UGB in 2002. City Council adopted a concept plan in
           April 2006. In January 2007, the Council adopted amendments to the Comprehensive Plan
           to implement the concept plan, including amendments to TSP Figure 8-1 Functional Class.
           Classifications of Elwert and Handley (Arterial and Collector, respectively), are consistent
           with the Council amendments, but proposed local roadways are not reflected in the current
           TSP’s.

          Brookman Road Concept Plan.29 Brought into the UGB in 2002, the city adopted the
           Brookman Road Concept Plan in 2009. The project identified future land uses and public
           facilities, including parks and open space, civic uses, and transportation corridors. In order
           to implement the plan, amendments to the comprehensive plan, zoning code, and public
           facility plans are needed. The Brookman area will remain in unincorporated Washington
           County until voter-approved annexation brings it into the city.

          Adams Avenue North Concept Plan.30 Metro also added this 33 acres north of Tualatin-
           Sherwood Road Metro as part of the 2002 regional UGB expansion. Metro’s primary
           purpose was to allow for development of a road connection (Adams Avenue) between OR
           99W and SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road. The North Adams Area was annexed in November
           2009 and is zoned primarily Light Industrial with a portion of the area along 99W-zoned
           Office Commercial. The City's 2005 Transportation System Plan (TSP) identifies a new
           collector street through portions of land identified in the Metro Ordinance. The TSP
           identifies this project as “Adams Avenue, Tualatin-Sherwood Road to Home Depot” (Table
           8-11, City Street Projects, ID 2). This portion of Adams Avenue will complete a direct
           connection between OR 99W and Old Town, an area where significant urban renewal
           investment has occurred and is planned.


28
     http://www.sherwoodoregon.gov/planning/page/area-59

29
     http://www.sherwoodoregon.gov/planning/page/brookman-road-concept-plan

30
     http://www.sherwoodoregon.gov/planning/page/adams-avenue-north-concept-plan

                                            11/20/13
                     Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 19
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




          Sherwood Cannery Square.31 The Cannery Planned Unit Development (PUD) is located at
           the site of the former cannery in Old Town near the railroad tracks. The PUD proposal
           included a TSP amendment to change the classification of Columbia Street from a collector
           to a local street, an action City council approved in 2010. The proposal includes a mixed-use
           development with up to 10 construction phases and includes construction of new streets,
           public plaza, retail, office and residential. Public streets will be constructed prior to
           construction of development phases. While some improvements associated with the
           project have already been completed, the following transportation projects related to the
           site (that are not yet completed) have the potential to impact traffic circulation in the Old
           Town area:

                  Construct improvements to improve the operations of Pine Street/1st Street to
                   meet City performance standards and mitigate queuing impacts at the Pine Street
                   railroad crossing. This shall be accomplished by implementing a modified
                   circulation for the downtown streets that includes:
                        o Install a diverter for south-westbound on 1st Street at Ash Street or Oak
                            Street to require vehicles travelling towards Pine Street to divert to 2nd
                            Street.
                        o Remove one side of on-street parking Ash Street-2nd Street or Oak Street-
                            2nd Street to provide two 12-foot travel lanes from the diverter to Pine
                            Street. Convert to one-way traffic flow approaching Pine Street for this
                            segment.
                        o Install an all-way stop at Pine Street/2nd Street. Stripe the south-
                            westbound approach of 2nd Street to have a left turn lane and a shared
                            through/right-turn lane.
                        o Install traffic calming measures on 2nd Street southwest of Pine Street to
                            manage the impact of the added traffic.
               •

          Tonquin Employment Area. The Tonquin Employment Area was brought into the UGB in
           2002 and the City adopted a concept plan in 2010 that amended the Comprehensive Plan,
           Community Development Code, and TSP. Amendments to the TSP include a proposed east-
           west collector, the extension of SW Blake Street (as proposed in the Southwest Tualatin
           Concept Plan) through the area and connecting to Oregon Street. The proposed extension
           of SW 124th Avenue south was adopted as a proposed Arterial.




31
     http://www.sherwoodoregon.gov/planning/project/cannery-pud


                                            11/20/13
                     Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 20
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




          Cedar Brook Way. In 2012 the functional classification of SW Cedar Brook Way was
           changed from a local to a collector road connecting SW Elwert Road to SW Handley Street.
           The TSP amendment also identified one connection to SW Pacific Hwy along the extension,
           the location of which was to be determined at a later date.

Actions or Strategies to be considered in Updating the TSP
Several of the regional and local documents reviewed for this project identified transportation
actions or strategies that will be considered in updated the City of Sherwood TSP. Relevant actions
or strategies are summarized below.

Metro State of Safety Report (2012): It is the Portland Metro region’s adopted goal to reduce the
number of pedestrians, bicyclists, and automobile occupants killed or seriously injured on the
region’s roadways by 50% by 2035, compared to a 2005 baseline. The State of Safety report
indicates that Sherwood has a lower rate of injury crashes and fatal crashes than the region, and is
ranked 24th in the region for serious crashes per million residents (Tables 4-5 and Figure 1).

                                Table 4: Number of Automobile Crashes32

     Jurisdiction    Annual         Fatal         Injury A    Injury B         Injury C       All Injury    Fatal/Incapac
                     Crashes       Crashes                                                                   (per capita)
                                     (per
                                   capita)

     Sherwood       111          0.3           1              14               30            45             1.3

     METRO          18263        NA            481            1907             5174          7562           532



                                Table 5: Crashes per million residents33

     Jurisdiction Population        All      Fatal/incapac.           Ped.               Ped             Bike       Bike
                                  injury      (per million)          Injury         Fatal/Incapac.      Injury     Fatal/
                                   (per                             Crashes          (per million)     Crashes     Incap
                                  million)                            (per
                                                                    Million)

     Sherwood       18,207        2453       73                    54.9             18.3             91.5          0.0

     METRO          1,481,118     5106       359                   190.6            40.7             230.9         27.2

32
  Crash rates were determined per capita. See p. 15 of the 2012 Metro State of Safety Report,
http://www.oregonmetro.gov/index.cfm/go/by.web/id=42790, under “Related Documents.

33
     2012 Metro State of Safety Report, pp. 16, 42, 63


                                              11/20/13
                       Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 21
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




                                 Figure 1: Serious Crash Rate by City34




Section 10 – Findings and Strategies states:

          Arterial roadways comprise 59% of the region’s serious crashes, 67% of the serious
           pedestrian crashes, and 52% of the serious bike crashes, while accounting for 40% of
           vehicle travel.
          Arterials have the highest serious crash rate per road mile and per VMT.
The safety report lists high-level strategies for implementation, several of which are relevant to this
TSP update, including:

          Policies that reduce the need to drive, and therefore limit vehicle-miles travelled
          Strategies to reduce the prevalence of speeding and aggressive driving on surface streets
          Revisions to state, regional, and local mobility standards to consider safety as equally
           important, at a minimum, as vehicular capacity
          A focus on crosswalk and intersection lighting where pedestrian activity is expected
          Policies to improve the quality and frequency of pedestrian crossings on arterials and multi-
           lane roadways
          A focus on safe cycling facilities and routes, particularly in areas where serious crashes are
           occurring

Draft Regional Active Transportation Plan (August 2013): The need for a regional Active
Transportation Plan (ATP) was identified as a follow up activity in the 2035 RTP. A regional
Stakeholder Advisory Committee composed of staff from cities and counties and advocacy groups
has been working to develop a strategy to complete and expand regional pedestrian and bicycle
networks, including way to integrate non-motorized networks with transit and increase

34
     2012 Metro State of Safety Report, p. 16


                                             11/20/13
                      Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 22
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




competitiveness for active transportation-related funding. The Ice Age Tonquin Trail and Western
Trail and are shown as Regional Bicycle Parkways and Regional Pedestrian Parkways on the
recommended Regional Bicycle Network and Regional Pedestrian Network.35 While this document
will remain a draft until it is proposed for adoption as a component of the RTP in July 2014, the TSP
update will take into consideration design guidelines, policies and implementation actions related
to trails and proposed improvements in Sherwood, where transportation system alternatives
impact these facilities.

Southwest Corridor Plan: The Southwest Corridor Plan addresses the Barbur Boulevard/Highway
99W/I-5 corridor between Portland and Sherwood Town Center (see Figure 2.) The plan is being
developed through a partnership of the cities of King City, Portland, Sherwood, Tigard, and Tualatin,
Clackamas and Multnomah counties, ODOT, TriMet, and Metro. The intent of this project is to let
the local plans and aspirations help shape and inform ultimate improvements so that all potential
projects and ideas are screened through a local lens.

A brief overview of the project is summarized below:

         2009 – The Joint Policy Advisory Committee on Transportation (JPAC) and the Metro
          Council designated the corridor as the next regional priority for high capacity transit (HCT)
          expansion. Based on existing traffic and transit counts, the Southwest Corridor shows the
          greatest ridership projections for potential HCT corridors in the region.

         December 2010 – Metro received a $2 million grant from the Federal Transit
          Administration to analyze alternatives for improving transit in the corridor.

         Spring 2012 – Metro completed a public involvement process to determine a vision and
          goals for the Southwest Corridor Plan. The outcomes of this process include: 1) bus rapid
          transit, light rail, roadway expansions/new roadways, rapid streetcar, and increasing local
          bus capacity are all transportation alternatives that must be included in the analysis. 2)
          Opportunities to expand the bicycle network and improve pedestrian mobility will also be
          studied.

         July 2013 – The Southwest Corridor Plan Steering Committee recommended transit
          alternatives for further study along with a set of potential roadway, bicycle, pedestrian,
          parks, trails and natural area investments that support land use, transportation and
          community-building goals in the corridor as part of the Southwest Corridor Shared
          Investment Strategy.




35
     http://www.oregonmetro.gov/index.cfm/go/by.web/id=39005


                                           11/20/13
                    Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 23
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




As part of the Shared Investment strategy, the transit recommendation directs TriMet to work with
Southwest corridor jurisdictions and stakeholders to develop the Southwest Service Enhancement
Plan. Plan implementation is intended to provide transit service that connects key Southwest
corridor locations quickly and reliably to one another and to a potential high capacity transit line.
Locations for future transit improvements include downtown Sherwood; however, the Steering
Committee removed a high capacity transit (HCT) connection between Tigard and Sherwood on
Highway 99W from further consideration to avoid impacts to auto and freight movement as well as
to commercial

Recommended Roadway and Active Transportation projects in Sherwood are listed below and
include the project reference number, which are keyed to maps in the Steering Committee
Recommendation:36

        Arrow Street (Herman Road) - Build 3 lanes with sidewalks and bike lanes. Construct new
         road to collector standards (Project 1062). Build new 3 lane roadway with stream crossing
         and with bike lanes and sidewalks from Langer Farms Parkway Phase 2 to Gerda
         Lane/Galbreath Drive.

        Town Center Signal & Intersection Improvements (Downtown Sherwood) – Project 1068)-
         Improve intersection at Edy & Borchers; remove traffic signal at Baler/Tualatin-Sherwood
         Road; on Sherwood Boulevard remove traffic signal at Langer and disallow left turns from
         Langer to Sherwood, and add traffic signal at Century Drive.

        Tualatin-Sherwood Rd. (Langer Parkway to Teton Ave.) - Widening to 5 lanes with ped./bike
         (Project 1154). Widen from 3 to 5 lanes with bike lanes and sidewalks from Langer Parkway
         to Teton Avenue.

        Oregon-Tonquin Intersection & Street Improvements (Project 5020). Intersection
         improvements (consider roundabout) on Oregon at Tonquin Road; sidewalks and bike
         access through the intersection.

        99W Sherwood TC Bicycle/Ped. Bridges (Project 6042). Ped/bike under/overcrossings of
         99W at Sunset, Meinecke, Edy. Listed as a Regional Bicycle Parkway in the Regional Active
         Transportation Plan (5/9/13).

        Tonquin Trail (Project 9003). Construct multi-use trail with some on-street segments
         connecting multiple communities in Washington and Clackamas County. Listed as a


36
  See Steering Committee Recommendation “Attachment A,”
http://www.oregonmetro.gov/index.cfm/go/by.web/id=35309


                                          11/20/13
                   Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 24
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




           Regional Bicycle Parkway and Regional Pedestrian Parkway in the Regional Active
           Transportation Plan (5/9/13).

          Westside Trial Segments (Project 9029). Tail opportunities within easements of BPA and
           PGE for connectivity. Listed as a Regional Bicycle Parkway and Regional Pedestrian Parkway
           in the Regional Active Transportation Plan (5/9/13).

Note that the bicycle/pedestrian and trail projects are only considered a priority where HCT is
extended to the City of Sherwood. Widening Tualatin-Sherwood Road (Project 1154) is considered
“critical” in this scenario, but less so if HCT does not extend to Sherwood.

With the first phase of the plan is completed, next steps will include implementation of the shared
investment strategy and identifying projects to be packaged with the HCT alternative(s) for
consideration in a Draft Environmental Impact Statement.

I-5 to 99W Connector Project: The I-5 to 99W Connector Project37 is intended to develop long-term
solutions to improving mobility between I-5 and OR 99W and is a collaboration between ODOT,
Metro, Washington County, and other affected agencies and jurisdictions.

The project identified a number of improvements to support access to 2040 land uses, address
existing deficiencies and serve increased travel demand. One primary function of this route is to
connect the Washington Regional Center to the cities of Tigard, Tualatin and Sherwood, as well as
to provide access to the Tualatin/Sherwood Industrial Area and Tualatin National Wildlife Refuge.
The corridor provides short-line heavy rail access the region from the Willamette Valley and
connects agricultural areas to the interstate highway system in this region, while serving as a
secondary gateway to the region.

The study recommended a variety of transportation investments to improve the area’s road,
transit, bicycle, pedestrian and trail networks and to distribute traffic across a network of three
arterials so that no single route would function as a defacto “connector.” The Metro 2035 RTP
places additional conditions on the Three Arterial Corridors Alternative recommendation and
implementation. A map of Alternative 7 is provided in Figure 2.




37
     http://www.i5to99w.org/


                                            11/20/13
                     Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 25
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




                     Figure 2. I-5 to 99W Connector Alternative 7 (2009)




Alternative 7 is based on arterial development in a set of three northern, central, and southern
arterial corridors. The central arterial projects are focused in Sherwood, although a proposed
northern arterial project and area-wide projects affect Sherwood as well.

As noted in the figure, alignments are not yet final. The Alternative 7 recommendations that are
relevant to Sherwood include the projects below. Cost estimates provided are conceptual costs in
2008 dollars.

Northern Arterial Project
        SW Herman Road – Construct a 3-lane extension between Tualatin Road and OR 99W; $30
         million.38

Central Arterial Projects

38
  Since the completion of the I-5 to 99W Connector Project and Alternative 7 recommendations, the City of
Tualatin has taken actions that impact the implementation of the project recommendations. These actions
include removing the Tualatin River bridge (a component of the northern arterial) from urban renewal
funding project list. In addition, Tualatin recently updated the City’s TSP and removed most of the northern
arterial components from the TSP. While improvements to the northern arterial corridor (Tualatin Road and
Herman Road) are still included in the City’s TSP, the outcome for the “northern arterial” as a package of
improvements to improve east-west mobility is unknown.


                                           11/20/13
                    Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 26
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




        Tualatin–Sherwood Road – Widen to 5 lanes from OR 99W to SW 124th Avenue; $25
         million.

        Tualatin–Sherwood Road – Widen to 5 lanes from SW 124th Avenue to Teton Avenue; $20
         million.

        Roy Rogers Road – Widen to 5 lanes between Borchers Road and OR 99W; $5 million.

Other Projects
        TSM / TDM – Regional trail system, bike lanes, sidewalks, and bus stops; $30 million.

        Commuter Rail – Rail extension to Sherwood; $40 million.

        SW 124th Avenue – Extend 4-5 lane roadway between Tualatin-Sherwood Road and the
         Southern Arterial; $70 million.

The 2010-2013 STIP includes programmed funding for planning work related to the project. The
2035 Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) includes the following components related to the I-5 99W
Connector, including those denoted in the financially-constrained (FC) project list:

        RTP 11179 (FC) – I-5 to 99W Replacement Projects – Construct improvements consistent
         with recommendations from I-5/99W Connector process

        RTP 10598 – I-5/99W Southern Arterial Right of Way – Purchase right-of-way when all
         project conditions are met: including integration with land use plans for UGB expansion
         areas and Urban Reserves, Conducting the I-5 South Corridor Refinement Plan, including
         Mobility Corridors39 2, 3, and 20 and resolution of access between I-5 and southern arterial
         with no negative impacts to I-5 and I-205 beyond the forecasted No-Build condition,
         addressing National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)40 compliance to determine the
         preferred alignment and addressing any conditions associated with land use goal exception
         for southern arterial.



39
  Metro has defined 24 “mobility corridors” that connect regional areas. These corridors include the
following linkages: Corridor 2 (Portland Central City to Tualatin), Corridor 3 (Tualatin to Wilsonville), and
Corridor 20 (Tualatin to Sherwood and Sherwood to Newberg).

40
  For some large scale projects, agencies are required to prepared documentation known as an
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) through a formalized process that demonstrates compliance with
NEPA by showing that environmental values are integrated into the decision making process along with
reasonable alternatives.


                                            11/20/13
                     Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 27
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




       RTP 11339 I-5/99W Southern Arterial Improvements – Construct the initial 2-3 lane arterial
        phase of the Southern Arterial from OR99W to the SW 124th Ave. Extension when all
        project conditions are met: including integration with land use plans for UGB expansion
        areas and Urban Reserves, Conducting the I-5 South Corridor Refinement Plan, including
        Mobility Corridors 2, 3, and 20 and resolution of access between I-5 and southern arterial
        with no negative impacts to I-5 and I-205 beyond the forecasted No-Build condition,
        addressing NEPA to determine the preferred alignment and addressing any conditions
        associated with land use goal exception for southern arterial.

       RTP 11340 – I-5/99W Southern Arterial Improvements – Expand to 4-5 lanes to serve
        growth in the area after improvements to Tualatin-Sherwood Rd. and an improved
        connection from SW Tualatin Rd. to the I-5/Lower Boones Ferry Rd. Interchange and when
        all project conditions are met: including integration with land use plans for UGB expansion
        areas and Urban Reserves, Conducting the I-5 South Corridor Refinement Plan, including
        Mobility Corridors 2, 3, and 20 and resolution of access between I-5 and southern arterial
        with no negative impacts to I-5 and I-205 beyond the forecasted No-Build condition,
        addressing NEPA to determine the preferred alignment and addressing any conditions
        associated with land use goal exception for southern arterial.

       RTP 11342 – I-5/99W Connector Southern Arterial/I-5 Interface –Connect the Southern
        Arterial to I-5 or other surface arterials in the vicinity of the N. Wilsonville interchange
        when all project conditions are met: including integration with land use plans for UGB
        expansion areas and Urban Reserves, Conducting the I-5 South Corridor Refinement Plan,
        including Mobility Corridors 2, 3, and 20 and resolution of access between I-5 and southern
        arterial with no negative impacts to I-5 and I-205 beyond the forecasted No-Build
        condition, addressing NEPA to determine the preferred alignment and addressing any
        conditions associated with land use goal exception for southern arterial.

City of Sherwood Comprehensive Plan (1991): The City of Sherwood originally adopted the
Comprehensive Plan II in 1991. Elements of the Plan have been periodically updated, including the
last update in 2009. Given the original adoption date, note that some data, findings, policies, and
strategies in the Plan are outdated. The purpose of the Plan is to guide the physical growth and
development of the community consistent with City policy goals and State Goals and Guidelines.
The Plan is intended to articulate the City of Sherwood's perception of what it is, what it seeks to be
and how it will achieve its desired future. Its aim is to preserve what is essential to its identity,
develop what it needs to be economically and environmentally healthy and meet the needs of the
people who contribute to its community life and make use of its land use resources.

Chapter 6, Transportation, provides goals, policies, and strategies relevant to the City’s
transportation system. The TSP update will need to combine transportation analysis with the
application of the goals, objectives and policies described in this chapter.

                                         11/20/13
                  Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 28
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




The goals and policies described in this chapter are nearly identical from the 2005 Transportation
System Plan, with the following exceptions:

        TSP Goal 1 Policy 5 is omitted from the comprehensive plan Policy 5 (“The City shall work
         cooperatively with the Port of Portland and local governments in the region to ensure
         sufficient air and marine passenger access for Sherwood residents.”)

        Comprehensive Plan Goal 3, Policy 10 is not part of the Transportation System Plan (“The
         City of Sherwood will establish a set of guidelines and standards for traffic calming
         measures to retrofit existing streets and as part of land use review.”)

Comprehensive Plan policies will need to be made consistent with modified and new transportation
policies developed as part of the TSP update.

Sherwood Zoning and Development Code: The Zoning and Development Code (“code”)
implements the City’s Comprehensive Plan by establishing zoning designations and use and other
development regulations for the zones, as well as regulations and procedures for land division and
application review. The following highlights code sections that address transportation-related
requirements.

Access Management
Subsection .040.M of Chapter 16.106 (Transportation Facilities) addresses access management, and
establishes required minimum spacing between driveways and intersections for local roads,
neighborhood routes and collectors (25 feet, 50 feet, and 100 feet respectively). The subsection
also refers to the Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual for street standards.41 Minimum
and maximum roadway and driveway spacing standards for city arterials and collectors are
provided in the 2005 TSP.

Performance Standards and Targets
As referred to earlier in this report, the 2005 TSP and Roadway Element of the Washington County
TSP establish level-of-service standards for both signalized and unsignalized intersections under
their jurisdiction. This report also addresses regional performance targets from the RTP and RTFP
regarding issues such as safety, congestion, freight reliability, and active transportation that will be
integrated into the updated TSP.


41
  The purpose of the city’s Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual is to set standards for the
construction of new public improvements and for the reconstruction of existing facilities to upgrade existing
infrastructure. These standards are primarily geared towards construction design; however, where
applicable, this engineering document will need to be consistent with, and implement, the standards that are
proposed in the updated TSP, as well as those reflected in development code requirements.


                                           11/20/13
                    Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 29
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




These standards and targets do not need to “live” in the code, but to ensure compliance with
performance standard requirements a traffic impact analyses (TIA) requirement should be
established in the code. Existing code sections 16.90.030.D and 16.106.040 include general TIA
requirements for development proposals based on the type of proposed development, whether
they are subject to site plan review, and their projected average daily vehicle trips (ADT).

Coordinated Review and Conditions of Approval
Written notice of Type II, III, IV, and V quasi-judicial and legislative actions is sent to Oregon
Department of Transportation (ODOT), Metro, applicable transit service providers, and other
affected or potentially affected agencies (Section 16.72.020.C). Also, pre-application conferences
established in existing code (Section 16.70.010) are an opportunity to coordinate with other
transportation facility and service providers.

General approval criteria for development applications grant authority to the Hearing Authority and
Appeal Authority to approve the application with conditions (Section 16.72.010.C.1).

Plan and Land Use Regulation Amendments
The TPR seeks to protect transportation facilities by requiring consistency of land use with the
function, capacity, and performance standards of transportation facilities. Existing Sherwood code
provisions regarding approval criteria for plan amendments address TPR compliance, although the
provisions do not necessarily reflect more recent TPR amendments (Section 16.80.030.C).

Pedestrian and Bicycle Access, Circulation, and Amenities
Requirements for on-site pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation are established in existing
code (Chapter 16.96). Standards for residential and non-residential development require that a
private pathway/sidewalk system extend throughout the site that connects existing development,
building entrances, adjacent development, future phases of development, public rights-of-way,
open space, and parking and storage areas.

Bicycle parking is required for uses including multi-family housing, office and most other
commercial uses, institutional uses, and park-and-ride facilities (Section 16.94.020.C). The
provisions address location and design of bicycle parking, and allow for long-term parking but do
not require it.

Transportation Demand Management
Existing off-street parking regulations allow for shared parking, blended parking rates, on-street
parking credits, preferential carpool/vanpool parking, residential parking districts, and reduced
parking requirements in environmentally sensitive areas (Section 16.94.010).

On-site pathway/sidewalk systems addressed in Chapter 16.96 require the system to connect to
transit facilities within 500 feet of the site. This is reinforced by language in the transportation

                                          11/20/13
                   Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 30
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




facilities section that requires site connections to transit streets, as designated in the TSP, and
either provision of or allowance for transit amenities and/or easements (Section 16.106.040.J).
Commercial, multi-family, institutional, and mixed-use development must be oriented to existing
and planned transit facilities and be built with no or minimal setbacks according to underlying
zoning and site plan provisions (Section 16.90.030.D.7).

Transportation System Design and Connectivity
Street design guidelines are provided in a transportation facilities section of existing code (Section
16.106.010). The narrowest street is a 28-foot local street, which is also shown in a cross-section in
the 2005 TSP.

Street spacing is an element of network connectivity; currently, street collector spacing is
addressed in the Engineering Design and Standard Details manual and 2005 TSP, as discussed
above. Existing code (Section 16.106.30) establishes maximum block lengths of 530 feet for new
streets, except for arterials, which have a maximum block length requirement of 1,800 feet. Where
full street crossings occur at distances of more 1,200 feet, bicycle and pedestrian crossings must be
provided at an average of 530 feet. Section 16.106.30 also requires consistency with a local
connectivity plan established in the 2005 TSP.

Code requirements will need to be consistent with the recommendations of the updated TSP. An
evaluation of the code and an assessment of how regulatory provisions meet the state TPR and
regional RTFP will be included in the Needs, Opportunities, Constraints and Tools Report.
Sherwood Parks Master Plan (2006): The Sherwood Parks and Recreation Master Plan involves a
comprehensive review of the existing inventory of land, recreation facilities, and recreation
opportunities; development of a mission statement; development of a strategic set of goals,
objectives, and actions for the next twenty years; survey of the needs of residents; identification of
land for future parks and open space acquisition, preservation, or conservation; development of
conceptual designs for parks; provision of a capital improvement schedule, and review of existing
finance strategies; and development of recommendations to fund improvements.

High priority recommendations include:

       Preservation of natural areas, particularly the Tualatin River National Wildlife Refuge, as
        new development occurs to preserve and connection of such areas with the fabric of the
        community

       The creation of new trails wherever the opportunity arises, and provision of ten new
        walking loops.

The Plan also notes the following acquisitions and developments of Pedestrian & Bike Paths:

       from Edy Road south along Cedar Creek

                                         11/20/13
                  Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 31
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




      from the Senior Center to Stella Olsen Park

      Cedar Creek Trail and Land in the UGB expansion area.

The updated pedestrian and bicycle elements of the TSP will need need to be consistent with path
and trail acquisitions and the recommendations of the Parks Master Plan.

Sherwood Urban Renewal Plan (Adopted 2000, updated through 2012): The Sherwood Urban
Renewal Plan aims to eliminate blighting influences found in the Renewal Area and to implement
the goals and objectives of the Sherwood Comprehensive Plan and the Vision for Old Town-2000.
The boundary of the Renewal Area includes Old Town, Six Corners, and a portion of Sherwood High
School.

Transportation improvements eligible for urban renewal funding may include streetscape
enhancements, existing roadways reconstruction, new streets construction, and pedestrian and
bicycle access improvements. Aesthetic improvements on the N. Sherwood Boulevard corridor
connecting Old Town and Six Corners, creating vehicular and pedestrian linkages between Highway
99 and the Old Town area, and improving access to Stella Olson Park are mentioned specifically.
Parking improvements called for in the plan include construction of public parking to support Old
Town businesses and activities, and provision of separate areas for employee parking so close-in
parking can be available for customers.




                                        11/20/13
                 Other Background Information for the TSP Update | Page 32
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




Appendix A: Applicable Plan and Policies
The following plans and policies were reviewed for the City of Sherwood TSP Update:

State of Oregon
●   Transportation System Planning Guidelines
●   Transportation Planning Rule (OAR 660-012-0010)
●   Oregon Statewide Planning Goals
●   Oregon Access Management Rule (OAR 734-051)
●   Oregon Transportation Plan
●   Oregon Highway Plan
●   ODOT Highway Design Manual
●   2010-2013 Statewide Transportation Improvement Program
Metro/Regional Plans
●   Metro 2035 Regional Transportation Plan
●   Metro 2035 Regional Transportation Functional Plan
●   Metro 2040 Growth Concept
●   Metro Non-Single Occupancy Vehicle (SOV) Target Actions Study
●   Metro State of Safety Report
●   Regional Active Transportation Plan (August 2013 draft)
●   Southwest Corridor Plan
●   I-5 – 99W Connector Study
●   Ice Age Tonquin Trail Master Plan
City of Sherwood
●   2005 City of Sherwood Transportation System Plan (and amendments)
●   City of Sherwood Capital Improvement Plan
●   City of Sherwood Comprehensive Plan
●   City of Sherwood Zoning and Development Code
●   City Engineering Design and Standard Details Manual
●   City of Sherwood Urban Renewal Plan
●   Sherwood Town Center Plan
●   Sherwood Parks Master Plan
●   Sherwood Capital Improvement Plan



                                          11/20/13
                      Appendix A: Applicable Plan and Policies | Page 33
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Plan and Policy Summary Report




Washington County
●   Washington County Transportation System Plan
TriMet
●   TriMet Transit Investment Plan




                                          11/20/13
                      Appendix A: Applicable Plan and Policies | Page 34
 

 

     




 
(This page left intentionally blank) 



 




 
Figure 1                                         DRAFT 10/16/13
                                                                                                                                             Í
                                                                                                                                             Î   99W


Study Area and Zoning

                                                                                          ROY ROGERS




                                                                                                   BORCHERS
                                                                                                                                                                                         TH
                                                                                                                                                                                       EA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CIPOLE
                                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                                LB
                 EDY                                                                                                                                                       GA
                                                                                                              LANGER
                                                                                                                                                       TUALATIN SHERWOOD




                                                                                                                          BALER
                                                                                                SH
                                     ELWERT




                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                  RW
                                                                                                                     CENTURY




                                                                                                    OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tonquin




                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Employment Area




                                                                                                                                  LANGER FARMS
                                                 HANDLEY
                                                                                                                                                       OREGON

                                                                                    MEINECKE




                                                                                                                                                                MURDOCK
                                                                                                                             T




                                                                                                               W
                                                                                                                          1S




                                                                                                                             AS
                                                                                                                AS




                                                                                                                                H
                                                                                                                  HI
                                                                                                                     NG
                                                                                                                       TO
                                                                                                                         N
          KRUGER




                                                                                                                                  PI
                                                                                                                                    EN
                                                                                                                  MAIN
                                             TIMBREL                      SUNSET
                               OLD HIGHWAY 99W




                                                                                                               HILL




                         Í
                         Î
                         99W
                                                                                                              LADD




                                                           Brookman Area
    CHAPMAN




                                                                                                                                                              BAKER
                  IFIC




                                                            BROOKMAN
               PAC




                                                           Legend                                                                                                                                                City of Sherwood
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Transportation System Plan
                                                                                                       Low Density Residential                         Neighborhood Commercial
                                                           Zoning                                      Low Density Residential PUD                     Office Commercial




8
                                                                                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                                                                       Office Commercial PUD                  Unannexed Area
                                                                                                                                                                EL
                                                               General Commercial                      Light Industrial
                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                           ON
                                                               General Industrial                      Light Industrial PUD                            Open Space                             Very Low Density Residential            City Limit
                                                                                                                                                         CC
                                                                                                                                                        M Commercial
                                                               High Density Residential                Medium Density Residential High                 Retail                                 Very Low Density Residential PUD        Parcel

                             Miles                             High Density Residential PUD            Medium Density Residential Low                  Retail Commercial PUD                  Urban Growth Boundary (UGB)
0             0.25         0.5                                 Institutional and Public                Medium Density Residentila Low PUD              Urban Growth Area                      Old Town Sherwood Overlay
Figure 2                                           DRAFT 11/1/13
                                                                                                                                      Í
                                                                                                                                      Î   99W


Key Activity Generators
                                                                                                                    k !(     !
                                                                                                                             (             S
                                                                                                                   k
                                                                                ROY ROGERS         k
                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                                                             TH




                                                                                        BORCHERS
                                                                                                    S              S                                                                       EA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CIPOLE
                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                    LB
                  EDY                                                                                        !
                                                                                                             (   Æ
                                                                                                                 ü                                                             GA
                                                                                                     LANGk
                                                                                                         ER
                                                                                                            S
                                                                                       k                     !
                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                         TUALATIN SHERWOOD




                                                                                                                 BALER
                                                                                                   !(
                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                   ( ! (               !
                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                        k
                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                           S




                                                                                      SH
                                                                                   k                                   (
                                                                                                                       !
                                      ELWERT




                                                                                        ER
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             (




                                                                                          W
                                                                                        k    !
                                                                                             (
                                                                                       S                   CENTURY




                                                                                            OO
                                                        n




                                                                                              D
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             (
                                                        n                                    (
                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                           LANGER FARMS
                                                                                               !
                                                                                               (
                                                                                               !
                                                                                               (
                                                  HANDLEY                                          k!(!( n                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                 k                                 G                   n                                 OREGON
                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                      (


                                                                           MEINECKE         P
                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                  (                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                        WASHINGTON
                                                                                               !                           Inset                                                                  k    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                             n                                                                                                                            n




                                                                                                                                                                     MURDOCK
                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                              ( 1S




                                                                                                                     AS
                                                                                                                       P




                                                                                                                       H
                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                             (
                                                                               n                                   W!
                                                                                                             S!(
                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                           Æ
                                                                                                           ü                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ((
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Old Town
          KRUGER                                                                                                                                                                       !   P




                                                                                                                           PI
                                                  Y                                                                                                                                                                                                   ON




                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EG




                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                !

                                                                                                        MAIN
                                                                                                                 n                                                                                                   (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                              TIMBREL                                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                    SUNS
                                                                                                      nET                                                                                                                 T
                                OLD HIGHWAY 99W




                                  n                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                !       n                                                              1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                    HILL



                          99W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                          Í
                          Î




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PI
                                                                                                   LADD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ü




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MAIN
    CHAPMAN




                                                                                                                                                                 BAKER
                   IFIC




                                                            BROOKMAN
                                                                                                                                     Legend                                                                             City of Sherwood
               PAC




                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                            !       Bus Stop
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Transportation System Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                      School                                      Railroad
                                                                                                                                            W       City Hall                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                      Senior Center                               Trail
                                                                                                                                            H       Library                    G
                                                                                                                                                                               S
8
                                                                                                                                                                     L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n Urban Growth Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                 EL
                                                                                                                                                    Medical Office                    Shopping Center
                                                                                                                                                                NN
                                                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                                                            ü
                                                                                                                                            Æ       Park and O
                                                                                                                                                           CC Ride Lot         Y      YMCA                 n                      City Limit
                                                                                                                                                          M
                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                            !       Public Parking Lot                Old Town Sherwood                           Park
                              Miles                                                                                                                                                   Overlay
0             0.25          0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                   Parcel
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Existing Conditions Technical Report




Functional Classification
Sherwood has five functional classes for streets:
       Principal Arterials are access controlled highways that span several jurisdictions and provide a
        high level of mobility. They generally have four or more travel lanes, bicycle lanes (or shoulders),
        and limited access (preferably connecting primarily with arterials).
       Arterials serve as the major roadways within Sherwood and link major commercial, residential,
        industrial and institutional areas. Many of these roadways also extend beyond Sherwood and
        connect to other nearby cities. Limited access is a key feature of arterials to ensure increased
        mobility through town.
       Collectors have the primary role of facilitating circulation within Sherwood by funneling traffic
        from residential, commercial, and industrial areas to the arterial street network. They do not
        require as extensive control of access (compared to arterials).
       Neighborhood Routes are the primary roadways used to access residential neighborhoods. They
        serve a similar function as collector roadways but are designed to feel more like a neighborhood
        street.
       Local Streets have the sole function of providing access to immediate adjacent land. Service to
        “through traffic movement” on local streets is deliberately discouraged by design.

Figure 3 shows the functional classifications of Sherwood’s roadways. The primary regional roadway
providing mobility to residents and connecting the City of Sherwood with the surrounding area is
Highway 99W, which is classified as a Principal Arterial. Highway 99W runs northeast-southwest through
the northern half of the City and connects to the Portland Metropolitan Area to the northeast and
Newberg, McMinnville, and other areas of Yamhill County to the southwest. Through Sherwood,
Highway 99W has limited access, including five signalized intersections, which serve as the primary
crossing locations between land uses on either side of the highway. There are only a few other accesses
with local roads and private driveways, and these are all limited to right-in/right-out movements except
Bookman Road.

The other major roadways within Sherwood (classified as Arterials) are the primary mobility routes that
provide regional connections through Sherwood. These arterials include Tualatin-Sherwood Road
(connecting to Tualatin), Roy Rogers Road (connecting to Beaverton), Oregon Street, Murdock Road,
Sherwood Boulevard, Main Street, Sunset Boulevard, and Elwert Road.




                                                    11/1/13
                                          Street System | Page 4
Figure 3                                         DRAFT 10/16/13
                                                                                                                           Í
                                                                                                                           Î   99W


Street Functional Classification

                                                                           ROY ROGERS

                                                                                                                                                                              TH




                                                                                  BORCHERS
                                                                                                                                                                            EA




                                                                                                                                                                                                    CIPOLE
                                                                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                                                                                                     LB
                 EDY                                                                                                                                            GA
                                                                                             LANGER
                                                                                                                                          TUALATIN SHERWOOD




                                                                                                        BALER
                                                                                 SH
                                     ELWERT




                                                                                  RWE
                                                                                                    CENTURY




                                                                                    OO
                                                                                      D




                                                                                                                LANGER FARMS
                                                 HANDLEY
                                                                                                                                          OREGON

                                                                      MEINECKE
                                                                                  WASHINGTON




                                                                                                                                                      MURDOCK
                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                        1S




                                                                                                           AS
                                                                                                              H
          KRUGER




                                                                                                                PI
                                                                                                                  EN
                                                                                                 MAIN
                                             TIMBREL
                                                                                             SUNSET
                               OLD HIGHWAY 99W




                                                                                              HILL



                         99W
                         Í
                         Î
                                                                                             LADD




    CHAPMAN




                                                                                                                                                     BAKER
                  IFIC




                                                           BROOKMAN
                                                                                                                          Legend                                                                City of Sherwood
               PAC




                                                                                                                                     Principal Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                       Transportation System Plan
                                                                                                                                     Arterial                                                   Old Town Sherwood
                                                                                                                                                                                                Overlay
                                                                                                                                     Collector



8
                                                                                                                                                  L   L                                         Urban Growth Boundary
                                                                                                                                               NE
                                                                                                                                     Neighborhood
                                                                                                                                                ON                                              City Limit
                                                                                                                                     Local    CC
                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                   Railroad     Park
                             Miles
0             0.25         0.5                                                                                                                                                     Trail        Parcel
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Existing Conditions Technical Report




System Connectivity
The Metro Regional Transportation Functional Plan (RTFP)
requires that each city incorporate street connectivity
guidelines into local TSPs. The image at right shows the
recommended spacing for arterial streets (approximately one-
mile) and collector streets (approximately half-mile). There is
allowance for deviations to this spacing based on the presence
of significant barriers, such as topography, rail lines, freeways,
existing development, and the presence of natural areas.1 The
roadway network spacing guidelines were recommended to
support walking, biking, and access to transit, as well as
improved connectivity to reduce demand on the arterial
roadway system.

Based on these street connectivity guidelines, Sherwood
currently has the following system connectivity characteristics
in its arterial and collector network. Specific gaps (as numbered) are shown in Figure 3A.
          East-West Roadways (South of Highway 99W): Tualatin-Sherwood Road and Sunset Boulevard
           are the two east-west arterials in Sherwood south of Highway 99W. They are spaced
           approximately 1¼ miles apart, which only slightly exceeds the desired one-mile arterial spacing
           guideline. Oregon Street and Meinecke Road are collectors that provide east-west connectivity
           located approximately midway between Tualatin-Sherwood Road and Sunset Boulevard
           (approximately ½ mile from each arterial). Brookman Road, a collector, also is located
           approximately ½ mile south of Sunset Boulevard.
          North-South Roadways (South of Highway 99W): Sherwood Boulevard – Main Street and
           Oregon Street-Murdock Road are the primary north-south arterials on the southern side of
           Highway 99W. Highway 99W also accommodates north-south travel. In general, these roadways
           are spaced between ¾ and 1 ¼ miles apart, which is generally consistent with the one-mile
           arterial spacing guideline. Langer Farms Parkway, a collector, provides north-south travel
           between Tualatin-Sherwood Road and Oregon Street and is located approximately ½ to ¾ mile
           from the adjacent arterial facilities. South of Oregon Street, Pine Street is the collector between
           Main Street and Murdock Road. However, west of Main Street the collector gaps are larger,
           including:
               o   There is no collector (gap 1) that links Meinecke Road and Sunset Boulevard. This area
                   is constrained by established residential neighborhoods, the rail line, and the creek.
                   Dewey Drive and Pinehurst Drive serve as neighborhood routes to the west.



   1
       Metro’s Regional Transportation Functional Plan (RTFP), Title 1 section 3.08.110(C)

                                                       11/1/13
                                               Street System | Page 6
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Existing Conditions Technical Report



          o   South of Sunset Boulevard, there is a gap of approximately 1 ¼ miles (gap 2) east to
              Ladd Hill Road to Old Highway 99W and Timbrel Lane. While Pinehurst Drive (a
              neighborhood route) extends south of Sunset Boulevard, it ends in a residential
              neighborhood that backs against the rail line.
      North of Highway 99W: The two arterials north of Highway 99W, Roy Rogers Road and Elwert
       Road, are spaced approximately ½ miles apart to the north and 1 ½ miles apart near Highway
       99W due to the curvature in Roy Rogers Road. Between the two arterials, Edy Road and Handley
       Street provide east-west connectivity. However, north-south collector connectivity is limited.
          o   There is a north-south collector gap of nearly a mile (gap 3) between Borchers Drive and
              Elwert Road north of Edy Road. While a neighborhood route is located along Houston
              Drive and Lynnly Way, area to the west is somewhat constrained by the creek.
          o   There is a north-south gap of approximately a mile south of Edy Road (gap 4). The
              neighborhood route of Bedstraw Terrace-Ladyfern Drive-Roellich Avenue is located in
              the general area that would meet the collector spacing guidelines. However, these
              roads are fronted by residential development that has direct access to the facility and
              would restrict the mobility function of a collector.
               Figure 3A: Arterial and Collector Gaps in System Connectivity




                             3

                      4


                              1


                          2


                                              11/1/13
                                       Street System | Page 7
Sherwood Transportation System Plan
Existing Conditions Technical Report



Roadway Characteristics
Figure 4 shows the speed limits on Sherwood’s roadways and the traffic control used for the City’s
intersections. Most of the roadways have 25 mile per hour (mph) speed limits, with some of the arterial
roadways having higher speeds of 35, 45, or 55 mph. The majority of the City’s traffic signals are also on
the arterial roadways, while roundabouts are located at various intersections around town. Old Town
Sherwood has a large concentration of the City’s all-way stops, and there are also a number of all-way
stops on Sunset Boulevard.




                                                 11/1/13
                                          Street System | Page 8
                                                                                                                                                               55
                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                                                               )
Figure 4                                                  DRAFT 10/16/13
                                                                                                                                                    Í
                                                                                                                                                    Î  99W


Roadway Characteristics                                                                                                                      45
                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                             )
                                                                                         ROY ROGERS!
                                                                                                                                 B  !
                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                    !


                                                                                                35 !
                                                                                                "
                                                                                                )B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TH




                                                                                                BORCHERS
                                                                                                        !

                                                                                                                                                                                                               EA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CIPOLE
                                                                                                                   B                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                   !

                                                                                                                                                                                                        LB
                                                                                                                   !

                                                                                                                                                                                                   GA
                                                                                                                   !
                 EDY
                                                                                                            LANGER         B B"                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                           !
                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !

                                                 "
                                                 )                                                                                                                     TUALATIN SHERWOOD
                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                        35                                                                                     B
                                                                                                                                !                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                           BALER
                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                              ) !
                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                      !

                                                                                                                                                                                             B !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                               SH
                                                                                                                                                                                               !

                                                                                               B!
                                     ELWERT




                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                !




                                                                                                RW
                                                                                                !

                                                                                                    B
                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                   CENTURY




                                                                                                  OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      35
                                                                                                    !

                                                                                                                   S           S                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      )




                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                   &
                                                                                                                   -           -
                                                                                                                               &                P




                                                                                                                                        LANGER FARMS
                                                      HANDLEY          P
                                                         S             S
                                                        &
                                                        -              &
                                                                       -      B!
                                                                               !
                                                                               !   S
                                                                                   &
                                                                                   -                                                                                    OREGON
                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                   MEINECK!E
                                                                              P          B      WASHINGTON
                                                                                          !

                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                               B!
                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                 MURDOCK
                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                !

                                                                                                                      1S P
                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                 &




                                                                                                                               AS
                                                              45                                               -
                                                                                                               &




                                                                                                                                  H
                                                              "
                                                              )            S
                                                                           -
                                                                           &                                   S &
                                                                                                               &
                                                                                                               -  -S
                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                     &                                 S
                                                                                                                 S &
                                                                                                                 &
                                                                                                                 -   S
                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                       &
                                                                                                                     -
                                                                   S
                                                                   &
                                                                   -                                                      S
                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                          &
          KRUGER
                                                                                                                                                                                     35




                                                                                                                                    PI
                                    B                                                                                                                                                "
                                                                                                                                                                                     )




                                                                                                                                       N
                                                 !

                                                                                                                                              S




                                                                                                                                          E
                                                 !

                                     55                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                              &
                                                 !

                                   "
                                   )

                                                                                                                MAIN
                                             TIMBREL
                                         S                      35                                          SUNSET
                               OLD HIGHWAY 99W




                                         -
                                         &                      "
                                                                )          S                                                   35
                                                                           -
                                                                           &                                           S       "
                                                                                                                               )                               S
                                                                                                                       &
                                                                                                                       -                                       &
                                                                                                                                                               -                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                 &
                                                                                                             HILL



                         99W
                                                                                                                                                                                 35
                                                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                                                                 )
                         Í
                         Î                                                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                            LADD




                                                                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                                                             &


    CHAPMAN




                                                                                                                                                                               BAKER
                  IFIC




                                                                   BROOKMAN
                                                                                                                                                  Legend                                                                                City of Sherwood
               PAC




                                                                                                                                                        XX         Posted Speed Limit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Transportation System Plan
                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                                        )
                                                                                                                                                                   Signalized Intersection                                              Old Town Sherwood
                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                            Overlay




8
                                                                                                                                                           S
                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                           &                     LL
                                                                                                                                                                   All Way Stop Intersection                                            Urban Growth Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                              NE
                                                                                                                                                        P                   ON Intersection
                                                                                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                                                                                           C                                                            City Limit
                                                                                                                                                                         C
                                                                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Railroad     Park
                             Miles
0             0.25         0.5                                                                                                                                                                                             Trail        Parcel
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Langer Farms Pkwy -- SW Tualatin Sherwood Rd                                                             QC JOB #: 11224713
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                              DATE: Thu, Sep 05 2013
                     11          8                          Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                               9.1        50.0

                     6     3     2
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 33.3 0.0


       887   6                          2   998
                                                                                                          4.7   50.0                      50.0      4.8
             803          0.96        863
                                                                                                                5.4                        4.8
       876   67                       133   867
                                                                                                          5.4   1.5                        4.5      5.5

                    19     0     62
                                                                                                                        5.3 0.0 8.1

                    204          81
                                                                                                                        3.9        7.4



                           3                                                                                             0    0     0



                                                                                                                0                            0

             0                          0                                                                       0                            0

                                                                                                                0                            2

                           1                                                                                             0    0     0




                          NA                                                                                                  NA




             NA                       NA                                                                        NA                         NA




                          NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count        SW Langer Farms Pkwy           SW Langer Farms Pkwy    SW Tualatin Sherwood Rd    SW Tualatin Sherwood Rd             Total      Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                   (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM         1     0     10     0           0      1      2     0    0    53       5    0       9    62       1    0               144
    4:05 PM         2     0      5     0           0      0      0     0    0    57      10    0      13    71       0    0               158
    4:10 PM         0     0      7     0           0      0      0     0    0    66       4    0       6    61       0    0               144
    4:15 PM         2     0      9     0           0      0      0     0    0    66       5    0      10    63       1    0               156
    4:20 PM         2     0      5     0           0      0      1     0    2    39       5    0       7    69       0    0               130
    4:25 PM         1     0      5     0           0      0      0     0    0    53       1    0       6    77       1    0               144
    4:30 PM         0     0      7     0           0      1      0     0    0    64       7    0      13    64       0    0               156
    4:35 PM         0     0      4     1           0      1      0     0    2    69       5    0       8    83       0    0               173
    4:40 PM         2     0      5     0           0      0      0     0    0    70       7    0      12    72       0    0               168
    4:45 PM         2     0      2     0           0      1      1     0    0    61       2    0       5    84       0    0               158
    4:50 PM         1     0      1     0           0      0      0     0    2    76       5    0      10    67       0    0               162
    4:55 PM         3     0      4     0           0      0      0     0    0    74      13    0       9    74       0    0               177            1870
    5:00 PM         2     0      9     0           0      0      0     0    0    65       5    0      10    69       0    0               160            1886
    5:05 PM         0     0      9     0           0      0      0     0    0    80       3    0      10    65       0    0               167            1895
    5:10 PM         4     0      8     0           0      0      0     0    1    60       5    0      26    77       2    0               183            1934
    5:15 PM         2     0      3     0           0      0      1     0    0    71       2    0      17    68       0    0               164            1942
    5:20 PM         2     0      6     0           0      0      3     0    0    53       8    0       5    68       0    0               145            1957
    5:25 PM         0     0      4     0           2      0      1     0    1    60       5    0       8    72       0    0               153            1966
    5:30 PM         1     0      6     0           0      0      0     0    0    51       6    0       9    65       0    0               138            1948
    5:35 PM         1     0      5     0           0      0      1     0    0    50       5    0      17    65       0    0               144            1919
    5:40 PM         1     0      3     0           0      0      0     0    0    70       3    0       5    60       0    0               142            1893
    5:45 PM         1     0      2     0           0      0      0     0    0    63      11    0      10    62       0    0               149            1884
    5:50 PM         2     0      4     0           0      0      0     0    0    63       7    0      18    62       0    0               156            1878
    5:55 PM         0     0      1     0           0      0      0     0    0    62       3    0      14    71       0    0               151            1852
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                      Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right      U                      Total
  All Vehicles     24     0     80     0           0      0      4     0    4   844      40    0     212   840       8    0                      2056
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      8                 0      0      0          4    28       0            4    56       4                            104
  Pedestrians             4                               4                       0                          0                                     8
    Bicycles        0     0      0                 0      0      0          0     0       0            0     0       0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Gerda Ln -- SW Tualatin Sherwood Rd                                                                              QC JOB #: 11224712
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                      DATE: Thu, Sep 05 2013
                    226             82                          Peak-Hour: 4:15 PM -- 5:15 PM                                   5.3         18.3

                    161       1     64
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                                5.0 0.0 6.3


       999   51                           30   861
                                                                                                                  3.6   13.7                       26.7      4.1
             790             0.97        829
                                                                                                                        5.7                         3.3
       843   2                             2   861
                                                                                                                  6.3   50.0                        0.0      5.9

                         9    1     7
                                                                                                                                11.1 0.0 28.6

                         5          17
                                                                                                                                20.0        17.6



                              2                                                                                                  0     0     0



                                                                                                                        0                             0

             0                             4                                                                            0                             1

                                                                                                                        0                             0

                              0                                                                                                  0     0     0




                             NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                          NA                                                                             NA                          NA




                             NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Gerda Ln                    SW Gerda Ln             SW Tualatin Sherwood Rd   SW Tualatin Sherwood Rd              Total      Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        0            0      0     0         7       0      8     0         6   52       1    0      0    55       5    0                134
    4:05 PM        1            0      0     0         5       0     11     0         5   61       0    0      0    76       4    0                163
    4:10 PM        0            0      0     0         3       0     10     0         3   52       0    0      1    58       7    0                134
    4:15 PM        0            0      0     0         5       0     16     0         8   73       0    0      0    58       0    0                160
    4:20 PM        1            1      1     0         4       1     13     0         3   56       0    0      0    77       2    0                159
    4:25 PM        0            0      0     0         4       0     12     0         5   60       0    0      0    76       6    0                163
    4:30 PM        1            0      1     0         8       0     17     0         8   62       1    0      0    70       2    0                170
    4:35 PM        1            0      0     0        12       0     15     0         2   56       1    0      0    59       4    0                150
    4:40 PM        0            0      1     0         3       0     16     0         3   66       0    0      0    75       6    0                170
    4:45 PM        3            0      0     0         8       0     16     0         8   67       0    0      0    65       2    0                169
    4:50 PM        0            0      0     0         2       0      6     0         4   72       0    0      0    73       3    0                160
    4:55 PM        0            0      2     0         2       0      9     0         3   60       0    0      0    67       1    0                144            1876
    5:00 PM        2            0      0     0         7       0     10     0         2   84       0    0      1    60       3    0                169            1911
    5:05 PM        0            0      1     0         6       0     16     0         2   71       0    0      1    70       1    0                168            1916
    5:10 PM        1            0      1     0         3       0     15     0         3   63       0    0      0    79       0    0                165            1947
    5:15 PM        0            1      0     0         3       0      9     0         6   63       1    0      0    60       2    0                145            1932
    5:20 PM        0            0      0     0         1       0      7     0         2   56       0    0      0    68       1    0                135            1908
    5:25 PM        0            0      0     0         1       0      8     0         3   67       1    0      0    62       3    0                145            1890
    5:30 PM        0            0      1     0        10       0      5     0         6   56       1    0      0    73       1    0                153            1873
    5:35 PM        0            0      0     0         2       0      8     0         2   72       0    0      0    58       1    0                143            1866
    5:40 PM        0            0      0     0         2       0      4     0         0   60       0    0      1    68       2    0                137            1833
    5:45 PM        0            0      0     0         0       0      4     0         4   73       0    0      0    71       1    0                153            1817
    5:50 PM        0            0      0     0         3       0      7     0         0   72       0    0      0    72       0    0                154            1811
    5:55 PM        1            0      0     0         0       0      5     0         1   63       0    0      0    66       0    0                136            1803
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right     U                       Total
  All Vehicles     12           0      8     0        64       0    164     0        28  872       0    0      8   836      16    0                       2008
 Heavy Trucks       0           0      0               4       0     12               8   24       0           0    36       8                             92
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                           0                         0                                      0
    Bicycles       0            0      0              0        0      0               0    0       0           0     0       0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Oregon St -- SW Tualatin Sherwood Rd                                                                            QC JOB #: 11224711
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                   35            8                             Peak-Hour: 4:55 PM -- 5:55 PM                                   0.0        12.5

                   11     9     15
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       833   2                          6   1140
                                                                                                                 4.8   0.0                       16.7      3.2
             660         0.96         675
                                                                                                                       4.1                        4.1
       860   198                      459   870
                                                                                                                 5.9   12.1                       1.7      3.6

                   147    0     194
                                                                                                                               8.2 0.0 2.1

                   665          341
                                                                                                                               4.8        4.7



                          1                                                                                                     0    0     0



                                                                                                                       0                            0

             1                          0                                                                              1                            1

                                                                                                                       0                            3

                          0                                                                                                     0    0     0




                          NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                       NA                                                                               NA                         NA




                          NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count             SW Oregon St                     SW Oregon St            SW Tualatin Sherwood Rd    SW Tualatin Sherwood Rd             Total      Hourly
     Period              (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At Left        Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM      8          0     20     0          2        0      0     0        1    37      14    0      34    52       0    0               168
    4:05 PM     13          0     27     0          0        1      0     0        1    54      17    0      24    68       0    0               205
    4:10 PM     14          0     25     0          0        1      1     0        0    39      13    0      26    66       1    0               186
    4:15 PM     16          0     10     0          1        0      0     0        0    45      10    0      31    57       1    0               171
    4:20 PM      9          1     10     0          0        1      0     0        0    50      11    0      28    63       0    0               173
    4:25 PM     16          0     11     0          1        0      0     0        2    52      13    0      20    54       0    0               169
    4:30 PM      9          0      8     0          0        1      0     0        1    54      19    0      32    69       0    0               193
    4:35 PM     10          0     16     0          1        0      0     0        1    48      22    0      26    58       2    0               184
    4:40 PM      8          0     27     0          1        0      0     0        1    56      12    0      38    56       0    0               199
    4:45 PM     20          0     13     0          4        0      0     0        0    50      15    0      33    42       3    0               180
    4:50 PM     14          0     12     0          0        0      1     0        0    44      10    0      30    56       0    0               167
    4:55 PM      9          0     18     0          1        1      1     0        0    46      21    0      41    63       2    0               203            2198
    5:00 PM      9          0     13     0          3        1      3     0        0    49      18    0      40    55       0    0               191            2221
    5:05 PM     20          0     26     0          3        2      2     0        0    43      13    0      38    44       0    0               191            2207
    5:10 PM     11          0     15     0          2        3      0     0        0    65      13    0      38    51       0    0               198            2219
    5:15 PM     18          0     17     0          2        1      1     0        1    68      14    0      36    41       1    0               200            2248
    5:20 PM     10          0     19     0          3        0      1     0        0    55      18    0      42    68       1    0               217            2292
    5:25 PM     15          0     14     0          0        0      1     0        1    54      16    0      40    62       0    0               203            2326
    5:30 PM     14          0      9     0          0        1      0     0        0    52      16    0      35    68       1    0               196            2329
    5:35 PM      9          0     20     0          0        0      1     0        0    64      17    0      42    57       0    1               211            2356
    5:40 PM      9          0     16     0          1        0      1     0        0    59      18    0      34    56       1    0               195            2352
    5:45 PM     11          0     13     0          0        0      0     0        0    57      22    0      38    49       0    0               190            2362
    5:50 PM     12          0     14     0          0        0      0     0        0    48      12    0      34    61       0    0               181            2376
    5:55 PM     12          0      7     0          0        0      1     0        0    41      12    0      33    65       0    0               171            2344
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                       Southbound                   Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates   Left       Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right      U                      Total
  All Vehicles 172          0    200     0          20       4     12     0        8   708     192    0     472   684       8    0                      2480
 Heavy Trucks    4          0      0                 0       0      0              0    28      16            0    32       0                            80
  Pedestrians               0                                4                           4                          0                                     8
    Bicycles     0          0      0                0        0      0              0     0       0            0     0       0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Langer Farms Pkwy -- SW Oregon St                                                                             QC JOB #: 11224709
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Thu, Sep 05 2013
                    267          164                         Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                   1.1        0.6

                    67     0     200
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:45 PM -- 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                             3.0 0.0 0.5


       266   32                        132   331
                                                                                                                3.0   0.0                      0.8       2.1
             100          0.91         199
                                                                                                                      3.0                      3.0
       132   0                           0   300
                                                                                                                2.3   0.0                      0.0       1.3

                     0     0      0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0            0
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                           1                                                                                                  2    0    0



                                                                                                                      1                          0

             0                           0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                           0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                        NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count       SW Langer Farms Pkwy              SW Langer Farms Pkwy           SW Oregon St                SW Oregon St                  Total       Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right     U            Left Thru Right      U    Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0     0      0     0             11      0      5     0    2       10      0      0    0       23    17     0               68
    4:05 PM        0     0      0     0             19      0      3     0    0        4      0      0    0       12    11     0               49
    4:10 PM        0     0      0     0              4      0      5     0    4        8      0      0    0       16    11     0               48
    4:15 PM        0     0      0     0              8      0      3     0    2        5      0      0    0       10     7     0               35
    4:20 PM        0     0      0     0             10      0      4     0    4        7      0      0    0       16     9     0               50
    4:25 PM        0     0      0     0             12      0      3     0    4        0      0      0    0       17    11     0               47
    4:30 PM        0     0      0     0             17      0      6     0    4        6      0      0    0       12     9     0               54
    4:35 PM        0     0      0     0             21      0      3     0    3       11      0      0    0       12     9     0               59
    4:40 PM        0     0      0     0             13      0      5     0    2       11      0      0    0       14     6     0               51
    4:45 PM        0     0      0     0             19      0      3     0    3        8      0      0    0       10    14     0               57
    4:50 PM        0     0      0     0              9      0      3     0    6       11      0      0    0       18    15     0               62
    4:55 PM        0     0      0     0             14      0      2     0    6       10      0      0    0       17     7     0               56              636
    5:00 PM        0     0      0     0             20      0      3     0    2       11      0      0    0       13     7     0               56              624
    5:05 PM        0     0      0     0             17      0      5     0    3        7      0      0    0       15    11     0               58              633
    5:10 PM        0     0      0     0             15      0      7     0    2        8      0      0    0       31    18     0               81              666
    5:15 PM        0     0      0     0             14      0      9     0    1        5      0      0    0       13     7     0               49              680
    5:20 PM        0     0      0     0             13      0      4     0    4        6      0      0    0       13    12     0               52              682
    5:25 PM        0     0      0     0             22      0      3     0    1        7      0      0    0       16    11     0               60              695
    5:30 PM        0     0      0     0             13      0      4     0    2       13      0      0    0       15    11     0               58              699
    5:35 PM        0     0      0     0             17      0     10     0    2        5      0      0    0        9    12     0               55              695
    5:40 PM        0     0      0     0             12      0      6     0    1        8      0      0    0       19    15     0               61              705
    5:45 PM        0     0      0     0             19      0      6     0    4        7      0      0    0       25    12     0               73              721
    5:50 PM        0     0      0     0             19      0      7     0    6       12      0      0    0       12     6     0               62              721
    5:55 PM        0     0      0     0             19      0      3     0    4       11      0      0    0       18    10     0               65              730
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                         Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right     U            Left Thru Right      U    Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0     0      0     0            228      0     64     0    56     120      0      0    0      220   112     0                      800
 Heavy Trucks      0     0      0                    0      0      0           0       0      0           0        8     0                             8
  Pedestrians            0                                  0                          0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0     0      0                    0      0      2          0        0      0           0        0     0                             2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 3rd St -- SW Washington St                                                                                     QC JOB #: 11224708
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                    DATE: Thu, Sep 05 2013
                    301            177                         Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  0.7        1.1

                    203 75         23
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:45 PM -- 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                              1.0 0.0 0.0


       325   135                         16   108
                                                                                                                 0.6   1.5                      0.0       0.0
             81             0.84         91
                                                                                                                       0.0                      0.0
       246   30                           1   105
                                                                                                                 1.2   3.3                      0.0       0.0

                       31    26     1
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

                    106            58
                                                                                                                              0.9        0.0



                             5                                                                                                 0    0    1



                                                                                                                       0                          0

             7                            0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                       0                          0

                             8                                                                                                 0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                          NA                                                                            NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count                  SW 3rd St                      SW 3rd St                SW Washington St           SW Washington St              Total       Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM        1           2      0     0        1        4     14     0        5     4      1     0      0      9     0      0             41
    4:05 PM        2           3      0     0        2        6      8     0        2     4      0     0      0      4     1      0             32
    4:10 PM        1           1      1     0        0        4     12     0        3     2      0     0      0      6     0      0             30
    4:15 PM        1           3      0     0        3        6      8     0        5     2      3     0      0      5     1      0             37
    4:20 PM        4           0      0     0        2        7      8     0        6     4      0     0      0      3     1      0             35
    4:25 PM        1           3      0     0        0        8      7     0        9     6      1     0      0     11     1      0             47
    4:30 PM        2           4      0     0        1        3     11     0       11    10      0     0      0      6     0      0             48
    4:35 PM        0           3      0     0        4        5     12     0        7     6      0     0      1      5     2      0             45
    4:40 PM        0           1      0     0        4        7     12     0       11     5      4     0      0      5     0      0             49
    4:45 PM        1           2      0     0        2        5     12     0        6     5      3     0      0      1     0      0             37
    4:50 PM        4           1      0     0        1        8     18     0        8     5      1     0      0      4     2      0             52
    4:55 PM        0           5      0     0        1        8     14     0       15     5      4     0      0      7     1      0             60              513
    5:00 PM        7           0      0     0        2        4     15     0       10     4      3     0      0      9     1      0             55              527
    5:05 PM        3           1      0     0        4        7     12     0       13     7      2     0      0      6     1      0             56              551
    5:10 PM        1           2      0     0        2        7     19     0       11     7      4     0      0     13     1      0             67              588
    5:15 PM        1           4      1     0        2        5     15     0        7     4      0     0      0      9     2      0             50              601
    5:20 PM        1           3      0     0        1        5     19     0        8     2      1     0      0      7     0      0             47              613
    5:25 PM        1           2      0     0        2        6     22     0        8     4      1     0      1      5     1      0             53              619
    5:30 PM        2           3      0     0        1        5     24     0       13     9      2     0      0      3     2      0             64              635
    5:35 PM        0           1      0     0        1        7     13     0        7     3      1     0      0     13     2      0             48              638
    5:40 PM        1           0      0     0        1        7     21     0       10     5      6     0      0      9     0      0             60              649
    5:45 PM        4           1      0     0        2        6     17     0       18    11      1     0      0      5     1      0             66              678
    5:50 PM        5           3      0     0        3       11     15     0       23    14      3     0      0      3     3      0             83              709
    5:55 PM        5           6      0     0        2        5     11     0        7    11      6     0      0      9     2      0             64              713
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                     Southbound                  Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles     56         40      0     0        28      88    172     0      192   144    40      0      0     68    24      0                    852
 Heavy Trucks       0          0      0               0       0      0              0     0      4            0      0     0                            4
  Pedestrians                  8                              0                           0                          0                                  8
    Bicycles       0           0      0              0        0      0              0     0      0            0      0     0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Main St -- SW Railroad St                                                                                       QC JOB #: 11224707
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Thu, Sep 05 2013
                    217             147                        Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                   4.6        0.0

                         7   201     9
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:45 PM -- 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 2.0 66.7


       23    4                            14   99
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                       0.0       0.0
             8               0.82         10
                                                                                                                       12.5                      0.0
       24    12                           75   91
                                                                                                                 4.2   0.0                       0.0       8.8

                         6   129 74
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 1.4

                    288             209
                                                                                                                               1.4        0.5



                              10                                                                                                1    0    0



                                                                                                                       0                           0

             14                            8                                                                           0                           0

                                                                                                                       0                           0

                              2                                                                                                 0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                           NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                             NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count                  SW Main St                    SW Main St                  SW Railroad St            SW Railroad St                Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        0           11      6     0       0       14      0     0        1      0      1      0     3     1      1    0               38
    4:05 PM        1            7      2     0       1       11      0     0        0      0      0      0     5     0      1    0               28
    4:10 PM        1            4      8     0       1        6      0     0        1      1      1      0     5     1      1    0               30
    4:15 PM        2            5      4     0       1       10      1     0        1      1      2      0     7     0      0    0               34
    4:20 PM        0           10      5     0       0       14      2     0        0      2      1      0     4     3      0    0               41
    4:25 PM        3           14      4     0       1       11      1     0        1      0      1      0     2     0      1    0               39
    4:30 PM        1           12      1     0       0        7      0     0        2      1      1      0    11     0      1    0               37
    4:35 PM        1            4      5     0       1       12      1     0        0      0      1      0     5     0      0    0               30
    4:40 PM        0            5      5     0       1       18      0     0        0      3      0      0     6     0      2    0               40
    4:45 PM        0            7      3     0       0       21      0     0        0      1      0      0     3     0      0    0               35
    4:50 PM        0           18      4     0       2       10      0     0        0      0      1      0     3     0      0    0               38
    4:55 PM        1            6      7     0       2       20      1     0        0      1      1      0     3     1      0    0               43              433
    5:00 PM        0           12      4     0       0       13      0     0        1      2      1      0     9     0      2    0               44              439
    5:05 PM        0            8      4     0       0       18      2     0        0      0      1      0     8     0      0    0               41              452
    5:10 PM        0           12      8     0       0       18      0     0        0      0      1      0     3     0      2    0               44              466
    5:15 PM        0           12      5     0       0       13      0     0        0      2      0      0     5     0      0    0               37              469
    5:20 PM        3           11      3     0       2        8      1     0        0      2      1      0     7     0      1    0               39              467
    5:25 PM        2           12      6     0       2       11      2     0        1      0      0      0     5     1      1    0               43              471
    5:30 PM        0            9     11     0       0       18      0     0        0      0      1      0     8     1      0    0               48              482
    5:35 PM        0            8      7     0       0       22      0     0        0      1      0      0     4     0      0    0               42              494
    5:40 PM        1            5      7     0       2       22      0     0        0      0      1      0     1     3      2    0               44              498
    5:45 PM        0           13      3     0       2       13      2     0        1      0      3      0     8     2      0    0               47              510
    5:50 PM        0           15     10     0       1       25      0     0        0      0      1      0     7     0      4    0               63              535
    5:55 PM        0           12      6     0       0       20      0     0        1      1      2      0    10     3      2    0               57              549
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0         160      76     0       12     232      8     0        8      4     24      0   100    20     24    0                      668
 Heavy Trucks      0            0      0              8       4      0              0      0      0            0     0      0                            12
  Pedestrians                   4                             0                            4                        12                                   20
    Bicycles       0            0      0             0        0      0              0      0      0            0     0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Timbrel Ln -- SW Sunset Blvd                                                                               QC JOB #: 11224705
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                DATE: Thu, Sep 05 2013
                    0            0                          Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                    0     0      0
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:40 PM -- 5:55 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 0.0 0.0


       356   0                          0   334
                                                                                                             0.6   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             281         0.91         269
                                                                                                                   0.0                      0.0
       384   103                       65   341
                                                                                                             0.3   1.0                      0.0       0.3

                   87     0     60
                                                                                                                          2.3 0.0 1.7

                   168          147
                                                                                                                          0.6        2.0



                          5                                                                                                0    0    0



                                                                                                                   0                          0

             0                          9                                                                          0                          1

                                                                                                                   0                          0

                          0                                                                                                0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                       NA                                                                           NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count        SW Timbrel Ln                      SW Timbrel Ln               SW Sunset Blvd            SW Sunset Blvd                Total       Hourly
     Period         (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right      U              Left Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM      5    0      2     0               0      0      0     0        0    12      6      0      1   16      0    0               42
    4:05 PM      8    0      2     0               0      0      0     0        0    26      3      0      1   14      0    0               54
    4:10 PM      3    0      2     0               0      0      0     0        0    15      3      0      5   18      0    0               46
    4:15 PM      3    0      0     0               0      0      0     0        0    15      6      0      2   19      0    0               45
    4:20 PM      1    0      1     0               0      0      0     0        0    20      8      0      1   20      0    0               51
    4:25 PM      1    0      2     0               0      0      0     0        0    16      2      0      1   19      0    0               41
    4:30 PM      0    0      3     0               0      0      0     0        0    20      2      0      6   18      0    0               49
    4:35 PM      8    0      3     0               0      0      0     0        0    16      8      0      3   17      0    0               55
    4:40 PM      4    0      3     0               0      0      0     0        0    26      7      0      2   12      0    0               54
    4:45 PM      3    0      2     0               0      0      0     0        0    27     10      0      5   22      0    0               69
    4:50 PM     12    0      3     0               0      0      0     0        0    20      7      0      6   19      0    0               67
    4:55 PM      7    0      1     0               0      0      0     0        0    19      8      0      7   19      0    0               61              634
    5:00 PM      6    0      3     0               0      0      0     0        0    29      5      0      6   23      0    0               72              664
    5:05 PM      5    0      3     0               0      0      0     0        0    19     11      0      5   18      0    0               61              671
    5:10 PM      7    0      4     0               0      0      0     0        0    25      6      0      5   24      0    0               71              696
    5:15 PM      6    0      9     0               0      0      0     0        0    20     11      0      4   26      0    0               76              727
    5:20 PM      3    0      2     0               0      0      0     0        0    22      6      0      4   22      0    0               59              735
    5:25 PM      5    0      5     0               0      0      0     0        0    26     11      0      4   22      0    0               73              767
    5:30 PM      7    0      3     0               0      0      0     0        0    28      6      0      7   18      0    0               69              787
    5:35 PM      9    0      9     0               0      0      0     0        0    15      9      0      2   30      0    0               74              806
    5:40 PM      8    0      1     0               0      0      0     0        0    33     11      0      7   18      0    0               78              830
    5:45 PM     12    0      9     0               0      0      0     0        0    18      6      0      8   24      0    0               77              838
    5:50 PM      9    0      5     0               0      0      0     0        0    22     13      0      6   28      0    0               83              854
    5:55 PM     10    0      7     0               0      0      0     0        0    24      8      0      7   16      0    0               72              865
 Peak 15-Min            Northbound                          Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right     U              Left Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles 116    0     60     0               0      0      0     0        0   292    120      0     84  280      0    0                      952
 Heavy Trucks    4    0      4                     0      0      0              0     0      0             0    0      0                            8
  Pedestrians         0                                   0                           0                         0                                   0
    Bicycles     0    0      0                     0      0      0              0     0      0             0    0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Main St -- SW Sunset Blvd                                                                                       QC JOB #: 11224704
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Thu, Sep 05 2013
                    267            212                          Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  1.1        0.5

                    133 107 27
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:45 PM -- 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 2.8 0.0


       444   102                          39   386
                                                                                                                  1.4   0.0                      2.6       1.3
             191            0.94         285
                                                                                                                        2.1                      1.4
       332   39                           62   246
                                                                                                                  1.5   2.6                      0.0       3.3

                       26    71    28
                                                                                                                               7.7 0.0 14.3

                    208            125
                                                                                                                               1.9        4.8



                             2                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

             5                             8                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          0

                             4                                                                                                  0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                          NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Main St                      SW Main St                SW Sunset Blvd             SW Sunset Blvd                Total       Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0           6      1     0         0        8      5     0       10   11      3      0       4   22      1    0               71
    4:05 PM        1           4      4     0         3        6      3     0        3    6      1      0       3   14      1    0               49
    4:10 PM        2           5      1     0         1        5      8     0        6   10      2      0       4   15      0    0               59
    4:15 PM        1           2      3     0         1        8      6     0        4   11      1      0       5   22      5    0               69
    4:20 PM        6           4      2     0         0        9      6     0        7    6      2      0       4   16      1    0               63
    4:25 PM        2           3      2     0         1        4     10     0        7   15      0      0       4   25      4    0               77
    4:30 PM        4           6      1     0         3        9     10     0        8   14      2      0       2   23      2    0               84
    4:35 PM        1           3      2     0         1        8      9     0        8   11      2      0      10   17      3    0               75
    4:40 PM        4           5      3     0         5        6      7     0        4   16      4      0       4   22      0    0               80
    4:45 PM        4           8      1     0         4       10      8     0        7   22      1      0       4   27      1    0               97
    4:50 PM        2           8      2     0         2        8      7     0        8   17      3      0       6   28      2    0               93
    4:55 PM        2           5      2     0         2        6     10     0        6    6      3      0       1   28      3    0               74              891
    5:00 PM        1           2      3     0         1       14     14     0        7   18      1      0       6   22      6    0               95              915
    5:05 PM        2           9      3     0         0       15     10     0        5   14      4      0       4   32      1    0               99              965
    5:10 PM        4           4      5     0         4        7     10     0       10   13      2      0       3   26      4    0               92              998
    5:15 PM        2           6      1     0         5       10      7     0        6   12      6      0       8   19      3    0               85             1014
    5:20 PM        3           4      5     0         2        5     10     0       10   17      0      0       4   25      3    0               88             1039
    5:25 PM        2           9      0     0         0        6      9     0        6   16      2      0       4   26      2    0               82             1044
    5:30 PM        3           7      2     0         2        7      9     0        9   21      2      0      10   20      4    0               96             1056
    5:35 PM        0           5      2     0         3       10     16     0        4   13      6      0       7   23      8    0               97             1078
    5:40 PM        0           5      0     0         3        5     15     0        7   16      2      0       2   23      2    0               80             1078
    5:45 PM        4           9      4     0         1        3     11     0        7   21      2      0       5   26      1    0               94             1075
    5:50 PM        5           6      3     0         3        9     11     0       17   13      8      0       3   20      4    0              102             1084
    5:55 PM        0           5      0     0         3       16     11     0       14   17      4      0       6   23      1    0              100             1110
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                      Southbound                 Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     36         80     28     0         28     112    132     0      152  204    56       0      56  276    24     0                      1184
 Heavy Trucks       0          0      8                0       4      0              0    0      0              0    0      0                            12
  Pedestrians                  0                               0                          0                          0                                    0
    Bicycles       0           0      0               0        0      0              0    0      0              0    0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Murdock Rd/SW Baker Rd -- SW Sunset Blvd/ SW McKinley Dr                                         QC JOB #: 11224703
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                      DATE: Thu, Sep 05 2013
                   323          182                    Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                            1.5        3.3

                   233 77       13
                                                      Peak 15-Min: 5:25 PM -- 5:40 PM
                                                                                                                0.4 3.9 7.7


       431   108                       5   15
                                                                                                   1.2   0.9                     20.0   13.3
             9           0.92          8
                                                                                                         0.0                     12.5
       209   92                        2   28
                                                                                                   1.9   3.3                      0.0    3.6

                   190 69        6
                                                                                                                1.6 5.8 0.0

                   171          265
                                                                                                                3.5        2.6



                          0                                                                                      0    0    0



                                                                                                         0                         0

             2                         0                                                                 0                         0

                                                                                                         0                         0

                          0                                                                                      0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                           NA




             NA                       NA                                                                 NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                           NA



 5-Min Count SW Murdock Rd/SW Baker RdSW Murdock Rd/SW Baker Rd
                                                              SW Sunset Blvd/ SW McKinley
                                                                                        SWDrSunset Blvd/ SW McKinley DrTotal      Hourly
     Period         (Northbound)            (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                       Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right      U   Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM     10    3      0     0     1     3     10     0     6     1       7    0       0     3      1     0       45
    4:05 PM     11    3      0     0     0     8      8     0     6     0       5    0       0     1      0     0       42
    4:10 PM     14    5      1     0     0     6     23     0     6     2       3    0       1     1      2     0       64
    4:15 PM     11    2      0     0     0     1     20     0     8     0       4    0       0     1      0     0       47
    4:20 PM     14    6      0     0     1     4     22     0     2     0       5    0       0     0      0     0       54
    4:25 PM     18    6      0     0     1     7     26     0     8     2       5    0       1     0      1     0       75
    4:30 PM      5    6      0     0     1     5     21     0     7     0       4    0       0     1      1     0       51
    4:35 PM     13    7      0     0     1     7     16     0     5     0       4    0       0     1      0     0       54
    4:40 PM     13    8      1     0     1     9     19     0     8     0       9    0       1     0      1     0       70
    4:45 PM     11    7      1     0     2     6     30     0     9     1       7    0       0     1      1     0       76
    4:50 PM     19    6      0     0     1     6     17     0     8     0      11    0       1     2      1     0       72
    4:55 PM     16    3      0     0     2     8     18     0     3     1       4    0       0     1      0     0       56          706
    5:00 PM     20    4      0     0     0     8     22     0    13     1       6    0       0     0      0     0       74          735
    5:05 PM     21    6      0     0     0     5     20     0    10     1       5    0       0     1      0     0       69          762
    5:10 PM     18    4      1     0     2     4     17     0     8     2       7    0       0     1      0     0       64          762
    5:15 PM     15    2      1     0     1     5     13     0     9     0       6    0       0     0      0     0       52          767
    5:20 PM     17    6      0     0     0     5     14     0     9     1       7    0       0     0      0     0       59          772
    5:25 PM     16   10      0     0     2     5     21     0     9     0      10    0       0     1      2     0       76          773
    5:30 PM     11    5      1     0     1     7     21     0    10     1      10    0       0     1      0     0       68          790
    5:35 PM     13    8      1     0     1     9     21     0    12     1      10    0       0     0      0     0       76          812
    5:40 PM     18    3      1     0     3     5     16     0     8     1       6    0       0     2      0     0       63          805
    5:45 PM     10    8      0     0     1     5     17     0     5     3      10    0       0     0      1     0       60          789
    5:50 PM     13    7      0     0     1     3     16     0     8     1       7    0       1     0      2     0       59          776
    5:55 PM     11    4      0     0     5    13     19     0     8     1      13    0       0     0      2     0       76          796
 Peak 15-Min            Northbound               Southbound                Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right     U   Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U            Total
  All Vehicles 160   92      8     0    16    84    252     0   124     8     120    0       0     8      8     0            880
 Heavy Trucks    4    4      0           0     0      0           0     0       8            0     0      4                   20
  Pedestrians         0                        0                        0                          0                           0
    Bicycles     0    0      0           0     0      0           0     0       0            0     0      0                    0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Ladd Hill Rd -- SW Brookman Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11224702
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                    DATE: Thu, Sep 05 2013
                    126            94                          Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                                  1.6        3.2

                       53    73    0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:25 PM -- 5:40 PM
                                                                                                                              1.9 1.4 0.0


       67    33                          0    0
                                                                                                                1.5   6.1                       0.0       0.0
             0              0.90         0
                                                                                                                      0.0                       0.0
       39    6                           0    0
                                                                                                                7.7   16.7                      0.0       0.0

                       14    61    0
                                                                                                                              0.0 1.6 0.0

                       79          75
                                                                                                                              2.5        1.3



                             0                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                           0

             0                           0                                                                            0                           0

                                                                                                                      0                           0

                             0                                                                                                 0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                         NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count             SW Ladd Hill Rd                 SW Ladd Hill Rd              SW Brookman Rd            SW Brookman Rd                 Total       Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left     Thru Right     U       Left     Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        0         2      0     0        0         5      5     0         2     0      2      0    0      0     0     0               16
    4:05 PM        0         3      0     0        0         2      3     0         3     0      1      0    0      0     0     0               12
    4:10 PM        0         1      0     0        0         5      3     0         3     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               12
    4:15 PM        1         5      0     0        0         6      3     0         1     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               16
    4:20 PM        2         5      0     0        0         3      3     0         2     0      3      0    0      0     0     0               18
    4:25 PM        1         1      0     0        0         3      4     0         1     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               10
    4:30 PM        0         5      0     0        0         8      1     0         1     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               15
    4:35 PM        2         3      0     0        0         3      1     0         3     0      1      0    0      0     0     0               13
    4:40 PM        0         8      0     0        0         5      4     0         3     0      1      0    0      0     0     0               21
    4:45 PM        0         6      0     0        0         3      5     0         6     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               20
    4:50 PM        2         6      0     0        0         4      5     0         2     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               19
    4:55 PM        1         6      0     0        0         3      4     0         0     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               14              186
    5:00 PM        2         3      0     0        0        12      4     0         1     0      1      0    0      0     0     0               23              193
    5:05 PM        2         4      0     0        0         6      7     0         6     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               25              206
    5:10 PM        0         7      0     0        0         4      1     0         2     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               14              208
    5:15 PM        1         2      0     0        0         9      9     0         2     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               23              215
    5:20 PM        2         3      0     0        0         4      2     0         3     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               14              211
    5:25 PM        2         6      0     0        0         4      4     0         2     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               18              219
    5:30 PM        2         7      0     0        0         6      7     0         3     0      2      0    0      0     0     0               27              231
    5:35 PM        0         3      0     0        0        13      1     0         3     0      2      0    0      0     0     0               22              240
    5:40 PM        2         2      0     0        0         5      2     0         2     0      1      0    0      0     0     0               14              233
    5:45 PM        0         5      0     0        0         4      2     0         4     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               15              228
    5:50 PM        1         3      0     0        0         5      4     0         0     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               13              222
    5:55 PM        0         4      0     0        0         9      5     0         1     0      0      0    0      0     0     0               19              227
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left     Thru Right     U       Left     Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                      Total
  All Vehicles     16       64      0     0        0        92     48     0        32     0    16       0    0      0     0     0                      268
 Heavy Trucks       0        0      0              0         0      4               4     0      0           0      0     0                             8
  Pedestrians                0                               0                            0                         0                                   0
    Bicycles       0         0      0              0         0      0               0     0      0           0      0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 99W -- SW Brookman Rd                                                                                          QC JOB #: 11224701
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Thu, Sep 05 2013
                    2016          1388                       Peak-Hour: 4:20 PM -- 5:20 PM                                 3.6        5.2

                     21 1972 23
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                           4.8 3.5 8.7


       25    15                          24   65
                                                                                                              4.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
             5             0.95           2
                                                                                                                    0.0                      0.0
       25    5                           39   67
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                      0.0      3.0

                     10 1348 40
                                                                                                                           0.0 5.3 0.0

                    2024          1398
                                                                                                                           3.5        5.2



                            0                                                                                               0    0    0



                                                                                                                    0                          0

             0                            0                                                                         0                          0

                                                                                                                    0                          0

                            0                                                                                               0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                          NA                                                                         NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count                99W                              99W                    SW Brookman Rd            SW Brookman Rd                Total      Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                            Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        0     90      1     2             0   116      2     1         0     1      1      0     3     1     0     0             218
    4:05 PM        1     81      0     1             2   180      0     0         2     0      1      0     1     0     1     0             270
    4:10 PM        0   121       4     0             2   158      2     0         2     0      1      0     3     0     2     0             295
    4:15 PM        1   101       6     0             0   147      2     1         0     0      0      0     3     0     2     0             263
    4:20 PM        0    110      4     0             1   186      1     0         0     0      0      0     0     0     3     0             305
    4:25 PM        0   100       2     0             1   138      3     0         2     0      0      0     4     0     1     0             251
    4:30 PM        0   106       5     3             3   146      0     0         0     0      0      0     0     0     1     0             264
    4:35 PM        0    117      5     1             3   140      1     0         0     0      0      0     0     1     2     0             270
    4:40 PM        0   125       5     1             2   180      2     1         5     1      1      0     2     1     2     0             328
    4:45 PM        0   107       6     1             3   162      1     0         0     1      0      0     6     0     2     0             289
    4:50 PM        0   120       2     1             1   172      2     0         2     0      0      0     3     0     1     0             304
    4:55 PM        0   134       1     0             1   171      2     0         1     0      0      0     4     0     2     0             316            3373
    5:00 PM        0     96      3     0             3   186      3     0         0     0      1      0     5     0     2     0             299            3454
    5:05 PM        2   104       2     1             0   176      4     0         1     1      0      0     7     0     3     0             301            3485
    5:10 PM        0    118      2     0             1   137      0     0         4     2      3      0     5     0     3     0             275            3465
    5:15 PM        0    111      3     0             3   178      2     0         0     0      0      0     3     0     2     0             302            3504
    5:20 PM        0   104       3     1             4   129      4     0         2     0      0      0     3     1     2     0             253            3452
    5:25 PM        1     96      6     0             2   149      1     0         2     0      0      0     4     0     2     0             263            3464
    5:30 PM        0   127       6     1             3   129      0     0         1     0      1      0     4     2     2     0             276            3476
    5:35 PM        0   103       2     2             4   150      3     0         0     1      0      0     5     0     0     0             270            3476
    5:40 PM        0   120       3     0             3   158      1     1         2     0      1      0     3     0     0     0             292            3440
    5:45 PM        1    117      0     0             5   135      2     0         2     2      0      0     2     1     1     0             268            3419
    5:50 PM        0   109       1     0             4   141      0     1         0     0      0      0     4     0     1     0             261            3376
    5:55 PM        0     84      3     0             4   143      2     0         6     1      0      0     4     0     2     0             249            3309
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                       Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles     0 1408       52   12             24 2056      20     4        28     8      4      0    44     4    20     0                    3684
 Heavy Trucks      0     72      0                   0    48      0               0     0      0            0     0     0                           120
  Pedestrians             0                                0                            0                         0                                  0
    Bicycles       0      0      0                   0     0      0               0     0      0            0     0     0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 1:32 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- SW Edy Rd                                                                                      QC JOB #: 10871808
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Wed, Dec 19 2012
                     0          0                          Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                     0.0        0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                          Peak 15-Min: 5:20 PM -- 5:35 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       160   0                         0   181
                                                                                                                1.9   0.0                      0.0       1.7
             131         0.77        157
                                                                                                                      1.5                      1.9
       134   3                        24   157
                                                                                                                1.5   0.0                      0.0       1.3

                     3    0     26
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                    27          29
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                         1                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                      NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          SW Copper Terr                 SW Copper Terr                  SW Edy Rd                    SW Edy Rd                   Total       Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right     U          Left Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        0     0      3     0           0      0      0     0        0      11      0      0    0       12      0     0              26
    4:05 PM        0     0      4     0           0      0      0     0        0       9      0      0    2         6     0     0              21
    4:10 PM        0     0      3     0           0      0      0     0        0       3      0      0    1         2     0     0               9
    4:15 PM        0     0      1     0           0      0      0     0        0       5      0      0    1         8     0     0              15
    4:20 PM        1     0      0     0           0      0      0     0        0      10      1      0    4        11     0     0              27
    4:25 PM        1     0      3     0           0      0      0     0        0      14      0      0    3       18      0     0              39
    4:30 PM        1     0      6     0           0      0      0     0        0       9      0      0    1       16      0     0              33
    4:35 PM        1     0      4     0           0      0      0     0        0      11      0      0    1       16      0     0              33
    4:40 PM        0     0      1     0           0      0      0     0        0       4      1      0    0       12      0     0              18
    4:45 PM        1     0      6     0           0      0      0     0        0       9      0      0    2         6     0     0              24
    4:50 PM        0     0      1     0           0      0      0     0        0      15      0      0    2         9     0     0              27
    4:55 PM        0     0      0     0           0      0      0     0        0      15      0      0    4         8     0     0              27              299
    5:00 PM        0     0      5     0           0      0      0     0        0      10      0      0    2       17      0     0              34              307
    5:05 PM        1     0      0     0           0      0      0     0        0      10      1      0    3         8     0     0              23              309
    5:10 PM        0     0      2     0           0      0      0     0        0       6      0      0    4       14      0     0              26              326
    5:15 PM        0     0      0     0           0      0      0     0        0       9      1      0    1         9     0     0              20              331
    5:20 PM        0     0      0     0           0      0      0     0        0      16      0      0    2       16      0     0              34              338
    5:25 PM        0     0      4     0           0      0      0     0        0       8      0      0    1       20      0     0              33              332
    5:30 PM        0     0      3     0           0      0      0     0        0      18      0      0    2       22      0     0              45              344
    5:35 PM        0     0      2     0           0      0      0     0        0      14      3      0    1         7     0     0              27              338
    5:40 PM        1     0      2     0           0      0      0     0        0       4      0      0    1       12      0     0              20              340
    5:45 PM        0     0      1     0           0      0      0     0        0       8      0      0    2        11     0     0              22              338
    5:50 PM        0     0      1     0           0      0      0     0        0      14      0      0    1       10      0     0              26              337
    5:55 PM        0     0      0     0           0      0      0     0        0      12      1      0    2       12      0     0              27              337
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                    Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right     U          Left Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right     U                     Total
  All Vehicles     0     0     28     0           0      0      0     0        0     168      0      0    20     232      0     0                     448
 Heavy Trucks      0     0      0                 0      0      0              0       8      0            0        0     0                            8
  Pedestrians            0                               0                             0                            0                                  0
    Bicycles       0     0      0                 0      0      0              0       0      0           0         0     0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/27/2013 5:17 PM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- SW Handley St                                                                            QC JOB #: 10871802
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                             DATE: Wed, Dec 19 2012
                    25          30                       Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                    10    0     15
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 5:20 PM -- 5:35 PM
                                                                                                                       0.0 0.0 0.0


       26    14                      16   32
                                                                                                          0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             33          0.73        16
                                                                                                                0.0                      0.0
       48    1                        0   48
                                                                                                          0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                                                                                       0.0 0.0 0.0

                     1          0
                                                                                                                       0.0        0.0



                          2                                                                                             0    0    0



                                                                                                                0                          0

             0                        0                                                                         0                          0

                                                                                                                0                          0

                          0                                                                                             0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                  NA




             NA                      NA                                                                         NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count          SW Copper Terr               SW Copper Terr                SW Handley St             SW Handley St                Total       Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      0     0         1     1      0      0    0      0     1     0               4
    4:05 PM        0     0      0     0          2     1      0     0         1     1      0      0    0      0     1     0               6
    4:10 PM        0     0      0     0          0     0      1     0         1     2      0      0    0      0     1     0               5
    4:15 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      0     0         0     0      0      0    0      0     1     0               2
    4:20 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      0     0         0     1      0      0    0      0     0     0               2
    4:25 PM        0     0      0     0          0     0      1     0         1     3      0      0    0      0     0     0               5
    4:30 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      0     0         0     0      0      0    0      1     0     0               2
    4:35 PM        0     0      0     0          2     0      0     0         0     2      0      0    0      1     2     0               7
    4:40 PM        0     0      0     0          0     0      0     0         0     1      0      0    0      2     3     0               6
    4:45 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      0     0         1     2      0      0    0      3     0     0               7
    4:50 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      1     0         0     4      0      0    0      4     0     0              10
    4:55 PM        0     0      0     0          0     0      2     0         0     1      0      0    0      0     1     0               4               60
    5:00 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      1     0         0     2      0      0    0      0     1     0               5               61
    5:05 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      1     0         1     2      0      0    0      2     1     0               8               63
    5:10 PM        0     0      0     0          2     0      0     0         2     0      0      0    0      0     1     0               5               63
    5:15 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      1     0         0     2      0      0    0      0     0     0               4               65
    5:20 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      2     0         3     1      0      0    0      3     3     0              13               76
    5:25 PM        0     0      0     0          0     0      0     0         4     3      0      0    0      1     3     0              11               82
    5:30 PM        0     0      0     0          2     0      1     0         3     3      0      0    0      0     3     0              12               92
    5:35 PM        0     0      0     0          3     0      3     0         0     2      0      0    0      2     3     0              13               98
    5:40 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      0     0         0     7      0      0    0      3     0     0              11              103
    5:45 PM        0     0      0     0          2     0      0     0         0     4      0      0    0      1     1     0               8              104
    5:50 PM        0     0      0     0          1     0      1     0         1     3      0      0    0      2     0     0               8              102
    5:55 PM        0     0      0     0          0     0      0     0         0     4      1      0    0      2     0     0               7              105
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                    Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                     Total
  All Vehicles     0     0      0     0         12     0     12     0        40    28      0      0    0     16    36     0                     144
 Heavy Trucks      0     0      0                0     0      0               0     0      0           0      0     0                            0
  Pedestrians            0                             8                            0                         0                                  8
    Bicycles       0     0      0                0     0      0               0     0      0           0      0     0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/27/2013 5:17 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Elwert Rd -- Edy Rd                                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10781226
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Jun 26 2012
                    473             206                         Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                      0.4        3.4

                         5   404 64
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.5 0.0


       83    8                            44   125
                                                                                                                      1.2   0.0                      6.8       3.2
             33              0.93         66
                                                                                                                            0.0                      1.5
       55    14                           15   126
                                                                                                                      1.8   7.1                      0.0       0.8

                       12 154 29
                                                                                                                                   0.0 2.6 3.4

                    433             195
                                                                                                                                   0.7        2.6



                              1                                                                                                     0    0    0



                                                                                                                            0                          0

             0                             0                                                                                1                          0

                                                                                                                            0                          0

                              0                                                                                                     0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                           NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                   Elwert Rd                      Elwert Rd                      Edy Rd                      Edy Rd                     Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0            6      1     0        4       24      0     0        3       3      0      0    2        1     4     0               48
    4:05 PM        1           12      0     0        7       14      0     0        1       6      1      0    3        5     4     0               54
    4:10 PM        2           12      0     0        2       20      0     0        0       2      2      0    2        5     1     0               48
    4:15 PM        0            8      2     0        0       21      0     0        0       2      0      0    0        4     1     0               38
    4:20 PM        0           10      1     0        3       26      0     0        0       2      0      0    0        2     4     0               48
    4:25 PM        0           14      2     0        1       31      1     0        0       1      0      0    1        7     4     0               62
    4:30 PM        0            5      2     0        4       29      0     0        0       4      1      0    1        5     2     0               53
    4:35 PM        1           14      2     0        4       17      3     0        0       0      1      0    1        4     2     0               49
    4:40 PM        0           11      1     0        5       39      1     0        1       3      0      0    2        9     3     0               75
    4:45 PM        0            6      4     0        6       29      0     0        0       4      1      0    1        7     2     0               60
    4:50 PM        1           17      1     0        6       34      0     0        1       3      1      0    2        8     1     0               75
    4:55 PM        1            9      3     0        2       32      1     0        0       1      2      0    2       10     3     0               66              676
    5:00 PM        0           11      2     0        8       35      1     0        0       1      1      0    0        6     4     0               69              697
    5:05 PM        1           11      3     0        3       46      0     0        0       5      0      0    0        6     3     0               78              721
    5:10 PM        2           16      2     0        4       33      0     0        3       3      2      0    1        5     4     0               75              748
    5:15 PM        0           12      0     0        9       35      0     0        0       5      0      0    1        7     5     0               74              784
    5:20 PM        0           12      2     0        4       31      1     0        2       5      0      0    1        4     5     0               67              803
    5:25 PM        1           12      1     0        8       40      1     0        0       2      5      0    2        4     2     0               78              819
    5:30 PM        2           12      4     0        5       25      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        4     5     0               57              823
    5:35 PM        1            7      6     0        8       39      0     0        0       2      0      0    1        6     2     0               72              846
    5:40 PM        1           16      2     0        3       25      1     0        0       1      0      0    4        4     5     0               62              833
    5:45 PM        2           14      2     0        4       18      0     0        0       2      2      0    1        6     4     0               55              828
    5:50 PM        1           13      4     0        3       41      1     0        2       4      2      0    1       10     3     0               85              838
    5:55 PM        1           18      1     0        5       36      0     0        1       3      2      0    3        4     2     0               76              848
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     12        156      20     0        64     456      0     0        12     52      8      0    8       72    48     0                      908
 Heavy Trucks       0           8      0               0       4      0               0      0      0           0        4     0                             16
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                             0                           0                                    0
    Bicycles       0            0      0              0        0      0              0       1      0           0        0     0                              1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/27/2013 5:17 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Hwy 99W -- Sunset Blvd                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10781224
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Jun 26 2012
                   1797          1282                         Peak-Hour: 4:55 PM -- 5:55 PM                                     1.6        3.3

                    24 1557 216
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 1.7 0.5


       223   16                         156   354
                                                                                                                   1.3   0.0                      0.0      0.6
             140          0.91           86
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       428   272                        112   433
                                                                                                                   0.7   1.1                      1.8      0.7

                   115 1076 111
                                                                                                                                2.6 3.9 1.8

                   1943          1302
                                                                                                                                1.6        3.6



                           0                                                                                                     0    1    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

             0                            0                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                           0                                                                                                     0    0    1




                          NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                         NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count          Hwy 99W                              Hwy 99W                      Sunset Blvd                  Sunset Blvd                 Total      Hourly
     Period         (Northbound)                         (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right       U               Left Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM      5    87      5     0                12   118      1     3        0       2      9      0    10        5    10     0             267
    4:05 PM      8    94      5     0                 7   112      1     0        0       5     19      0    14        9      7    0             281
    4:10 PM      7  106      11     0                 9   158      2     2        1       8     13      0     5        5    15     0             342
    4:15 PM      6    66     10     0                11   110      2     3        0       4     16      0    18        2    22     0             270
    4:20 PM      9  107      13     0                14   108      3     1        1       7     15      0    18       10      9    0             315
    4:25 PM      8  120       9     0                 9   148      1     1        1       6     21      0     7        1     11    0             343
    4:30 PM     10    84     10     0                19   120      2     3        1       6     29      0    13        5      9    0             311
    4:35 PM     10    84      5     0                14   156      1     4        1       6     17      0     8        3      9    0             318
    4:40 PM      8    75      8     0                15   136      2     2        0       5     17      0    13        3      9    0             293
    4:45 PM      8    65     15     0                11   106      1     0        2      15     30      0    14        6    14     0             287
    4:50 PM     11  105       7     0                15    90      1     2        1      15     25      0    10        8     11    0             301
    4:55 PM      7    76     10     0                12   125      0     1        1      11     26      0     9       11    10     0             299            3627
    5:00 PM      3    73     11     0                17   115      3     2        0      13     30      0    13        9      7    0             296            3656
    5:05 PM     20  100       6     1                15   127      4     3        3       9     22      0    10        7      8    0             335            3710
    5:10 PM      7  101      12     0                19   179      4     3        0       6     21      0     7        2    17     0             378            3746
    5:15 PM      9    94     14     0                15   146      1     3        1      12     24      0    12        6    17     0             354            3830
    5:20 PM     14  101       8     0                12   110      0     4        1      13     27      0     6        7    12     0             315            3830
    5:25 PM      7    86      5     0                10   142      1     2        1       7     18      0     5       14      8    0             306            3793
    5:30 PM     10    92     14     0                19   129      5     5        0      16     24      0     5        4    14     0             337            3819
    5:35 PM      2    65      9     1                18   119      1     3        1      14     18      0    18        8    18     0             295            3796
    5:40 PM     15   115     11     0                14   107      3     1        6      14     22      0    10        6    15     0             339            3842
    5:45 PM      9    94      4     0                 8   137      1     2        1      14     14      0    10        7    17     0             318            3873
    5:50 PM     10    79      7     0                23   121      1     5        1      11     26      0     7        5    13     0             309            3881
    5:55 PM     12    93      6     0                16    94      2     5        3      10     29      0     7        8    12     0             297            3879
 Peak 15-Min             Northbound                           Southbound                    Eastbound                    Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right      U               Left Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles 144 1180     128     4               196 1808      36   36         16    108    268      0   116       60   168     0                    4268
 Heavy Trucks    8    48      8                       0    24      0               0      0      4            0        0      0                          92
  Pedestrians          0                                    0                             0                            0                                  0
    Bicycles     0     0      0                       0     0      0              0       0      0            0        0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/27/2013 5:17 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Baler Way -- SW Century Dr                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10702329
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Jan 24 2012
                       111          82                         Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                       43     26    42
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 4:35 PM -- 4:50 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       93    43                          29   79
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             22              0.82        43
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       74    9                            7   67
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         7    10    3
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                       42           20
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                               0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                            2                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                              4                                                                                               0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                          NA                                                                           NA                       NA




                              NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Baler Way                 SW Baler Way                 SW Century Dr             SW Century Dr                Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        1            0      0     0      3        1      2     0         0     1      0      0     1     4     2     0              15
    4:05 PM        1            0      0     0      3        7      2     0         1     1      1      0     0     3     0     0              19
    4:10 PM        0            1      0     0      0        1      3     0         2     2      0      0     0     2     2     0              13
    4:15 PM        1            1      1     0      2        3      4     0         2     1      0      0     0     3     5     0              23
    4:20 PM        0            0      0     0      3        3      2     0         4     1      0      0     1     4     1     0              19
    4:25 PM        1            1      0     0      2        3      2     0         3     1      0      0     0     2     2     0              17
    4:30 PM        1            0      0     0      1        2      1     0         4     2      1      0     0     1     3     0              16
    4:35 PM        1            2      0     0      5        0      1     0         4     1      0      0     0     6     2     0              22
    4:40 PM        1            0      0     0      7        1      5     0         6     5      1      0     1     4     1     0              32
    4:45 PM        3            4      1     0      0        1      6     0         4     2      2      0     2     3     5     0              33
    4:50 PM        0            2      0     0      3        0      4     0         4     0      1      0     0     0     1     0              15
    4:55 PM        0            0      1     0      7        5      5     0         3     2      0      0     0     1     4     0              28              252
    5:00 PM        0            2      0     0      3        1      3     0         4     2      1      0     2     7     6     0              31              268
    5:05 PM        0            0      0     0      3        1      2     0         1     2      0      0     1     6     0     0              16              265
    5:10 PM        1            0      1     0      3        4      5     0         6     4      0      0     1     4     2     0              31              283
    5:15 PM        0            0      0     0      1        3      2     0         3     0      1      0     0     2     3     0              15              275
    5:20 PM        0            0      0     0      2        4      7     0         4     1      0      0     0     3     1     0              22              278
    5:25 PM        0            0      0     0      4        3      1     0         2     0      1      0     0     2     3     0              16              277
    5:30 PM        1            0      0     0      4        3      2     0         2     3      2      0     0     5     1     0              23              284
    5:35 PM        1            1      0     0      1        1      4     0         5     5      0      0     0     2     0     0              20              282
    5:40 PM        1            2      0     0      4        2      3     0         3     2      1      0     0     0     1     0              19              269
    5:45 PM        0            0      0     0      2        1      1     0         2     1      0      0     0     1     1     0               9              245
    5:50 PM        0            0      0     0      2        1      3     0         2     4      2      0     1     2     2     0              19              249
    5:55 PM        1            2      0     0      3        1      1     0         7     4      0      0     1     3     1     0              24              245
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                   Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                     Total
  All Vehicles     20          24      4     0      48       8     48     0        56    32    12       0    12    52    32     0                     348
 Heavy Trucks       0           0      0             0       0      0               0     0      0            0     0     0                            0
  Pedestrians                   0                            0                            0                         8                                  8
    Bicycles       0            0      0            0        0      0               0     0      0            0     0     0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/27/2013 5:17 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Oregon St -- SW Tonquin Rd                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10562836
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Dec 07 2010
                    662             317                           Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                                 3.8        1.6

                         0    475 187
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 4:45 PM -- 5:00 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 2.1 8.0


       0     0                            159   405
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      1.9      1.0
             0               0.98           0
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       0     0                            246   274
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.4      5.8

                         0    158 87
                                                                                                                                0.0 1.3 1.1

                    721             245
                                                                                                                                1.5        1.2



                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

             0                              0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                           NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                              NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Oregon St                    SW Oregon St                 SW Tonquin Rd             SW Tonquin Rd                Total      Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                            Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:10 PM        0           17      6     0         15      37      0     0        0      0      0      0    11     0    15     0             101
    4:15 PM        0           13      8     0         13      23      0     0        0      0      0      0    25     0     9     0              91
    4:20 PM        0            5      5     0         14      34      0     0        0      0      0      0    19     0    10     0              87
    4:25 PM        0           10      5     0          9      32      0     0        0      0      0      0    20     0     6     0              82
    4:30 PM        0           22      6     0         17      29      0     0        0      0      0      0    15     0     7     0              96
    4:35 PM        0           15      2     0         14      24      0     0        0      0      0      0    22     0    14     0              91
    4:40 PM        0           17      7     0         16      40      0     0        0      0      0      0    18     0    16     0             114
    4:45 PM        0           13      7     0         17      53      0     0        0      0      0      0    21     0    11     0             122
    4:50 PM        0            6      7     0         19      31      0     0        0      0      0      0    19     0    10     0              92
    4:55 PM        0           12      8     0         16      42      0     0        0      0      0      0    24     0    18     0             120            1168
    5:00 PM        0           14     12     0         11      29      0     0        0      0      0      0    23     0    13     0             102            1199
    5:05 PM        0           13      8     0         20      44      0     0        0      0      0      0    15     0    10     0             110            1208
    5:10 PM        0           15      5     0         13      38      0     0        0      0      0      0    17     0    17     0             105            1212
    5:15 PM        0           12      7     0         13      33      0     0        0      0      0      0    23     0    19     0             107            1228
    5:20 PM        0           18      7     0         21      31      0     0        0      0      0      0    18     0    11     0             106            1247
    5:25 PM        0           14      5     0         10      52      0     0        0      0      0      0    15     0    12     0             108            1273
    5:30 PM        0           14      9     0         15      38      0     0        0      0      0      0    26     0    12     0             114            1291
    5:35 PM        0           10      5     0         16      44      0     0        0      0      0      0    27     0    10     0             112            1312
    5:40 PM        0           19      5     0         13      32      0     0        0      0      0      0    21     0    13     0             103            1301
    5:45 PM        0           14      3     0         10      41      0     0        0      0      0      0    18     0    14     0             100            1279
    5:50 PM        0           19      8     0          9      35      0     0        0      0      0      0    18     0    14     0             103            1290
    5:55 PM        0            7      4     0         17      38      0     0        0      0      0      0    11     0     9     0              86            1256
    6:00 PM        0           13      8     0         13      46      0     0        0      0      0      0    17     0     9     0             106            1260
    6:05 PM        0           17      6     0          5      34      0     0        0      0      0      0    17     0     7     0              86            1236
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                      Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles     0          124     88     0        208     504      0     0        0      0      0      0   256     0   156     0                    1336
 Heavy Trucks      0            0      4               20      12      0              0      0      0            0     0     8                           44
  Pedestrians                   0                               0                            0                         0                                  0
    Bicycles       0            0      0                0       0      0              0      0      0            0     0     0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/27/2013 5:17 PM                                            SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
