                                            AGENDA
                                  Veneta Planning Commission
                                  TUESDAY – March 3, 2015 – 7:00 p.m.
                                          Veneta City Hall

    1.   Review Agenda

    2.   Public Comment
         If you wish to address the Planning Commission; state your name, address, and limit your comments to 3
         minutes. Maximum time 20 minutes. The Planning Commission will not engage in any discussion or make any
         decisions based on public comment at this time; however, they may take comments under advisement for
         discussion and action at a future Planning Commission meeting.

    3.   Approval of Minutes
         a. December 8, 2014 Joint Meeting of the City Council & Planning Commission (pgs. 3-6)
         b. February 3, 2015 Planning Commission (7-10)

    4.   Request for Tentative Subdivision & Type C Tree Removal Approval, S-2-14 Madrone
         Ridge
         a. Request approval of a tentative plan to divide 21.22 acres into 96 parcels & Associated
            Type C Tree Removal (pgs. 11-99)

    5.   Other

    6.   Adjourn



 Location is wheelchair accessible (WCA). Communication interpreter, including American Sign
 Language (ASL) interpretation, is available with 48 hours’ notice. Contact Darci Henneman; Phone
 (541) 935-2191, FAX (541) 935-1838 or by TTY Telecommunications Relay Service 1-800-735-1232.
                       THIS MEETING WILL BE DIGITALLY RECORDED.

The Planning Commission considers all public comments, staff reports, and City ordinances in arriving at a
final decision. Staff reports are available for review at Veneta City Hall - 88184 8th Street - Veneta,
Oregon.


  LAND USE DECISIONS - Veneta Municipal Code Chapter 18.05
  Whenever this chapter is in effect, the following procedures or procedure similar thereto shall be followed by
  the city staff and applicable decision-making body: (1) Preparation of brief statement setting forth the criteria
  and standards considered relevant to the decision of the city staff. Such shall utilize criteria and standards
  found in the applicable ordinance, the comprehensive plan, and other ordinances and rules and regulations
  now in effect as from time to time adopted by the city council and appropriate decision-making body.
                         Minutes of the Joint Meeting of the
                Veneta City Council and Veneta Planning Commission
                                 December 8, 2014
City Council:              Sandra Larson, Thomas Cotter, Victoria Hedenstrom, Thomas Laing

Planning Commission:       Kevin Conlin, Calvin Kenney, Len Goodwin, Lily Rees

Community Members:         Tim Brooker, Joan Mariner, Herb Vloedman

Absent:                    Brittany Boothe, James Eagle Eye; Jason Alansky, Phil Velie

Others:                    Ric Ingham, City Administrator; Kay Bork, Community Development Director; Lisa Garbett,
                           Associate Planner, Darci Henneman, Assistant City Recorder, and Bob Parker, Amanda
                           D’Souza, and Michael Howard of the University of Oregon Community Service Center



    Mayor Sandra Larson and Planning Commission Chair James Eagle Eye called the meeting to order at
    5:30 p.m.

    I. Introduction
       Brief introductions were made.

    II. Goal 4 – Community and Workforce Readiness
        a. Review of Results from Survey

          Ms. D’Souza reviewed the Goal 4 results from the survey. She said Goal 4 would create certified
          shovel ready projects or project ready sites for industries to locate. She said Business Oregon
          industrial site certification requires 25 acre minimum, which we don’t have.

          In response to questions from Kevin Conlin, Mr. Parker said develop our local program for
          industrial site readiness.

          In response to a question from Kevin Conlin, Len Goodwin said if we have shovel ready sites
          where all of the infrastructure and zoning is in place including a land designation, a developer can
          come in and pull building permits within 60 to 90 days. He said creating that kind of site gives us
          the ability to market sites in a different way. He said ready to build sites would be a good incentive.

          In response to a question from Tim Brooker, Bork said state shovel ready certification letters from
          utility companies or completed wetland delineation, they don’t have to extend their timeline an
          additional six to nine months, since all of those permits have been completed and it’s ready to sell.

          In response to a question from Victoria Hedenstrom, Mr. Parker said the City does a lot of the work
          itself, the benefit of taking the approach that Victoria Hedenstrom suggested takes pressure off
          staff but he said we don’t want a complicated process. He suggested if we partner with
          businesses, we should develop a form or questionnaire for businesses to complete.

       b. Strategy and Action Item Discussion
          Ms. D’Souza said the survey results indicated the Committee wanted to take steps to make current
          properties attractive to new business; through rehabilitation, redevelopment, making the
          information available, and taking care of problem properties.

          Mr. Parker said it would be helpful if we took this apart and separated rehabilitation and
          development and taking care of problem properties.
Ingham said rehabilitation doesn’t really apply because we have such limited stock.

Ms. D’Souza said the City’s current strategy is on a case by case basis.

Ingham said we don’t have a formalized business specific incentive plan but we could get there by
reviewing what’s worked and what hasn’t then incorporate that into a formal incentive program. He
said if we formalize something it would need to be included in the budget because if we offer
incentives we need dollars to back it up. He explained how the City’s business loan and grant
program works.

Mr. Parker said the survey results indicated some Committee members wanted a formalized
program.

Len Goodwin said as soon as you put a formal program in place, the next development requires a
change. He said the Council has an opportunity to make a decision on any development and may
find we want to use $100,000 to attract an appropriate employer. He said in that scenario, we
don’t want to tie the Council’s hands when an opportunity provides itself.

In response to a question from Thomas Cotter, Len Goodwin said SDCs never make a difference.
He said for a large scale employer, $100,000 in SDCs isn’t an issue but it is for a small developer.
He said in Springfield, the program didn’t work and not one developer took advantage of the
discount. He said there’s always other factors. He said we need to be creative in how we define
the uses; allowing for credits of existing uses and taking advantage of the existing methodology.

Mr. Parker said having a formal program creates a rigid structure but it’s open to everyone and
would involve more staff time. He suggested targeting the businesses we want.

Victoria Hedenstrom suggested we have some kind of standard criteria in place so when a
business asks for incentives, specific criteria would need to be met including some kind of an
accountability process.

Ingham said he thought we can get there.

Bork suggested using the Urban Renewal Agency framework.

Mr. Parker said we need some guidelines and prioritization to determine what we are investing in.

Ingham said it’s not just our dollars but how well we connect with all the other programs, Lane
County, the state, etc. He said funding from other agencies contribute to make many projects
happen.

Mayor Larson said some committee members are thinking on a smaller scale, given the discussion
tonight, we need to preserve flexibility. She said we can develop the criteria for each case and
provide the clear expectations of the City.

After a thorough discussion, it was the consensus of the committee that when an opportunity
presents itself, this is what we’ll expect from each individual case.

Herb Vloedman said these are risky propositions and sometimes that’s how it goes, but we need
more successes. He suggested clearly stating the items we’re looking for and identify the City’s
high priorities.

Kevin Conlin suggested having minimums rather than going in the opposite direction.
     Ms. D’Souza reviewed the generalized guidelines and said she’s hearing from the Committee that
     we will continue with a program but not commit to a specific amount each year.

     Ingham said the City hasn’t spent any funds on Plough Monday other than getting the site ready.

     Ms. D’Souza reviewed the strategies of the redevelopment tool kit.

     It was the consensus to continue to use the redevelopment tool kit and to use a flexible set of
     strategies should be included in the document to mix and match for different projects.

     Mr. Parker said this feels like it fits under Goal 1. He said Lane Work Force Partnership (LWFP) is
     a challenge at the municipal level because cities don’t have the authority to make those decisions.
     He suggests cities should focus on what they have control over.

     Thomas Cotter agreed with Mr. Parker.

     In response to a question from Mayor Larson, Mr. Parker said LWFP completes the certification.
     He said the City would support it and provide the criteria. He said LWFP will already be a partner
     to the City, certify that we have people here ready to work.

     It was the consensus of the Committee to eliminate Goal 4.

III. Goal 5 – Infrastructure Improvement
    a. Review of Results from Survey

     Ms. D’Souza said the survey results identified the following in order of the prioritization:

             Installing fiber optics throughout the City.
             Streetscape and pedestrian infrastructure.
             Sewer, infill opportunities, and creating more parking.

     She said there was no action item for sewer improvements.

     It was the consensus of the committee that prioritizing the installation of a fiber optic line in Veneta
     will help the City fully enter us into the communication age.

  b. Action item discussion
     Ingham said we should continue to advocate to ODOT for improvements to Hwy 126 and we
     should continue to offer aesthetic enhancements to make Veneta attractive to residents, visitors,
     and potential industries.

     Victoria Hedenstrom suggested adding some kind of signage at West Broadway.

     Ingham said there was a sign on the corner but it was removed when the Park N Ride and corner
     monument was built.

     Calvin Kenney suggested there should be signage on Eighth St.

     Joan Mariner suggested a business kiosk could be located at the Park N Ride that included all
     Veneta businesses.

     Thomas Cotter said many of the action items are ongoing maintenance issues.
     In response to a question from Mayor Larson, Herb Vloedman said we need something that drives
     people downtown.

     Ingham said once we get West Lane Fitness and Plough Monday up and running on West
     Broadway, we can focus on the third catalyst project.

     After a brief discussion, it was the consensus of the Committee that we should continue to work on
     incorporating art. Everyone agreed the bike racks and the mural at Bimart are great ways we are
     already incorporating art in our community.

     In response to a question from Mayor Larson, Ingham said the four corners beautification project is
     still a work in progress.

IV. Goal 1 – Economic Development Commitment
   a. Revisit Meeting #2 discussion
      Len Goodwin said advancing the City with our regional partners shows that we are interested in
      projects. He said maintaining our partnerships with Lane County and other local
      governments/partners is important.

     In response to a question from Thomas Cotter, Ingham said the cost of a Resource Assistance for
     Rural Environments (R.A.R.E.) intern from the University of Oregon it was about $18,000 to
     $21,000 for 1700 hours of service.

     Thomas Cotter suggested using economic development funds to cover the cost of a R.A.R.E.
     intern.

     After a brief discussion, it was the consensus of the Committee to not realign staff responsibilities
     but to wait until the work stations at City Hall are completed, which will provide a work area for a
     R.A.R.E. intern.

     There was a thorough discussion about possible catalyst projects and if we should look into
     building a commercial building on West Broadway.

     Len Goodwin said it doesn’t really need to limit itself to downtown. He said a catalyst manufacturer
     could locate in many places and could draw other industries in.

     Mr. Parker said the City could provide some guidelines to support catalytic projects or the City
     could target specific businesses to locate in Veneta.

     Ms. D’Souza said the survey results also identified establishing and maintaining partnerships with
     federal and state agencies and local economic development organizations such as Travel Lane
     County, Lane Work Force, ODOT, Lane Economic Development Group, and to partner with our
     local Chamber of Commerce to support small business development.

V. Next Steps
   Mr. Parker said his team will prepare a report for staff to review and then it will go to the Planning
   Commission in a Work Session. He said it will also tie to the Economic Opportunities Analysis (EOA)
   and will include some proposed policy limits and code recommendations. He said we will need to
   notify the Oregon Dept. of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) of the public hearing
   recommending the Council adopt the plan. He said a Work Session will take place in January or early
   February. He’s not sure if the strategic plan will follow the land use guidelines but he thinks the
   Council will adopt the plan by resolution sometime in March when the public hearing is held.
7. ADJOURN
   Mayor Larson and Planning Commission vice Chair Len Goodwin adjourned the meeting at 7:25 p.m.


   _________________________________               _________________________________
   Sandra Larson, Mayor                            James Eagle Eye, Chair




   ATTEST:


   __________________________________
   Darci Henneman, Assistant City Recorder
   (Minutes prepared by DHenneman)
                             Minutes of the Veneta Planning Commission
                                        February 3, 2015
  Present:        James Eagle Eye, Calvin Kenney, Len Goodwin, Kevin Conlin, and Lily Rees


  Others:         Kay Bork, Community Development Director; Lisa Garbett, Associate Planner; Darci Henneman,
                  Assistant City Recorder; Forrest Cooper, West Lane Technical Learning Center, and Jed Truett,
                  Metro Planning, Inc.


   I.   Review Agenda
        Chair James Eagle Eye opened the Veneta Planning Commission meeting at 7:01 p.m. and
        reviewed the agenda.

II.     Public Comment
        None

III.    Approval of Minutes
        MOTION: Lily Rees made a motion to approve the January 6, 2015 Planning Commission
                  minutes. Calvin Kenney seconded the motion which passed with a vote of 4-0.

IV.     Request for Preliminary Subdivision Approval, S-2-14, Madrone Ridge (Postponed to March 3,
        2015)

V.      Request for Minor Site Plan Amendment Approval, SR-1-15, West Lane Shopping Center/ West
        Lane Technical Learning Center
        Garbett said staff presenting a minor site plan amendment to allow West Lane Technical Learning
        Center (WLTLC) to occupy the vacant Macenzi’s Too restaurant in the West Lane Shopping Center.
        She said WLTLC will use the space to offer a culinary arts program as well as health and computer
        occupational programs. She said the site plan review and a decision from the Planning Commission is
        needed based on interpretation of the use being a low impact use in terms of public and semi-public
        uses. The land development ordinance does allow public and semi-public but doesn’t provide a
        definition for low impact. The staff report indicated there was a definition for high impact which, in
        general, addresses traffic and other nuisance types. Notice was sent and posted at the site and
        ODOT commented on the proposal indicating traffic was not a concern. Garbett provided a copy of
        that email because it was received after the packets were mailed. Staff is recommending approval
        with conditions that the applicant obtain a sign permit, if applicable, and a yearly business registration
        with the City. Garbett asked if there were any questions.

        In response to questions from Calvin Kenney, Bork said with regard to the medical marijuana facility
        (MMF) located in the shopping center, the Council wrote the ordinance to read a school wouldn’t be
        prohibited if it came in after the fact but if there was a school there previously, the MMF couldn’t locate
        there. They allowed that to occur because similarly the code prohibited a MMF from locating 1000 ft.
        from a park but if a park were to come later, the MMF could be allowed.

        In response to a question from Calvin Kenney, Mr. Cooper said the school will operate Monday
        through Friday, from 8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. and will be open some Saturdays to prepare for catering
        events.

        MOTION: Kevin Conlin made a motion to approve the Site Plan Amendment with the conditions
                of approval as outlined. Calvin Kenney seconded the motion which passed with a
                vote of 4-0.
VI.    Review and Comment on Veneta Economic Development Strategy Draft Report
       James Eagle Eye said he doesn’t see a lot of new information or changes in the Report.

       Bork said the Draft Report will be sent to the citizen committee members and Council for comment.
       She said Bob Parker is working on a schedule for a joint meeting on March 9th to review the Report,
       including the comments, and prepare a final Report. She said he will also talk about the Economic
       Opportunity Analysis at that meeting. She asked the Planning Commissioners to provide feedback to
       her prior to the tentatively scheduled March 9th meeting.

       Bork said she will send out a notice once she receives confirmation from Mr. Parker. . She said with
       regard to “Goal 3 – Retail and Commercial Businesses” Mr. Parker agreed that a strategy should be
       added as an action item to revise the land development ordinance in order to promote commercial
       development in the industrial commercial zones and make those zones available for those types of
       development. She also said she thought, under strategy “Strategy 4.2 – Make aesthetic
       enhancements to make Veneta attractive to resident, visitors, and potential industries” we had talked
       about making downtown Veneta more visible from Highway 126 and potential ways to create that line
       of site. She asked it was discussed as a strategy or action item.

       James Eagle Eye said that was talked about trying to do something with the intersection and we
       always run into the problem with it being in ODOT jurisdiction which limits what we can and can’t do.

       Bork said we also talked about areas past the intersection near downtown.

       James Eagle said we talked about doing something on Jack Kelley Dr. but as he recalls the
       conversation went in the direction that we need to actually have something to point them to. He said
       eventually we do need to find a way to make that happen.

       Herb Vloedman said there were no specifics but a general direction to look for opportunities for that
       but there wasn’t any definite details or actions determined.

       Kevin Conlin agreed and said we knew it was a problem but he didn’t recall coming up with any
       specific list of things to do about it.

       Kevin Conlin said people have told him that the existing Veneta sign isn’t clear whether to continue
       down Territorial or to turn.

       Calvin Kenney said when you get to Broadway you have no idea to turn.

       James Eagle Eye said the Park N Ride has the monument at the corner of W. Broadway where we
       could eventually put something up to direct people into the downtown area.

       Bork said the report the Planning Commission received tonight will be sent to the City Council and the
       community members for review and comment. She said Mr. Parker would like those comments prior
       to the March 9th so he can incorporate the comments. She said the City Council will adopt this Report
       by resolution separate from any comprehensive plan amendments. She said the economic
       opportunity analysis (EOA) is a similar exercise to the Residential Buildable Land Inventory; looking at
       the 20 year supply of employment land based on employment forecast. She said he’ll have that whole
       document ready to go. She said we will adopt the study into our Comp Plan because we need to
       show how we have a 20 year supply of commercial, industrial and residential land. She said we’ll
       incorporate the study into the Comprehensive Plan, usually by reference but there may be some
       policies that we may also want to update. She said that will come later. She said Ingham is anxious to
       get the economic strategic plan adopted so some of the activities included in the Plan can be included
       in this year’s budget..

VII.   Other
          Garbett said the Madrone Ridge subdivision will be brought to the Planning Commission March 3rd
          meeting and will include some issues regarding tree code and panhandle lots.

          In response to a question from Calvin Kenney, Garbett said the Madrone subdivision is between
          Bolton Hill Estates and Phase 3 of Applegate Landing.

VIII.     Adjourn
          Chair James Eagle Eye adjourned the Veneta Planning Commission at 7:20 p.m



                                                   _______________________________________
                                                   James Eagle Eye, Chairman
        ATTEST:

        ___________________________________
        Darci Henneman, Assistant City Recorder
                               VENETA PLANNING COMMISSION
                                      STAFF REPORT

                TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION AND TYPE C TREE REMOVAL
                            MADRONE RIDGE (S-2-14)

Application Received:                         August 1, 2014
Incomplete Notice #1 Sent:                    August 28, 2014
Additional Information Submitted:             October 24, 2014
Additional Information Submitted:             November 3, 2014
Incomplete Notice #2 Sent:                    November 21, 2014
Additional Information Received:              December 2, 2014
Application Complete:                         December 3, 2014
Supplemental Information Received:            January 7, 2015 and January 20, 2015
120 days from Completeness:                   April 2, 2015
Notice Mailed and Posted:                     December 10, 2014
Staff Report Date:                            January 12, 2015
Prepared by:                                  Lisa Garbett, Associate Planner

Referrals:                                    Kyle Schauer, Public Works Director - City of Veneta
                                              Lane Branch, P.E., City Engineer - Branch Engineering
                                              David Mortier, Building Inspector - City of Veneta
                                              Dean Chappell, Fire Inspector - Lane Fire Authority
                                              Tom Jeffreys, Staking Engineer - E.P.U.D.
                                              Ken Augustson, Lane Transit District (LTD)
                                              Richard Smith, Post Master - Veneta Post Office
                                              Michael C. Cowles, Lane County Assessor
                                              Gerry Juster, Oregon Department of Transportation
                                              Keir Miller, Lane County Public Works
                                              Daniel B. Ingram, Lane County Public Works
                                              Matt Laird, Lane County Land Management
                                              Scott Johnson, Sanipac
                                              John Norrena, Lane Electric Cooperative
                                              Randy Weston, Charter Communications
                                              Sally Storm, Fern Ridge School District

BASIC DATA
Owner:                                        Allyn J. & Carol Tews Rev Liv Trust
                                              P.O. Box 561
                                              Veneta, Oregon 97487

Applicant:                                    West Coast Investments, LLC
                                              1866 Ridgley Blvd.
                                              Eugene, Oregon 97401



                                                                                                  1
Staff Report – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal (City File #S-2-14)
Applicant’s Representative:                   Metro Planning, Inc.
                                              370 Q Street
                                              Springfield, Oregon 97477

Traffic Engineer:                             Access Engineering, LLC
                                              134 E. 13th Ave, Suite 2
                                              Eugene, Oregon 97401

Arborist:                                     Matthew Rivers, ISA Certified Arborist
                                              3295 W 16th Avenue
                                              Eugene, Oregon 97402

Surveyor:                                     Steven E. Woods, PLS
                                              All Oregon Land Surveying
                                              P.O. Box 85
                                              Junction City, Oregon 97448

Location:                                     Immediately west of Applegate Landing Phase 3 within
                                              the Southwest Area Specific Plan (SWAP)

Assessor’s Map:                               18-06-01-00

Tax Lot Number:                               01600

Plan Designation:                             L – Low Density Residential & M – Medium Density
                                              Residential

Zoning:                                       Single Family Residential (SFR), General Residential
                                              (GR), Specific Development Plan Subzone - Southwest
                                              Area Specific Development Plan (/SDP)

Associated Files:                             Southwest Area Specific Plan (SDP-1-05), Approved
                                              April 10, 2006

REQUEST

The request before the Planning Commission is for tentative subdivision approval and associated
Type C Tree Removal request in order to divide approximately 21.22 acres into 96 single-family
lots within the Southwest Area Specific Plan. The applicant is also requesting that trees planted
on twenty-seven (27) of the proposed lots, post final plat approval, to count towards tree
mitigation requirements for Planning Commission consideration. Currently, VMC 8.10.120(3)(d)
- Mitigation states, “Replacement trees shall be planted prior to plat for land divisions and prior
to issuance of final certificate of occupancy for other applications. Mitigation requirements shall
run with the land until all required mitigation has been completed.”



                                                                                                  2
Staff Report – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal (City File #S-2-14)
PROPERTY CHARACTERISTICS AND SURROUNDING CONTEXT
The subject property is currently vacant land located at the west end of Perkins Road, west of
Territorial Road and Applegate Landing Phase 3. The site is densely vegetated including
‘significant’ and ‘heritage’ trees as defined by the City Tree Code (VMC Chapter 8.10). This is
Phase 4 of the adopted Southwest Area Specific Plan (SWAP) and is an approximate 21.22 acres
of the total 128 acres. A majority of the site is in the Single Family Residential (SFR) zone
except for a small piece along the eastern property boundary which is in the General Residential
(GR) zone. There is an existing development (Applegate Phase 2) located along the north
property line. There are two streets currently stubbed to the project from this development (8th
Street and Oaks Orchard) to the north.

Below are vicinity maps of the subject site and surrounding area.




Transportation
Access is available to the property from Eighth Street, Oaks Orchard and Perkins Road, a Major
Collector according to the Veneta Transportation System Plan, Map 12. The majority of
proposed lots are proposed to access off of Local Streets from residential driveways (except for
proposed Lots #1-3 and Lot #86 which will access off Perkins Road). Flag lots are proposed
(Lots #28-30, #47-50 and #87-89) which will access off of Perkins Road. Three lots or less can
share an access pole but the flag lot access pole must be a minimum of 20-feet wide. The
applicant is exceeding the standard as 28-foot paved widths are proposed to be shared through a
shared access agreement between flag lots. An existing bus stop is located approximately 150-
feet north of the Territorial and Perkins Road intersection. There are no proposed access points
along the south property boundaries which consequently is also the city UGB and city limits
boundary. A Proportionate Cost Sharing Agreement is in place as part of the Southwest Area
Specific Plan for transportation impacts per lot as identified in City Agreement File# A-120
(attached as Exhibit).

Wastewater Service
The applicant is proposing for wastewater service to connect to the site from two locations, Oaks
Orchard Road and Eighth Street, both of which travel north to Eighth Street and head to the City
treatment plant. The City Public Works Director indicated that capacity should not be an issue
with this route. The proposed sewer system features three collection lines that are located within
the back yards of the proposed lots. Sewer laterals for all lots are required to be located within
the right-of-way of streets.
                                                                                                   3
Staff Report – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal (City File #S-2-14)
Stormwater
The applicant’s drainage report identifies off-site areas to the west that currently drain through
the site. Off-site drainage will need to be intercepted, routed around the proposed lots, and
conveyed through the site for each phase of development in accordance with the City Engineer.
The applicant is proposing to route stormwater to a detention pond south of the site at Assessor’s
Map and Tax Lot No. Tax Lot No. 18-06-01-00-01608 which is outside of Veneta city limits/
UGB and within Lane County jurisdiction.

Water Service
Water to the proposed development will be provided by a 12-inch water main located within
Perkins Road as well as from an existing 8-inch line on Oaks Orchard Road. The Public Works
Director has indicated that capacity will not be an issue.

Natural Resources
The subject site contains 773 trees according to submitted ‘Natural Features’ Plan (Sheet 4 of 16)
and Arborist Report prepared by Certified Arborist, Matthew Rivers. Of the 773 trees mapped, a
total of 114 have been deemed unfit or hazardous according to the Arborist Report and
subsequent addendums prepared on October 29, 2014 and January 3, 2015.

A total of 417 (350 significant and 67 heritage) trees regulated by the tree code (Veneta
Municipal Code Chapter 8.10- Tree Cutting, Destruction and Removal) are proposed for removal
as part of the Type C tree permit application submitted and per Sheet 14 of 16 submitted on
January 3, 2015.

Tree Removal Synopsis
   • The applicant has chosen Option A per VMC, Chapter 8.10.090(5)(a)(i) as the desired
       approval standard for this Type C permit request. Option A requires preservation of at
       least 30 percent of the total “significant tree” diameter on the site. The applicant proposes
       to preserve an approximate 2454.5” (30.8%) out of a total significant tree diameter of
       7951”. For Option A, code requires adding all leader DBH’s together at breast height per
       VMC 8.10.020(4). Thirty-one (31) percent of the total significant tree diameter on the site
       is proposed to be preserved.
   • One hundred and fourteen (114) trees have been deemed ‘unfit’/ hazardous by Certified
       Arborist, Matthew Rivers.
   • Twenty-seven (27) replacement trees are proposed to be planted on 27 individual lots to
       count towards mitigation requirements for Planning Commission consideration given
       VMC 8.10.120(3)(d) requires replacement trees to be planted prior to plat for land
       divisions.
   • One hundred and seventy-two (172) street trees are proposed to be planted and count
       towards mitigation requirements as permitted per VMC 8.10.120(3)(d). The street trees
       will be required to be planted prior to final plat as required by code.
   • Six hundred ninety three (693) total replacement trees are required to be planted or cash
       in lieu of planting, before subtracting out any tree credit.
   • The 693 replacement trees include:
            o +343 heritage replacement trees
            o +350 significant replacement trees
                                                                                                  4
Staff Report – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal (City File #S-2-14)
    •   Subtracting the following for tree mitigation credit:
                    -172 street trees
                    -3 tree credits for three trees that could otherwise be removed with a Type
                       ‘A’ permit as permitted by VMC 8.10.120.

AND/OR subtracting the following for tree mitigation credit (for Planning Commission
consideration):
                 -27 trees planted on individual lots, as VMC 8.10.120(3)(d) requires
                    replacement trees to be planted prior to plat for land divisions. A bond for
                    three years after final plat approval will be required, in order to ensure
                    survival of the 27 trees planted on lots prior to final plat.

SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
Tentative Plan (S-2-14)
The applicant has submitted the application, plans, and other supplementary data as required by
Section 4.01 – Tentative Plan Submission Requirements of Veneta Land Division Ordinance No.
494.

APPROVAL CRITERIA
Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Article 4, Section 4.03 - Categories for Review of
Tentative Plan Applications, Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 494, Section 4.02 –
Single Family Residential, Section 4.03 - General Residential, Section 4.15(7)(b) - Specific
Development Plan Subzone, Southwest Neighborhood Center and Veneta Municipal Code,
Chapter 8.10 - Tree Cutting, Destruction and Removal.

REFERRAL COMMENTS
Comments were received by the Veneta Public Works Director, Veneta Engineer (Branch
Engineering, Inc.), Veneta Building Inspector (The Building Department, LLC), Lane Fire
Authority, Lane County Assessor, Oregon Department of Transportation, Lane County Public
Works, Lane County Land Management, Sanipac and Lane Electric Cooperative. Comments are
attached as Exhibits.

PUBLIC NOTICE
A notice was mailed to all property owners within 300-feet for the entire contiguous site and
posted at the property on December 10, 2014 in accordance with Veneta’s Land Division
Ordinance No. 494, Section 2.06(2) - Notice of Limited Land Use Action.

PUBLIC COMMENT
None.

ISSUES
The following issues have been raised concerning the proposal:

Block Lengths
The proposal meets block length standards as defined in the adopted SWAP Development
Standards, Table 3, which requires a maximum 600-foot block length. This proposal will affect

                                                                                                  5
Staff Report – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal (City File #S-2-14)
development immediately to the north (i.e. the Madrone Ridge Drive future extension to the
north). The applicant has submitted a ‘Block Length Diagram’ received January 20, 2015 which
depicts the potential future development to the north of the subject site, according to the adopted
SWAP Conceptual Diagram. However, the property to the north of the subject site contains
significant wetlands and depending on future wetland delineation, the development layout to the
north could be modified from the original SWAP concept. In either case, future development of
Hawk View Drive to the north may need to be brought further south than depicted on the SWAP
Conceptual Diagram, in order to create a code compliant block length of 600-feet for Madrone
Ridge Drive.

Stormwater
The applicant is proposing to route stormwater to a detention pond south of the site at Assessor’s
Map and Tax Lot No. Tax Lot No. 18-06-01-00-01608 which is outside of Veneta city limits/
UGB. Lane County Public Works has responded to referral indicating that prior to final plat
approval, the applicant shall obtain Special Use Permit approval from Lane County under the
process outlined in LC16.211(3)(j) and construct the pond. Lane County has also commented the
special use permit is a Director-Level (commonly referred to as a Type 2) discretionary review
process and approval of the permit cannot be guaranteed.

The stormwater facilities proposed outside of city limits is allowed according to Veneta
Municipal Code 13.35.020(1) which states, “Pursuant to the general laws of the state of Oregon
and the powers granted in the Charter of the city, the council does hereby declare its intention to
acquire, own, construct, reconstruct, equip, operate and maintain within the city limits of the
city, and outside the city limits when consistent with the council's adopted policies or
intergovernmental agreements, stormwater drainage facilities, and also to require persons
responsible to construct, reconstruct, maintain and extend stormwater drainage facilities.” Staff
has conferred with the City Attorney to confirm this scenario is allowed with conditions. Staff
has also corresponded with the Lane County Public Works Department and City Staff will be
able to comment and recommend conditions as part of a Special Use Permit submittal that will
be required by Lane County. Staff has discussed the issue with the City Public Works Director
and City Engineer whom have no concerns. As a note, the pond will need to be located so that it
does not impede future potential development of Eighth Street (including sidewalk and
easements) to the south.

The City Engineer has commented that off-site drainage will need to be intercepted and routed
around the proposed lots and conveyed through the site for each phase of development. The
Madrone Ridge Homeowner’s Association will be responsible for performing maintenance on all
stormwater swales and detention ponds. The applicant will be required to execute and record
stormwater agreements for maintenance of all stormwater swales and detention ponds. The
agreement shall provide for City maintenance of the ponds and open drainages for functionality
only.

Transportation
Proposed streets are generally aligned in conformance with the adopted Southwest Area Specific
Plan (SWAP) Conceptual Diagram. Perkins Road is classified as a major collector and is
proposed to have the required 60-foot right-of-way, 39-foot paved width, and sidewalks. All

                                                                                                  6
Staff Report – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal (City File #S-2-14)
other proposed streets within this phase of development are classified as Local Streets (Madrone
Ridge Drive, Arbutus Avenue, Bearberry Drive, Oaks Orchard Road and Archibald Lane) except
for 8th Street which is a Minor Collector according to Map 12 of the Transportation System Plan.
Local Streets are required to have a 50-foot right-of-way, 32-foot paved width (9-foot travel
lanes, 7-foot parking stalls, motor vehicle parking on both sides) and sidewalks (one side if a
stormwater swale is located in the right-of-way or if there is a park or common open space with a
parallel pedestrian path, both sides in all other situations). The City Engineer is requiring for
Phase 1, a 5.3 feet wide right-of-way dedication for 7th Street along the eastern property
boundary between Perkins Road and Westfield Avenue and a 7-foot wide public utility easement
(PUE) adjacent to the 7th Street right-of-way.

A Traffic Impact Analysis prepared by Access Engineering, LLC has been submitted. The
Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) has proposed no mitigation measures in response
to a referral request. The City Engineer has recommended that the submitted TIA be approved by
the City.

Emergency Access
The applicant has proposed three (3) 30-foot by 60-foot emergency vehicle turn-around’s at both
ends of Arbutus Avenue and one at the end of Bearberry Drive. An emergency vehicle
turnaround will be required at the west end of Perkins Road in accordance with the Lane Fire
Authority and Oregon Fire Code.

Geotechnical
According to City geographic information system data, there are slopes between 15-20% on the
subject site. Although, these slopes are limited to a very small portion of the western boundary.
Therefore, there is only an isolated area on the site which exceeds the 15% limit as defined in
Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493, Section 5.25. This section of the code states, “A
site shall be deemed to meet the 15% slope criteria if the average slope across the site in any
direction meets or exceeds a 15 foot rise in every 100 feet. Isolated areas on the site may exceed
the 15% limit and not require the additional review process itemized below providing the entire
site is below the 15% threshold.”

Natural Resources
The Planning Commission is being asked to decide if twenty-seven (27) replacement trees which
are proposed to be planted on twenty-seven (27) individual lots can count towards mitigation
requirements. Veneta Municipal Code (VMC) 8.10.120(3)(d) requires replacement trees be
planted prior to plat for land divisions. However, trees planted prior to final plat would likely be
damaged during the grading process and the location of planting may not be where the eventual
homeowner desires. Staff has discussed the request with legal counsel and if we treat the
proposed twenty-seven (27) individual trees as a required public improvement (subject to
bonding and a recorded agreement for planting at some point in the future, i.e. prior to final
occupancy, pursuant to Section 7.05 of the City’s land division ordinance). The decision could
be challenged if the code was not amended. It is recommended that if the Planning Commission
would like to allow mitigation credit for individual lot development in the future, staff be
directed to amend the VMC 8.10.120(3)(d) to allow greater flexibility.


                                                                                                  7
Staff Report – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal (City File #S-2-14)
The applicant is also proposing one-hundred seventy-two (172) street trees to count towards tree
mitigation credit. The applicant has submitted a Proposed Street Tree Plan which was received
on January 7, 2015. A Final Street Tree Plan will be required to be approved at the time of public
improvement review and prior to final plat, the applicant will be required to plant the street trees
in order for them to count towards tree mitigation credit as required by VMC 8.10.120(3)(d) –
Replacement Trees.

Therefore, depending on Planning Commission decision in regards to additional tree mitigation
credit requested; the applicant will be required to comply with one of the two conditions listed
below:

    Condition #1: No credit for 27 trees on individual lots
    Plant a total of 518 mitigation/ replacement trees (+343 heritage tree replacement +350
    significant tree replacement -172 street trees -3 tree credits/otherwise allowed with Type A
    permit) or provide payment in the amount of $129,500, in lieu of tree mitigation/ replacement
    tree planting as permitted in Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter 8.10.120(4) and City
    Resolution No. 1011.

    Condition #2: Credit for 27 trees on individual lots
    Plant a total of 491 mitigation/ replacement trees (343 heritage tree replacement + 350
    significant tree replacement -172 street trees and -27 individual lot trees for Planning
    Commission consideration -3 tree credits/otherwise allowed with Type A permit) in
    accordance with VMC, Chapter 18.10 or provide payment in the amount of $122,750 in lieu
    of tree mitigation/ replacement tree planting as permitted in Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter
    8.10.120(4) and City Resolution No. 1011. The applicant will be required to sign and record
    a Development Agreement prior to building permit issuance for each affected lot. Prior to
    final plat approval, the applicant shall post a three year performance bond, in favor of the
    city, in the amount of $6,750 (27 replacement trees planted post final plat x $250 payment in
    lieu of planting).

Fiber Optic Requirement
The City recently adopted Ordinance 509 (adopted February 10, 2014) which amended Veneta
Municipal Code Chapter 13.30.020(4) and requires installation of underground facilities
including broadband fiber conduit prior to surfacing of streets. The applicant will be required as
a condition of approval to conform to Veneta Municipal Code 13.30.020(4) and adopted
Ordinance 509.

Proportionate Share Agreement
Previously, the SWAP traffic impact analysis determined that the intersection of Highway 126
and Territorial Road was projected to operate below standards (without the addition of traffic
from the development) during the p.m. peak hour of 2011, and therefore, the Development would
place additional pressures on surrounding intersections and projected to operate below standards
during the peak p.m. peak hour of 2009. As a result, as part of Applegate Landing Phase 1 and
for all continuing phases of the Southwest Area Specific Plan, the City imposed a condition of
approval which required the applicant to enter into a Cost Sharing Agreement (City File#A-120)
which is attached to this staff report as Exhibit D.

                                                                                                     8
Staff Report – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal (City File #S-2-14)
Lot Numbering
The Lane County Assessor has commented lot numbers should be consecutive in each phase (i.e.
Phase 1 Lots 1-19, Phase 2 Lot 20-38, etc.).

STAFF RECOMMENDATION
Based on the findings for the tentative subdivision and associated tree removal stated in the
Proposed Final Order (S-2-14), staff recommends conditional approval of the Tentative
Subdivision and Type C Tree Permit. The proposed conditions of approval are specified in the
Proposed Final Order.

POSSIBLE ACTIONS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION

The Commission may:

        a.   Approve the Tentative Plan with specified conditions of approval based on the
             findings in the Proposed Final Order.

        b.    Modify the proposed findings or conditions of approval in the Proposed Final Order.

        c.    Deny the Tentative Plan based on the Commission’s findings.

        d.    Continue deliberations on the Tentative Plan if more information is needed.

EXHIBITS
A.   Proposed Final Order
B.   Applicant’s Submittal (Received August 1, 2014)
     • Additional Information Submitted (Received October 24, 2014)
     • Additional Information Submitted (November 3, 2014 and December 2, 2014)
     • Supplemental Materials Provided (January 7, 2015)
     • Block Length Diagram (Received January 20, 2015)
     • Memorandum (Received January 24, 2015)
C.   Southwest Area Specific Plan, Conceptual Diagram
D.   Proportionate Cost Sharing Agreement (City File # A-120)
E.   Veneta Public Works Director Memorandum
F.   Veneta Engineer Technical Memorandum (TIA Review)
G.   Veneta Engineer Technical Memorandum (Tentative Subdivision Review)
H.   Lane Fire Authority Memorandum
I.   Oregon Department of Transportation Memorandum
J.   Lane County Public Works Email Responses
K.   Lane County Assessor




                                                                                                  9
Staff Report – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal (City File #S-2-14)
                                                                                           Exhibit A


                                  FINAL ORDER OF THE
                              VENETA PLANNING COMMISSION

                               Madrone Ridge Tentative Subdivision
                                And Type C Tree Removal (S-2-14)

A.      The Planning Commission finds the following:

        1.      The applicant has submitted information for a tentative plan application required
                by Section 4.01 of the Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494.

        2.      The Veneta Planning Commission held a meeting on February 3, 2015 to review
                and discuss the tentative plan for Assessors Map No. 18-06-01-00, Tax Lot
                01600 after providing proper notice of limited land use action according to
                Section 2.06 of the Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494.

        3.      The Planning Commission followed the required procedure and standards for
                taking action on a tentative plan as set forth in Section 4.02 of the Veneta Land
                Division Ordinance No. 494.

B.      The Veneta Planning Commission approves with conditions the Madrone Ridge,
        Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal (S-2-14) with the following
        conditions of approval:

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL

1)   In accordance with Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter 8.10.130(1-5) – Tree Protection
     during construction, where trees are removed from within the critical root zone of a tree to
     remain, the removal shall be done by cutting the tree near the ground and grinding the
     stump or leaving it in place.

 2) Obtain approval from the Lane Fire Authority for any work that may interrupt emergency
    access as the site is developed, in accordance with the City Engineer (i.e. proposed Perkins
    Road and 8th Street right-of-way through the Phase 1 development site, currently has a gravel
    road serving as a secondary emergency access to adjacent neighborhoods.)

 3) Maintenance of street trees shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner as
    defined in Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Section 5.28(5)(a-g) – Street Trees.

PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION ON SITE, THE APPLICANT SHALL:

 4) Clearly mark and fence all tree protection areas. At a minimum, areas to be protected shall
    have construction fencing placed in accordance with Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter
    8.10.130 – Tree Protection during construction.

 5) Obtain approval for public improvement plans to include the items listed below.
   a) SANITARY SEWER improvement plans.
Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                   1
       i)   Provide minimum 14-foot public utility easement over proposed sanitary sewer lines
            except for easements adjacent to the right-of-way which may be reduced to six (6)
            feet in width or otherwise determined by the City Engineer, in accordance with
            Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Section 6.03(3) – Easements.
      ii)   Sewer laterals shall be located within the right-of-way of streets per the City Public
            Works Director.

    b) WATER improvement plans which include the following:
       i) Hydrant fire-flow shall be 1,000 gallons per minute at 20 pounds per square inch
            residual for 1 hour for dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area that does not
            exceed 3,600 square feet. Fire-flow and flow duration for dwellings having a fire
            flow calculation area in excess of 3,600 square feet the hydrant fire-flow shall be
            1,500 gallons per minute at 20 pounds per square inch residual for 1 hour in
            accordance with Oregon Fire Code Appendix B Section B105.
       ii) Hydrants shall be 400 apart in accordance with the Oregon Fire Code Appendix C
            Section C105, Table C105.1 and the Lane Fire Authority.
       iii) All new water main connections will be required to be a minimum of 8-inch, blow
            offs will be required at all dead end lines and water services to be installed in the
            public utility easement behind the sidewalk.

    c) DRAINAGE FACILITY improvement plans which include the following:
         i) The Final Plat for Phase 1, shall include a blanket public drainage easement over the
            stormwater detention pond area, in accordance with the City Engineer and Veneta
            Land Development Ordinance No. 493, Section 5.14(6) – Utility and Drainage
            Easements.
        ii) All stormwater facility plantings shall comply with the requirements of the city
            adopted 2008 Portland Stormwater Management Manual, Revision #4.
      iii) For each phase, details for managing the off-site flows from the west shall be
            included in the public improvement plans in accordance with the City Engineer and
            Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 7.03(2) – Surface drainage and
            storm sewer system. The conveyance system to accommodate off-site flows shall be
            sized to convey a 25-year storm assuming full build out of the contributing area. If
            the off-site drainage will be routed to the on-site stormwater treatment and detention
            facilities, they will need to be sized to accommodate this flow.
       iv) The proposed stormwater treatment manhole at the north end of Oaks Orchard Road
            is not an acceptable device for public maintenance according to the City Engineer.
            Stormwater treatment for the northern end of Oaks Orchard Road may occur via the
            street swales and detention pond constructed with Applegate Landing Phase 2
            according to the City Engineer.
        v) Execute and record stormwater agreements approved by the City Engineer, for
            maintenance of all stormwater swales and detention ponds. The stormwater
            agreements shall provide for City maintenance of the ponds and open drainages for
            functionality only. The Madrone Ridge Homeowner’s Association will be
            responsible for performing all other maintenance in accordance with the City
            Engineer.



Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                   2
       vi) The applicant shall apply for, and obtain, Lane County land use approval (Special
           Use Permit) for construction of the proposed stormwater detention pond on
           Assessor’s Map and Tax Lot No. 18-06-01-00-01608, in Lane County, under the
           process outlined in LC16.211(3)(j), as required by Lane County and the City
           Engineer with Phase 1.

    d) STREET and ACCESS improvement plans which include:
        i) Emergency vehicle turn-a-rounds at the west end of Perkins Road and Archibald
           Lane, north end of Arbutus Avenue and Bearberry Drive, in accordance with the
           Lane Fire Authority and Oregon Fire Code Appendix D, Section D103.4 and Veneta
           Land Division Ordinance 494, Section 6.02(6) - Future Extension of Streets. Turn-
           a-rounds shall be exclusive of private driveways and shall be constructed to support
           loads of 55,000 pounds or as otherwise in accordance with the Lane Fire Authority
           and Oregon Fire Code.
       ii) Curbs painted yellow 10-feet to each side of all hydrants to indicate “No Parking”.
      iii) One-foot reserve strips at the terminus of all dead-end streets in conformance with
           Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 6.02(4) – Reserve Strips.
      iv) Provide street lighting in conformance with Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter
           15.15.060 - Street Lights.
       v) All ADA curbs return ramps shall be installed as part of the public improvements for
           each phase, in accordance with the City Engineer and Veneta Land Division
           Ordinance No. 494, Section 7.03(5) - Sidewalks. Sidewalks and street trees shall be
           installed on road frontages as part of Phase 1 public improvements at tree
           conservation and storm drainage easement areas.

     f) LANSCAPING improvement plans which include:
        i) Planting details for planter strips including street tree size, species, irrigation and
             location. Tree locations shall not interfere with public utilities or sight distances
             (clear vision areas) in conformance with the adopted Southwest Area Specific Plan,
             Table 3, Street Standards - Landscaping, Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493,
             Section 5.12 - Landscaping and Section 5.28 - Street Trees.
        ii) Submit and receive approval of a Final Landscape Plan indicating the location of
             street trees that complies with the size, growth characteristics, spacing and location
             of Veneta Land Development Ordinance No. 493, Section 5.28(1-4) – Street Trees
             and the adopted SWAP design standards. Depict a minimum 30-40-foot interval
             street tree placement, in accordance with Veneta Land Development Ordinance No.
             493, Section 5.28(3) – Street Trees, Spacing and Location and adopted SWAP, Table
             3 – Street Standards.
        iii) Clear vision areas within proposed Storm Drainage and Tree Conservation Areas in
             accordance with Veneta Land Development Ordinance 494, Section 5.03 - Clear
             Vision Areas.
        iv) Planting details for all open space tracts including tree, shrub, and grass planting
             rates and irrigation methods in accordance with Veneta Land Development
             Ordinance, Section 5.12 - Landscaping.
        v) Detention treatment facilities landscape plantings shall conform to the adopted 2008
             Portland Stormwater Management Manual, Revision #4, and Veneta Land

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                 3
            Development Ordinance No. 493, Section 5.12(11) and approved by the City
            Engineer.

    g) UNDERGROUND UTILITY improvement plans which include: telephone, electric, and
       cable. Installation of utilities must be coordinated with the appropriate regulatory
       agencies in accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Section 7.03(9) –
       Other.
        i) Underground utilities including broadband fiber conduit in accordance with Veneta
           Municipal Code, Chapter 13.030.020(4) - Installation of Underground Facilities.

    h) GRADING improvement plans which includes:
        i.) Maximum street grade shall not exceed 12 percent per Oregon Fire Code Section
           503.2.7 and the Lane Fire Authority.

6) After approval of engineered plans for streets, sewer, water, storm drainage systems, and
   utilities the applicant shall post a performance bond, in favor of the City, to assure that the
   subdivision improvements are completed. The bond shall be between the applicant and the
   City. The performance bond shall be equal to the cost of public improvements for city water
   and sewer main extension and services, streets, which includes curbs, gutters and drainage,
   sidewalks, and all other public improvements and utilities. The cost of public improvements
   shall be based on an estimate prepared and/or approved by the City Engineer. Performance
   bond shall be in the form of a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash, or other
   financial instrument acceptable to the City Attorney in accordance with Veneta Land
   Division Ordinance 4.02(7) - Performance Bonds and Irrevocable Agreements.

7) Obtain all required permits and reimburse the City for all engineering inspection and plan
   review fees according to Resolution No. 767 - A Resolution Establishing Land Use Planning
   Fees. Permits include, but are not limited to the following:
        i.) Obtain permits if necessary for removal of existing wells and septic.
       ii.) Obtain permits to work within the City right-of-way.

8) Submit a development agreement (to be recorded at applicant’s expense) stating:
     1. Clear vision areas (i.e. Lots 2, 4, 9, 12, 16, 18, 19, 21, 24, 24, 25 - 27, 31, 32, 45, 46, 51,
        52, 65, 66, 71, 72, 85, 86, 90, 91 and 96) including those shown on the tentative plans
        and a triangle with 20-feet sides on all corner lots shall be permanently maintained and
        fifteen (15) feet leg lengths at all panhandle – street intersections. These areas shall
        contain no plantings, driveways, fences, walls, structures or temporary or permanent
        obstructions exceeding 2-1/2 feet in height, measured from the top of the curb or where
        no curb exists, from the established street center line grade. Trees exceeding this height
        may be located in this area, provided all branches or foliage are removed to a height of
        eight (8) feet above grade.
     2. All parcels shall meet the landscaping requirements of Veneta Land Development
        Ordinance 493, Section 5.12 - Landscaping, prior to occupancy.
     3. Where practicable, corner lots shall take access from the street with the lowest
        functional class.



Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                     4
      4. Any trees identified for preservation, and all newly planted trees used to meet the
         conditions of approval contained herein, shall not be removed without an approved
         Tree Removal Permit from the City in accordance with Veneta Municipal Code,
         Chapter 8.10 - Tree Cutting, Destruction and Removal.

PRIOR TO FINAL PLAT APPROVAL

9) The applicant shall apply for and obtain special use permit approval for the detention pond
   on Map and Tax Lot No. 18-06-01-00-01608, with Phase 1, under the process outlined in
   LC16.211(3)(j) and construct the pond, in accordance with Lane County and the City
   Engineer.

10) For Phase 1, the applicant shall record a blanket public drainage easement, acceptable to the
    city attorney, over the stormwater detention swale area located south of Lots 1 and 2 per the
    City Engineer. The easement shall also be illustrated on the Final Plat for Phase 1. The
    easement shall include provisions for City of Veneta staff and Madrone Ridge homeowners
    to construct, maintain, and access the stormwater facility. The detention swale area shall be
    fenced with access provided via the dead end of 8th Street.

11) The applicant shall receive approval of all proposed road names from the Lane County Road
    Naming Committee.

12) Enter into a shared access and maintenance agreement between proposed lots 26, 28-31, 46-
    51 and 86-90 in accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 6.04(1)
    - Access.

13) The applicant shall provide for each phase, one (1)-foot reserve strips at the terminus of all
    dead end streets and shall have separate legal descriptions and be separately identified on
    the plat, in accordance with the City Engineer and Veneta Land Division Ordinance No.
    494, Section 6.02(4) – Reserve Strips.

14) The applicant shall provide the City with recorded copies of all deeds, easements,
    development agreements, and Irrevocable Petitions for Public Improvements required as
    conditions of approval.

15) All flag lots shall be at least 20-feet wide for the entire length with a paved surface of 12-
    feet in accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 6.04(5)(c)1.a –
    Flag Lot Access Pole.

16) The applicant shall submit a final plat for approval within three years of tentative approval.
    The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494
    and Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 92 and shall include the following:
      i.) The width and locations of easements must meet City and utility company
           requirements. All easements are to be shown on the plat.
      ii.) All public stormwater and sanitary sewer piping shall be located within public rights-
           of-way or in a public utility easement (PUE) adjacent to right-of-way, unless

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                    5
             otherwise approved by the City Engineer during the public improvement review
             process.
       iii.) Phase 1 (Madrone Ridge) shall include a right-of-way dedication of 5.3 feet wide for
             7th Street along the eastern property boundary between Perkins Road and Westfield
             Avenue. A 7-foot wide public utility easement shall also be included on the Final Plat
             adjacent to the 7th Street right-of-way along the eastern property boundary between
             Perkins Road and Westfield Avenue as required by the City Engineer.

17) The applicant shall install/construct broadband fiber conduit in accordance with Veneta
    Municipal Code, Chapter 13.30.020(4) – Installation of Underground Facilities.

18) Include plat notes as follows:
       i.) A triangle with 25-foot sides shall be permanently maintained as a clear vision area
            on all corner lots. These areas, and all vision clearance areas shown on the approved
            subdivision plan, shall contain no plantings, driveways, fences, walls, structures or
            temporary or permanent obstructions exceeding 2-1/2 feet in height, measured from
            the top of the curb or where no curb exists, from the established street center line
            grade. Trees exceeding this height may be located in this area, provided all branches
            or foliage are removed to a height of eight (8) feet above grade.
       ii.) If an improvement bond is posted in lieu of improvements being installed, include a
            plat note which states that building permits will not be issued until all public
            improvements are installed.

19) The configuration and size of all public improvements (including streets, storm, sanitary
    sewer, water, sidewalks, bicycle routes, street name signs, other utilities) shall be subject to
    approval by the City Engineer upon review of design and supporting analysis prepared by
    the applicant’s engineer. The applicant shall install all required public improvements and
    repair existing streets or other public facilities damaged in the development of the property
    OR execute and file with the City an agreement between the applicant and the City,
    specifying the period within which required improvements and repairs shall be completed
    and post a performance bond with the City. This shall be completed in accordance with the
    Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 7, Sections 7.03, 7.05 and 7.06. Public
    improvements must include all improvements required by the Veneta Land Division
    Ordinance, the Planning Commission’s conditions of approval, and must be installed in
    accordance with plans approved by the City.

20) The applicant shall obtain a “Letter of Substantial Completion” from the City of Veneta for
    improvements, which have been installed and approved by the City.

21) The applicant shall provide the City with a one (1) year subdivision warranty bond for
    public improvements installed and approved by the City. The bond shall be in favor of the
    City and shall be between the developer and the City.

22) The applicant shall submit and receive approval of a Revised Tree Removal Plan that
    depicts a total of thirty (30) percent of the total significant tree diameter on the site will be
    preserved.

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                       6
23) The applicant shall provide documentation from a Certified Arborist discussing the likely
    impacts of the CRZ’s (Tree ID No.’s 219, 628, 641-645, 716-718) and mitigation proposed,
    in accordance with Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter VMC 8.10.090(3)(a)(ii)(A)2 and VMC
    8.10.130(4) – Construction Near Preserved Trees.

24) Plant a total of 518 mitigation/ replacement trees (+343 heritage tree replacement +350
    significant tree replacement -172 street trees -3 tree credits/otherwise allowed with Type A
    permit) or provide payment in the amount of $129,500, in lieu of tree mitigation/ replacement
    tree planting as permitted in Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter 8.10.120(4) and City Resolution
    No. 1011.

    OR Plant a total of 491 mitigation/ replacement trees (343 heritage tree replacement + 350
    significant tree replacement -172 street trees and -27 individual lot trees for Planning
    Commission consideration -3 tree credits/otherwise allowed with Type A permit) in
    accordance with VMC, Chapter 18.10 or provide payment in the amount of $122,750 in lieu
    of tree mitigation/ replacement tree planting as permitted in Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter
    8.10.120(4) and City Resolution No. 1011. The applicant shall sign and record a Development
    Agreement, prior to building permit issuance, for each affected lot. The applicant shall post a
    3-year performance bond, in favor of the City, in the amount of $6,750 (27 replacement trees
    x $250 payment in lieu of planting).

25) If planting of required mitigation trees is chosen in lieu of payment, then a Tree Mitigation
    Plan will be required to be submitted and approved prior to planting of replacement trees.
    Planting of no more than 25 percent of any one species of the replacement trees required
    shall be allowed in accordance with VMC, Chapter 8.10.120(3)(b) – Mitigation. The
    applicant shall care for the replacement trees, in accordance with VMC Chapter
    18.10.120(3)(e) - Mitigation. The applicant shall enter into an irrevocable development
    agreement with the city for three years after the replacement tree planting date, if chosen in
    lieu of payment, in accordance with VMC, Chapter 8.10.120(3)(f) - Replacement Trees.

26) A Maintenance Plan for proposed storm water detention facilities for functionality only,
    approved by the City Engineer and City Public Works Director.

27) A 7-foot wide public utility easement dedication shall be included on the Final Plat adjacent
    to the required 7th Street right-of-way dedication along the eastern property boundary
    between Perkins Road and Westfield Avenue in accordance with the City Engineer.

28) Water meters shall be located behind the sidewalk in the public utility easement in
    accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 7.03(4) – Water
    Systems and the City Engineer.

PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS

29) Provide the City with a recorded copy of the Final Plat.




Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                    7
30) Provide the City with recorded copies of all deeds, easements, development covenants, and
    Irrevocable Petitions for Public Improvements required as conditions of approval.

31) Compliance with landscape requirements of Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493,
    Section 5.12(1-6) – Landscaping, for each individual lot.

32) Construct all required emergency accesses for all applicable dwellings.

33) Setbacks for all flag lots (lots 28-30, 47-50 and 87-90) shall be a minimum of 10-feet from
    all lot lines and garages shall be setback a minimum of 20-feet from the front line abutting
    the pole in accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section
    6.04(5)(c)3.e.1.

34) Provide residential driveways that conform to Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493,
    Section 5.24(1) – Access Management, specifically, proposed Lot 24 will be required to
    provide a residential driveway from 8th Street, a Minor Collector.

PRIOR TO CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR EACH LOT

35) The applicant shall construct and install all required sidewalks in accordance with Veneta
    Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 7.03(5) - Sidewalks.

C.      IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Veneta Planning Commission approves
        with conditions the Madrone Ridge Subdivision tentative plan (S-2-14) and
        associated Type C Tree Removal Permit based on the information in the staff
        report and the following findings of fact:

        Tentative Subdivision, applicable criteria. Ordinance language is in italics. Findings
        are in bold.

        Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 4 - Subdivision
        Section 4.01 Tentative Plan Submission Requirements

        A Pre Application Conference was held on November 15, 2013. The tentative
        subdivision application was submitted and deemed complete on December 3, 2014 in
        accordance with the Tentative Plan Submission Requirements per Veneta Land
        Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 4.01.

        Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 4 - Subdivision
        Section 4.03 Categories for Tentative Plan Review Criteria
        The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a
        tentative plan based on the standards found in the following sections of the Land
        Division Ordinance, Land Development Ordinance, and other sources specified
        in this section.



Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                  8
        (1) The transportation system supports the new development and provides
        vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian access to each lot in conformance with the
        applicable City requirements, including Design Standards (Article 6) and
        Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land Division Ordinance; the
        requirements of the zoning district (Land Development Ordinance); and the
        Veneta Transportation System Plan.

        Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 6 – Design Standards
        Section 6.02 Street Design Standards

        (1) General. The function, location, width, and grade of streets shall be considered in
           relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public
           convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of land to be served by the streets.
           The street system shall assure an adequate and safe traffic circulation system with
           intersection angles, grades, tangents and curves appropriate for the traffic to be
           carried, considering the terrain. Where location is not shown on the street plan or in
           a development plan, the arrangement of streets shall either:
           (a) Streets shall be interconnected and provide for continuation or appropriate
                extension to surrounding properties. Cul-de-sacs shall be allowed only when
                one or more of the following conditions exist:
                  1. Physical or topographic conditions make a street connection impracticable.
                    Such conditions include but are not limited to freeways, railroads, steep
                    slopes, wetlands or other bodies of water where a connection could not
                    reasonably be provided.

        The proposal complies with this standard. The applicant is proposing to construct
        the subdivision in phases (5 total) and for street connections to terminate at the
        proposed phase boundaries. The subject site does not contain wetlands but does
        contain isolated areas of steep slope (15%-20%) according to City GIS data (i.e. in
        the vicinity of proposed lot #’s: 79, 90-96 along the western boundary of proposed
        Phase 5). The isolated area of slope (15-20%) along the western boundary will not
        impede development of Perkins Road through the site.

        The proposed street layout is interconnected yet slightly modified from the adopted
        Southwest Area Specific Plan ‘Concept Plan’ with the elimination of Westfield
        Avenue continuing through the site to the west and slight curve of Perkins Road to
        the north. However, the proposed street layout complies with block length
        standards as discussed below (under Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494,
        Section 6.03(2)) and still provides connectivity throughout the subdivision with the
        extension of Perkins Road through the site.

                 2. Buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands physically
                   preclude a connection now or in the future considering the potential for
                   redevelopment; or




Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal               9
        This standard does not apply to the proposal as connections to adjacent land will be
        required, and where connections are required, there are generally no buildings or
        other existing development on adjacent lands that preclude connectivity.

                 3. Where streets would violate provisions of leases, easements, covenants,
                   restrictions or other agreements existing as of October 1, 1998 which
                   preclude a required street connection.

                   Where cul-de-sacs are planned, multi-use paths connecting the end of the cul-
                   de-sac to other streets or neighborhood activity centers shall be provided if
                   feasible.

        This standard is not applicable as there are no proposed cul-de-sacs within this
        phase of the SWAP.

                    (b) Conform to a plan for the development area approved or adopted by the
                        Planning Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical
                        or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets
                        impractical.

        The proposal complies with this standard. The proposed street network was
        designed as part of the SWAP, which was adopted by the City on April 10, 2006. As
        discussed previously, the proposed street layout is slightly modified from the
        adopted Southwest Area Specific Plan ‘Concept Plan’ with the elimination of
        Westfield Avenue continuing through the site.

        The proposed street layout complies with block length standards as discussed
        under Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 6.03(2) below.
        Connectivity throughout the subdivision is provided with the extension of Perkins
        Road through the site and therefore serving the lesser classified streets in terms of
        access.

        (2) Standard right-of way and street widths.

        The proposed subdivision is part of the Southwest Area Plan (SWAP) / Specific
        Development Plan. Alternative street standards adopted for the plan area are as
        follows.

        Table 3, Street Standards (adopted Southwest Area Specific Plan)
                                                      Street Classification
                            Local One-        Local Two- Minor              Major
        Standard            Way               Way         Collector         Collector   Alley
        Right-of-Way
        Width               20 ft.            50 ft.        60 ft.             60 ft.   16 ft.




Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                10
                                                          Street Classification
                            Local One-        Local Two- Minor                    Major
        Standard            Way               Way             Collector           Collector        Alley
                                              32 ft.                              39 ft.
                            16 ft.                            39 ft.              (11 ft. travel
                                              (9 ft. travel (11 ft. travel        lanes, 5 ft.
                       (9 ft. travel          lanes, 7 ft.    lanes, 5 ft. bike   bike lanes, 7
        Roadway Paving lane, 7 ft.            parking         lanes, 7 ft.        ft. parking
        Width*         parking stalls)        stalls)         parking stalls)     stalls)          12 ft.

        Motor Vehicle
        Parking Allowed one side              both sides     one side             one side         no
        Bicycle Lanes
        Required        no                    no             yes                  yes              no

                       One side (can
                       be integrated
                       with roadway if
                       delineated with One side if a stormwater swale is located in the
                       contrasting        right-of-way or if there is a park or common
        Sidewalks      surface material open space with a parallel pedestrian path.
        Required       or texture)        Both sides in all other situations.                      no
        Sidewalk Width 4 ft. min.         5 ft. min.                                               n.a.
                        The remainder of the right-of-way, including the stormwater
                        swale, shall be landscaped. Street trees shall be planted at an
        Landscaping     average spacing of no greater than 40 feet.                                no
        Maximum Block 600 ft. Greater length is allowed in order to minimize wetland
        Length          crossings.                                                                 n.a.


        Maximum Cul-
        de-Sac Length    No maximum length. Maximum of 20 lots facing the cul-de-sac. n.a.
                         Off-Street Bicycle/Pedestrian Paths
                         All parks, bicycle/pedestrian paths, and open spaces intended for public use
        Lighting         shall be lighted as required by the City.
                         Paved bicycle/pedestrian paths shall be a minimum of 10 ft. wide or as
                         otherwise approved by the City. Pathways required to serve as emergency
                         access routes shall be a minimum of 14 ft. wide and engineered to support a
                         load of 55,000 pounds. All paved paths shall be constructed of 5 in. of
        Off-Street       Portland Cement over approved base or as otherwise approved by the City.
        Bicycle/         Soft surfaced paths shall be constructed with materials as required by the
        Pedestrian Paths City.




Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                           11
Figure 14, Street Cross Sections (adopted Southwest Area Specific Plan)




        The proposal complies with this standard. Proposed Madrone Ridge Drive,
        Arbutus Avenue, Bearberry Drive, Oaks Orchard Road, Westfield Avenue and
        Archibald Lane are classified as Local Two-Way streets. Perkins Road is classified
        as a Major Collector and 8th Street is classified as a Minor Collector according to
        Map 12 of the Veneta Transportation System Plan. The Proposed Plan (see Sheet 3)
        and Paving Details (see Sheet C-1.2) depict street widths, sidewalks and bike lanes
        that comply with the adopted SWAP, Table 3 - Street Standards.

        (4) Reserve Strips. The control and disposal of the land comprising such strips shall be
            placed within the jurisdiction of the City under conditions approved by the Planning
            Commission or Building and Planning Official. One foot reserve strips are used
            across the ends of stubbed streets adjoining undivided land or along half streets
            adjoining undivided land, and they shall be designated as such. Reserve strips may
            also be parallel to the right-of-way as a means of access control (prohibiting
            driveway access). The reserve strip shall have separate legal descriptions and shall
            be separately identified on the plat.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. The final plat for each
        phase shall include one (1)-foot reserve strips at the terminus of all dead end streets
        and shall have separate legal descriptions and be separately identified on the plat,
        in accordance with the City Engineer and Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494,
        Section 6.02(4) – Reserve Strips.

        (5) Alignment. As far as is practical, streets other than minor streets shall be in
            alignment with existing streets by continuation of the center lines thereof. Staggered
            street alignment resulting in "T" intersections shall, wherever practical, leave a



Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal              12
            minimum distance of 200 feet between the center lines of streets having
            approximately the same direction.

        The proposal complies with this standard. The proposed street layout is similar to
        the adopted SWAP but varies slightly with Westfield Avenue not continuing
        through the site to the west. However, the proposal complies with block length
        standards. A “T” intersection is proposed where Westfield Avenue terminates to
        the west at Oaks Orchard Road and a minimum distance of 200 feet between the
        center lines of streets having approximately the same direction (i.e. Sun Ridge Way
        and Perkins Road) is provided as shown on Sheet 3 - Proposed Plan.

        (6) Future extensions of streets. Where necessary to give access to or permit a
            satisfactory future division of adjoining land, streets shall be extended to the
            boundary of the subdivisions or partition and the resulting dead-end streets must
            have a turn-around. Reserve strips may be required to preserve the objectives of
            street extensions.

        As conditioned, the applicant complies with this standard. The proposal includes
        extensions of streets to the boundaries of the subdivision in order to permit the
        satisfactory future division of adjoining land. Dead end streets will occur until the
        property to the west and north are developed and will be required to have a turn-a-
        round.

        Prior to final plat approval, the applicant shall provide emergency vehicle turn-a-
        round’s on the west end of Perkins Street and Archibald Lane, north end of
        Arbutus Avenue and Bearberry Drive in accordance with Lane Fire Authority and
        Oregon Fire Code Appendix D, Section D103.4.

        (7) Division of property. Property with frontage onto two or more streets shall not be
            divided in a manner that would preclude access to a portion of the property from the
            road(s) with the lesser functional class. Access could be provided via an access
            easement.

        This standard is not applicable.

        (8) Intersection angles. Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles, and all
            other conditions shall require a variance. An arterial or collector street intersecting
            with another street shall have at least 100 feet of tangent adjacent to the
            intersection.

        The proposal complies with this standard. The proposed streets are laid out to
        intersect at right angles except for Perkins Road which slightly curves near
        proposed lot #25 and #26. Perkins Road is classified as a Major Collector and does
        not intersect with an arterial within the subject site boundaries.




Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal               13
        (9) Existing Streets. Whenever existing streets adjacent to or within a tract are of
            inadequate width, additional right-of-way shall be provided at the time of the land
            division.
        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. Although not currently
        constructed, 7th Street will exist along the eastern property boundary as part of
        development for Applegate Landing Phase 3 (City File# S-1-14) of the SWAP. The
        Final Plat for Phase 1, Madrone Ridge, shall include a right-of-way dedication of
        5.3 feet wide for 7th Street along the eastern property boundary between Perkins
        Road and Westfield Avenue. A 7-foot wide Public Utility Easement (PUE)
        dedication shall also be included on the Final Plat adjacent to the 7th Street right-
        of-way, in accordance with the City Engineer and Veneta Land Division Ordinance
        No. 494, Section 6.02(9) – Existing Streets.

       (10) Half Streets. Half streets, while generally not acceptable, may be approved where
            essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision or partition when in
            conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and when the Planning
            Commission finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when
            the adjoining property is developed. Whenever a half street is adjacent to the tract
            to be divided, the other half of the street shall be provided within such tract. Reserve
            strips may be required to preserve the objectives of half streets.

        This standard is not applicable, as there are no proposed half streets included in
        the applicant’s submitted plans.

       (11) Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac shall have a maximum length of 400 feet. A cul-de-sac
            shall terminate with a circular turn-around.

       This standard does not apply. There are no cul-de-sacs proposed or required.

       (12) Street names. Except for extensions of existing streets, no street name shall be used
            which will duplicate or be confused with the name of an existing street. Street names
            and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the City and shall be subject
            to the approval of the Planning Commission and Lane County.

        The proposal complies with this standard.

       (13) Grades and curves. Grades shall not exceed six (6) percent on arterial, ten (10) per
            cent on collector streets or fifteen per cent on other streets. Center line radii of
            curves shall not be less than 300 feet on major arterial, 200 feet on secondary
            arterial or 100 feet on other streets. Where existing conditions, particularly the
            topography, make it otherwise impractical to provide buildable sites, the Planning
            Commission may accept steeper grades and sharper curves. In flat areas, allowance
            shall be made for finished street grades having a minimum slope, preferably, of at
            least 0.3 per cent.




Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                14
        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. According to the
        applicant’s submittal (see Sheet C-1.0 and Sheet C-1.1 – Grading and Storm
        Drainage Plans), grades for proposed collector and all other streets will not exceed
        the standard. Perkins Road is proposed to have a six (6) percent grade towards the
        west side of the subject property and decreases in slope to a two (2) percent grade
        to the east. All other streets are proposed to have less than one (1) percent grade
        with the exception of Westfield Avenue which is proposed to have a two and a half
        (2.5) percent grade. The Lane Fire Authority has commented maximum street
        grade shall not exceed 12 percent per Oregon Fire Code Section 503.2.7. The City
        Public Works Director has commented that the proposed plan follows the natural
        grading of the site and additional fill may be needed for lot drainage.

        (14) Streets adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. Wherever the proposed land division
             contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, provision may be required for a
             street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance
             suitable for the appropriate use of the land between the streets and the railroad.
             The distance shall be determined with due consideration at cross streets of the
             minimum distance required for approach grades to a future grade separation and
             to provide sufficient depth to allow screen planting along the railroad right-of-way.

        This standard is not applicable, as no railroad right-of-way is located on or near
        the subject property.

        (15) Marginal access streets. Where a land division abuts or contains an existing or
             proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access
             streets, reverse frontage lots with suitable depth, screen planting contained in a
             non-access reservation along the rear or side property line, or other treatment
             necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation
             of through and local traffic.

        The proposal complies with this standard. Perkins Road abuts the site to the east,
        once it is constructed with Phase 3 (Applegate Landing) of the SWAP. Perkins
        Road will continue through the site as a Principal Arterial in accordance with Map
        12 of the Veneta Transportation System Plan. The proposed layout complies with
        the layout of streets approved with the adopted SWAP, where no marginal streets
        or reverse frontage lots were proposed.

        (16) Alleys. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, unless other
             permanent provisions for access to off-street parking and loading facilities are
             approved by the Planning Commission. The corners of alley intersections shall
             have a visual clearance of not less than 45 degrees with fifteen (15) foot leg lengths.

        This standard is not applicable. The subject property is zoned for residential use.

        Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 6 – Design Standards
        Section 6.04 Building Sites

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                15
         (1) Access. Each lot and parcel (except those in the GR and RC zones intended
             for single-family attached housing) shall abut upon a street other than an
             alley for a width of at least 50 feet and 35 feet for a cul-de-sac. Flag lots
             shall be allowed in accordance with Section 6.04(5) below. A shared access
             and maintenance agreement between all lots within a flag lot partition is
             required prior to the application for Final Plat.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. All lots are proposed for
        single-family housing and abut upon a street other than an alley for a width of at
        least 50-feet in conformance with this standard. A majority of the lots abut upon a
        street for 60-feet. Proposed Lots 10, 11 and 21 are the minority which abut upon a
        street for 50-55 feet.

        The applicant is proposing ten (10) flag lots (i.e. proposed lots 28-30, 47-50 and 87-
        89) as depicted on the submitted ‘Proposed Plan’. Flag lots are allowed in
        accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 6.04(5). Prior to
        final plat, the applicant shall enter into a shared access and maintenance
        agreement between all flag lots (i.e. proposed lots 28-30, 47-50 and 87-89) in
        accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 6.04(1) - Access.

        (5) Flag Lots.
            (a)The Building and Planning Official may approve a flag lot that creates
               three (3) lots or less in conformance with the subdivision or partition
               requirements in this ordinance Partition or subdivision requirements apply
               unless a more specific flag lot provision conflicts. Flag lot development of
               a unit of land possessing any one of the following characteristics shall be
               referred to the Planning Commission:
             1. The unit of land has sufficient area to create more than 3 lots.
             2. Site is traversed by a natural drainageways or has demonstrated drainage
                limitations as shown on the utility plans required in Section 6.03 (1) 4 of
                this ordinance. Demonstrated drainage limitations are site or development
                conditions that prevent the unrestricted flow of water from areas draining
                through the site or that do not allow the extension of the system to serve
                such area as per the City’s Drainage Master Plan, or that prevent
                stormwater from being directed to storm sewers or to natural
                drainageways in accordance with the Land Division and Land
                Development Ordinances.
              3. Site includes Open Space and/or Greenway Areas designated on the
                Veneta Zoning Map as a Greenway subzone.
              4. Site has slopes of or greater than fifteen percent (see Section 5.25 of this
                Ordinance).
              5. Site is located in a Flood Hazard subzone.
              6. Site includes significant wetland resources, or is located within 50 feet of
                a wetland resource identified as locally significant in the Veneta Local
                Wetlands Inventory.



Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal               16
        The proposal complies with this standard. The tentative subdivision request
        has been referred to the Planning Commission for approval/ denial as
        required with all tentative subdivision requests. Provisions defined under
        Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 6.04(a)1 applies to the site,
        however, 6.04(5)(a)2-6 are not applicable. The applicant has stated in the
        Memo dated January 24, 2015 and attached as Exhibit to the Staff Report,
        that if the Planning Commission does not approve the proposed panhandle
        lots (28-30, 47-50 and 87-89) the applicant will support a condition of
        approval that streets be extended to the property line, in lieu of panhandle
        drives.

             (b)A flag lot is allowed only when the following requirements are met:
                    1. A unit of land cannot otherwise be divided in accordance with the
                       provisions of the Land Development Ordinance and this ordinance
                    2. Only one flag pole is proposed.
                    3. Minimum lot size and maximum lot coverage requirements of the
                       zone can be met.

        The proposal complies with this standard. The applicant is proposing ten
        (10) flag lots (28-30, 47-50 and 87-89) as depicted on the submitted Proposed
        Plan. The proposal complies with all three (3) requirements listed under
        Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 6.04(5)(b)1.-3 per the
        following:
             • The remainder depth just south of the proposed Perkins Road
                extension is almost twice as deep (+/-193 feet) than other proposed
                lots. If flag lots were not proposed to the south of the proposed
                Perkins Road extension then linear (i.e. north-south) lot development
                off of Perkins Road to the south would create deeper than necessary
                lot development considering the proposed alignment of Perkins
                Road.
             • Perkins Road is proposed to curve to the north, in order to meet up
                with Bolton Hill Ranch Estates 1st Addition to the west, in a manner
                that provides the curve on the gentlest slope along the easterly
                portion of the subject site.
             • Given the layout of proposed streets (particularly Perkins Road) the
                proposal complies with this standard. The proposed alignment of
                Perkins Road allows creation of larger lots. The general layout of
                streets was already defined and the proposal follows the intent of the
                SWAP.
             • Only one flag pole is proposed and shared access agreements will be
                required for any shared flag poles. The proposal includes shared
                access and utility easements as depicted on Sheet 3 - Proposed Plan.
             • Minimum lot size (6,000 square feet) and maximum lot coverage
                (40%) requirements of the Single-family residential can be met with
                the proposed flag lot development. The smallest flag lots proposed
                include Lots 30, 47, 50 and 87 at 6,000 square feet. The largest flag

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal          17
                 lots proposed include Lot 89 at 13,343 square feet.
             •   The adopted Southwest Area Specific Plan Development Standards
                 (i.e. adopted SWAP Table 2 - Development Standards) references
                 panhandle lots as being permitted with a minimum 15-foot street
                 frontage in the Single Family Residential (SFR) zone for lots within
                 the SWAP boundaries. A paved surface of at least 12-feet is
                 proposed and required in conformance with VLDO, Section
                 6.04(5)(c) – Flag lot access pole.

            (c)Flag lot access pole. The pole portion of the lot must meet the following
               standards:
                   1. The pole providing access to:
                       a. A unit of land creating three (3) or less lots shall connect to a
                       street and must be at least 20 feet wide for its entire length and
                       have a paved surface of 12 feet, or 25 feet if the length from the
                       centerline of the street right-of-way to the flag portion is more than
                       150 feet.
                      b. A parent parcel with the potential area to create more than three
                       (3) lots shall connect to a street and must be at least 25 feet wide
                       for its entire length with a paved surface of at least 18 feet.
                    2. The access pole shall be shared by all lots, including existing
                      dwellings, unless the Planning Commission or Building and
                      Planning Official find shared access impractical.
                    3. A shared access and maintenance agreement between all lots shall
                      be in a form approved by the City Engineer and City Attorney and
                      that protects interests of property owners and the city. The
                      agreement shall be recorded prior to final plat.
                      (d) Minimum lot dimensions. No dimension of a flag lot may be less
                      than the requirements of the zone, excepting the pole portion. All
                      other lot dimension standards shall be met.
                      (e)Flag lot development standards. The following standards apply to
                      development on flag lots:
                             1. Setbacks for panhandle lots shall be a minimum of 10 feet
                                  from all lot lines. Garages shall be set back a minimum of
                                20 feet from the front lot line abutting the pole.

        As conditioned, the applicant complies with this standard. The applicant is
        proposing ten (10) flag lot access poles. According to the Proposed Plan, the
        flag lot access poles which serve Lots 28-30 are sixteen and a half (16.5) feet
        wide each. The flag lot access poles which serve Lots 47-50 are twelve and a
        half (12.5) feet wide each. The flag lot access poles which serve Lots 87-89
        are sixteen and a half (16.6) feet wide each. All proposed flag lots are
        precisely 150-feet or less than 150-feet in length. The applicant is proposing
        for the flag lots to be developed as shown on the “Private Drive” cross
        section proposed on Sheet C-1.2 (Paving Details). Three lots (28-30) will be
        served by a 28-foot paved driveway with 5-foot sidewalks. Four lots (47-50)

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal               18
        will be served by a 28-foot paved driveway with 5-foot sidewalks. Three lots
        (86-90) will be served by a 28-foot paved driveway with 5-foot sidewalks.
        Panhandle lots are permitted as referenced in Adopted SWAP, Table 2 –
        Development Standards with a minimum 15-foot minimum street frontage.
        Therefore, prior to final plat approval, all flag lots (28-30, 47-50 and 87-89)
        shall have a minimum 15-foot street frontage.

        Prior to final plat approval, all flag lots shall be at least 20-feet wide for its
        entire length and have a paved surface of at least 12-feet for its entire length,
        in accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section
        6.04(5)(c)1.a – Flag Lot Access Pole. The applicant is proposing a shared
        access and utility easement for all shared flag lots as shown on Sheet 3 –
        Proposed Plan.

        Prior to final plat approval, the applicant shall enter into and record a
        shared access and maintenance agreement between proposed flag lots and
        be approved by the City Engineer and City Attorney in accordance with
        Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 6.04(5)(c)3. Prior to
        building permit approval for all flag lots (i.e. Lots 28-30, 47-50 and 87-89),
        setbacks shall be a minimum of 10-feet from all lot lines and garages shall be
        setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the front line abutting the pole
        in accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section
        6.04(5)(c)3.e.1.

        Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 7 – Improvement Requirements
        Section 7.03 – Improvements in Subdivisions

        The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the sub-divider at the
        time of subdivision or as agreed upon as provided in Section 7.05. All improvements
        shall comply with the construction permit requirements of Veneta Municipal Code
        Chapter 12.05.

        (1) Streets. Public Streets, including alleys, within the subdivisions and public streets
            adjacent but only partially within the subdivision shall be improved. Catch basins
            shall be installed and connected to drainage tile leading to storm sewers or drainage
            ways. Upon completion of the street improvement, monuments shall be
            re-established and protected as provided in ORS Chapter 92. Traffic impacts to
            facilities as identified in the TIA and supported by the City’s consulting engineer,
            shall be mitigated by the developer as part of the public improvements of the Site
            Plan, Subdivision or PUD.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. The configuration and
        size of all public improvements (including streets, storm, sanitary sewer, water,
        sidewalks, bicycle routes, street name signs, other utilities) shall be subject to
        approval by the City Engineer upon review of design and supporting analysis
        prepared by the applicant’s engineer. A Proportionate Cost Sharing Agreement

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                19
        (City File Agreement# A-120) for transportation impacts per lot was entered into
        for the entire Southwest Area Specific Plan area. Although Hayden Enterprises,
        Inc. entered into the Cost Sharing Agreement in 2007, Section 5.1 - Assignability of
        the recorded agreement states that the agreement shall be “fully assignable, in whole
        or in part, by any Party and shall bind and inure to the benefit of the Parties and their
        respective successor and assigns. If any portion real estate which is subject to the Plan
        and the Development has not been approved for development as a Phase and is sold,
        the duties, rights and interest of Hayden under this agreement shall become the duties,
        rights and responsibilities of that purchaser.”

       (5) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of a public street and in any
           special pedestrian way within the subdivision at the time a building permit is issued,
           except that in the case of arterials, or special type industrial districts, the Planning
           Commission may approve a subdivision without sidewalks if alternative pedestrian
           routes are available; and provided further, that in the case of streets serving
           residential areas having single-family dwellings located on lots equivalent to two
           and one-half or less dwellings per gross acres, the requirement of sidewalks shall
           not apply, provided there is no evidence of special pedestrian activity along the
           streets.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. The applicant is
        proposing sidewalks and planting strips with street trees along all streets except the
        proposed private drives. Sidewalks are required to be installed at the time of final
        occupancy with building permit. There will be no building permit necessary for the
        areas along the proposed storm drainage easements and tree conservation
        easements and therefore, sidewalks and street trees shall be installed on road
        frontages as part of Phase 1 public improvements, at tree conservation and storm
        drainage easement areas in order to ensure connectivity of the sidewalks are
        constructed.

        All ADA curbs return ramps shall be installed as part of the public improvements
        for each phase, in accordance with the City Engineer and Veneta Land Division
        Ordinance No. 494, Section 7.03(5) - Sidewalks. Prior to Certificate of Occupancy
        for each lot, the applicant shall construct and install all required sidewalks in
        accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 7.03(5) -
        Sidewalks.

       (6) Bicycle routes. If appropriate to the extension of a system of bicycle routes, existing
           or planned, the Planning Commission may require the installation of separate
           bicycle lanes within streets or separate bicycle paths.

        This standard is not applicable to Phase 4 of the SWAP. Bicycle Lane are required
        along Perkins Road as it is a Major Collector per Table 3 – Street Standards of the
        adopted SWAP. However, the adopted SWAP concept plan does not indicate
        additional bicycle routes are necessary within this phase of the SWAP.



Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                20
        Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Article 5 – Supplementary Provisions
        Section 5.02 – Access
        All lots shall be provided with access according to the standards of Article 6 of the
        Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, specifically, Section 6.04(2) – Access.

        The proposal complies with this standard. Each lot is proposed to abut a street other
        than an alley for a width of at least 50-feet and proposed flag lots conform with the
        development standards of the adopted SWAP and VLDO, Section 6.04(5). The
        applicant is proposing to develop the site in five (5) separate phases as depicted on
        Sheet 1 (Cover Sheet). A shared access agreement between all lots within a flag lot
        partition is required prior to the application for final plat, as conditioned previously.

       Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Article 5 – Supplementary Provisions
       Section 5.03 – Clear Vision Areas
       In all zones except the BC zone a clear vision area shall be maintained on the
       corners of all property at the intersections of two (2) streets, a street-alley or
       street-railroad.

       (1) Corner lots shall maintain a triangular area at street intersections, railroad-
           street intersections alley-street intersections, and panhandle-street
           intersections for safety vision purposes. Two (2) sides of the triangular area
           shall be exterior property lines, 20-feet in length at street intersections and
           fifteen (15) feet leg lengths at alley-street intersections and panhandle-street
           intersections. When the angle of the portion of the intersection between
           streets is less than 30 degrees, the visual distance shall be 20 feet along the
           property line from the point of intersection. The third side of the triangle
           shall be an interior line connecting the two (2) exterior sides.

        As conditioned, the applicant complies with this standard. Prior to construction on
        the site, the applicant shall submit a development agreement to be recorded at the
        applicant’s expense, for lot #’s 2, 4, 9, 12, 16, 18, 19, 21, 24, 25-27, 31, 32, 46, 51, 65,
        66, 71, 72, 85, 86, 91 and 96 stating that: Clear vision areas including those shown on
        the tentative plans and a triangle with 20-feet sides on all corner lots shall be
        permanently maintained and fifteen (15) feet leg lengths at all panhandle – street
        intersections. These areas shall contain no plantings, driveways, fences, walls,
        structures or temporary or permanent obstructions exceeding 2-1/2 feet in height,
        measured from the top of the curb or where no curb exists, from the established
        street center line grade. Trees exceeding this height may be located in this area,
        provided all branches or foliage are removed to a height of eight (8) feet above grade.
       (2) A clear vision area shall contain no plantings, driveways, fences, walls,
           structures or temporary or permanent obstruction exceeding 2 ½ feet in
           height, measured from the top of the curb or where no curb exists, from
           the established street center line grade. Trees exceeding this height may be
           located in this area, provided all branches or foliage are removed to a
           height of eight (8) feet above grade. See Figure 5.03(b).

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                21
        As conditioned above, the proposal complies with this standard. Prior to
        construction, the applicant shall submit and receive approval of a Final Landscape
        Plan depicting street tree locations, planting details for planter strips including street
        tree size, species, and location, irrigation and street tree locations shall not interfere
        with public utilities or sight distances (clear vision areas).

       Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Article 5 – Supplementary Provisions
       Section 5.23 – Transit Facilities
       Table 5.23(a) below shows the transit amenities that may be required.
       Determination of specific requirements will be made on a case by case basis for
       each development by weighing the following factors in consultation with the Lane
       Transit District:
         • Expected transit ridership generated by development
         • Level of existing or planned service adjacent to development
            (Planned service is defined as service which will be established within five years
            after the completion of the development.)
         • Location of existing transit facilities
         • Proximity to other transit ridership generators

                                 Table 5.23(a) Transit Facility Requirements
         Number of Average Peak Hour      Amenities Which May Be Required
         Traffic Trips
         Residential
         Developments with less than 9           Concrete boarding pad for bus stop, lighting,
         dwelling units per gross acre           bench
         that generate 25 to 49 trips
         Developments with 9 or more             Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting
         dwelling units per gross acre
         that generate 25 to 49 trips
         Developments that generate 50 to        Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting
         99 trips
         100 - 199 trips                         Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting, bus
                                                 turnout
         200 or more trips                       Shelter, concrete boarding pad, lighting, bus
                                                 turnout, on-site circulation

        According to the TIA submitted and prepared by Access Engineering, LLC, the
        proposal will produce an approximate 1012 new daily trips, 77 new AM peak hour
        trips and 101 new PM peak hour trips. The Lane Transit District was sent a referral
        request and did not provide a response. Therefore, staff is not requiring additional
        transit facilities for this phase of development within the SWAP.

        Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Article 5 – Supplementary Provisions
        Section 5.24 – Access Management

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                22
       (1) Residential driveways shall be located to optimize intersection operation and where
           possible, to access off the street with the lowest functional classification. For
           example, if a house is located on the corner of a local street and a minor collector,
           the driveway shall access from the local street as long as it can be located a
           sufficient distance from the intersection.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. Proposed Lot 24 contains
        two accesses, one from 8th Street and one from Perkins Road. At time of building
        permit approval for each individual lot, the applicant will be required to provide
        residential driveways that conform to Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493,
        Section 5.24(1) – Access Management, specifically, proposed Lot 24 will be
        required to provide a residential driveway from 8th Street, a Minor Collector.

       (2) Properties that only front on collector or arterial streets are encouraged to share an
           access with neighboring properties. The decision making body may require a
           combined access for two or more developments, and shared driveways between
           developments, including land divisions, where access spacing standards cannot
           otherwise be met.

        As mentioned above, driveways for individual lots will be examined at the time of
        building permit. Shared driveways will be encouraged whenever possible to reduce
        access points on collector streets.

       Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Article 5
       Section 5.25 – Development on Slopes of or over fifteen percent
       In addition to other review processes and standards required in other sections of
       this ordinance, the following process and standards shall apply to all land
       developments and land divisions on land where the slope meets or exceeds
       fifteen percent:
         (1)A site shall be deemed to meet the 15% slope criteria if the average slope
           across the site in any direction meets or exceeds a 15 foot rise in every 100
           feet. Isolated areas on the site may exceed the 15% limit and not require the
           additional review process itemized below providing the entire site is below
           the 15% threshold

        This standard is not applicable. According to City data, there are isolated slopes
        between 15-20% that exist (i.e. within proposed lots 90-94) on the subject site.
        These slopes are limited to a small portion of the western boundary, an isolated
        area on the site which exceeds the 15% limit as defined in Veneta Land
        Development Ordinance No. 493, Section 5.25. The average slope across the entire
        site in any direction does not meet or exceed a 15-foot rise in every 100-feet.

        Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Article 5 – Supplementary Provisions
        Section 5.27 – Traffic Impact Analysis and Mitigation
        (1) A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) and review is required when one of the

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal              23
            following conditions exists:

                 (a) The development will generate more than 100 vehicle trips during
                     the a.m. or p.m. peak hour as determined by using the most recent
                     edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineer’s Trip
                     Generation Manual. In developments involving a land division, the
                     peak hour trips shall be calculated based on the likely development
                     that will occur on all lots resulting from the land division.
                 (b) The increased traffic resulting from the development will
                     significantly contribute to documented traffic problems in the
                     area based on current accident rates, traffic volumes, or speeds.
                 (c) The Traffic Impact Analysis is required by the State or County due
                     to increased traffic on a State or County road within the City’s
                     Urban Growth Boundary.

        The proposal complies with this standard as described in Section 5.27(3) below.

        (2) Review Procedure.
           Any application for a planned development, subdivision, site plan, or specific
           development plan which shows that increased traffic meeting one of the
           applicability conditions a) through c) above shall be accompanied by a Traffic
           Impact Analysis. Traffic Impact Analysis shall be reviewed by the City
           Engineer, or a professional engineer chosen by the City, prior to approval of
           the site plan review, subdivision, PD, or SDP. This review is part of the
           “Technical Review” costs incurred by the developer.

        The proposal complies with this standard as described in Section 5.27(3) below.

       (3) Mitigation Required.
           Traffic impacts to facilities as identified in the TIA and supported by the
           City’s Traffic Engineer shall be mitigated by the developer as part of the
           improvements for the Site Plan, Subdivision, Planned Development (PD), or
           Specific Development Plan (SDP).

        The proposal complies with this standard. A Transportation Impact Analysis
        prepared by Access Engineering, LLC dated September 19, 2014 was submitted as
        part of the tentative subdivision application as required. The City Engineer has
        provided comment in the Technical Memorandum dated December 18, 2014. The
        City Engineer made several findings that ultimately recommended approval of the
        submitted TIA. The City Engineer commented that the proposed development will
        add turning movements to the Huston Road and Hwy 126 northbound approach and
        result in an increase to the projected delay, but will not cause the northbound (or
        other) approaches to exceed the V/C standard. A preliminary traffic signal warrant
        analysis was provided per ODOT’s Analysis Procedures Manual (APM) for Huston
        Road at Highway 126. The preliminary signal warrant analysis revealed that the


Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal           24
        intersection is not anticipated to meet signal warrants at build-out for the future year
        2018 analysis scenarios.

        The Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) was sent a referral request for
        the proposed tentative subdivision and provided a response dated December 29,
        2014. The response indicated that the applicant’s submitted Traffic Impact Study
        did not contain queuing analysis which would have been scoped if the study has been
        required under ODOT’s authority. In addition, the applicant’s submitted study had
        utilized Synchro 6 analysis software which is no longer accepted by ODOT as it does
        not contain methodology from the current Highway Capacity Manual 2010. In
        summary, ODOT has proposed no mitigation measures.

        A Proportionate Cost Sharing Agreement (City File Agreement# A-120) for
        transportation impacts per lot was entered into for the entire Southwest Area
        Specific Plan area. Although Hayden Enterprises, Inc. entered into the Cost
        Sharing Agreement in 2007, Section 5.1 - Assignability of the recorded agreement
        states that the agreement shall be “fully assignable, in whole or in part, by any Party
        and shall bind and inure to the benefit of the Parties and their respective successor and
        assigns. If any portion real estate which is subject to the Plan and the Development has
        not been approved for development as a Phase and is sold, the duties, rights and
        interest of Hayden under this agreement shall become the duties, rights and
        responsibilities of that purchaser.”

        SANITARY SEWER, WATER, AND OTHER PUBLIC UTILITIES
        (2) Each lot will be served with sanitary sewer (or septic systems), water, and other
            public utilities in conformance with the applicable City requirements, including
            Design Standards (Article 6) and Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land
            Division Ordinance; the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development
            Ordinance); and City utility plans.

        Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 6 – Supplementary Provisions
        Section 6.03 – Blocks

        (1) General. The length, width and shape of blocks shall take into account the need for
            adequate building site size and street width and shall recognize the limitations of the
            topography.

        The proposal complies with this standard. The length, width, and shape of blocks
        have already been determined by the approved SWAP, which takes into account
        the topography and other considerations in configuring street layouts and block
        shape.
        (2) Size. In residential zones, block lengths shall not exceed 600 feet and block
            perimeters shall not exceed 1800 feet except where topography, natural features, or
            existing development creates conditions requiring longer blocks.



Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal               25
        The proposal complies with this standard. The length, width, and shape of blocks
        have already been determined by the approved SWAP, which takes into account
        the topography and other considerations in configuring street layouts and block
        shape. Regardless, proposed block lengths do not exceed the standard. The
        applicant has provided a diagram, received on January 20, 2015 and included as
        Exhibit to the staff report.

        (3) Easements.
            (a) Utility lines. Easements for sewers, water mains, electric lines or other public
                utilities shall be dedicated wherever necessary. The easements shall be at least
                fourteen (14) feet wide and located adjacent to lot or parcel lines, except for
                easements adjacent to the right-of-way which may be reduced to six (6) feet in
                width.

        As conditioned, the applicant proposal complies with this standard. Prior to
        approval of the Pubic Improvement Plans, the applicant shall provide a minimum
        14-foot public utility easement over proposed sanitary sewer lines except for
        easements adjacent to the right-of-way which may be reduce to six (6) feet in width,
        in accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Section 6.03(3)(a) –
        Easements. Prior to Final Plat approval, a 7-foot wide public utility easement
        (PUE) dedication shall be included on the Final Plat adjacent to the required 7th
        Street right-of-way dedication along the eastern property boundary between
        Perkins Road and Westfield Avenue as required per the City Engineer.

        Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 7 – Improvement Requirements
        Section 7.03 – Improvements in Subdivisions

        The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the sub-divider at the
        time of subdivision or as agreed upon as provided in Section 7.05. All improvements
        shall comply with the construction permit requirements of Veneta Municipal Code
        Chapter 12.05.

        (3) Sanitary Sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve the subdivision and to
            connect the subdivision to existing mains and shall take into account the capacity
            and grade to allow for desirable extension beyond the subdivision. In the event it is
            impractical to connect the subdivision to the City sewer system, the Planning
            Commission may authorize the use of septic tanks if lot areas are adequate
            considering the physical characteristics of the area. If sewer facilities will, without
            further sewer construction, directly serve property outside the subdivision, and the
            area outside the subdivision to be directly served by the sewer line has reached a
            state of development to justify sewer installation at the time, the City Council may
            construct as an assessment project with such arrangements as are desirable with the
            sub-divider to assure financing his share of the construction. If the City Council
            chooses not to construct the project as an assessment project the sub-divider shall be
            solely responsible for the cost of improvements in accordance with City approved
            plans.

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal                26
        The proposal complies with this standard. The proposed subdivision will be
        connected to the existing City sewer system. The proposed sewer shows the
        collection of the entire development entering the existing sewer system from two
        locations, Oaks Orchard Road and Eighth Street, both of which travel north to
        Eighth Street and head to the treatment plant. Capacity should not be an issue with
        this route according to the City Public Works Director. The proposed sewer system
        features three collection lines that are located within the back yards of the
        proposed lots which will not be allowed. Sewer laterals for all lots are to be located
        within the right-of-way of streets. Veneta Municipal Code 13.10.390 requires, “A
        separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building
        drain.” Prior to public improvement plan approval, all public stormwater and
        sanitary sewer piping shall be located within public rights-of-way or in a public
        utility easement (PUE) adjacent to right-of-way, in accordance with Veneta Land
        Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 7.03(3) – Sanitary Sewers and the City
        Engineer.

        (4) Water system. Water lines and fire hydrants serving each building site in the
            subdivision and connecting the subdivision to existing mains shall be installed to the
            standards of the City, taking into account provisions for extension beyond the
            subdivision.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. Water to this
        development will be provided from the existing 12-inch water main located within
        Perkins Road as well as from an existing 8-inch line on Oaks Orchard Road.
        Capacity will not be an issue. Prior to final plat, water meters shall be located
        behind the sidewalk in the public utility easement in accordance with the City
        Engineer.

        (9) Other. The developer shall make necessary arrangements with utility companies or
            other persons or corporations affected for the installation of underground lines and
            facilities. Electrical lines and other wires, including but not limited to
            communication, street lighting and cable television, shall be placed underground.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. Prior to
        construction, the applicant shall coordinate the installation of underground
        utilities with all utility companies affected persons or corporations in
        accordance with Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Section 7.03 –
        Improvements in Subdivisions. Prior to approval of public improvement
        plans, the applicant shall provide street lighting in conformance with Veneta
        Municipal Code, Chapter 15.15.060 – Street Lights.

        Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 7 – Improvement Requirements
        Section 7.05 – Agreement for Improvements.
        Before final approval of a subdivision plat or partition map, the land divider shall either
        install required improvements and repair existing streets and other public facilities
        damaged in the development of the property or execute and file with the City an

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal               27
        agreement between himself and the City, specifying the period within which required
        improvements and repairs shall be completed and providing that, if the work is not
        completed within the period specified, the City may complete the work and recover the
        full cost and expense, together with court costs and attorney fees necessary to collect
        said amounts from the land divider. The agreement shall also provide for reimbursement
        of the City for the cost of inspection by the City in accordance with Section 7.06.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. Prior to Final Plat
        Approval, the applicant shall install all required public improvements and repair
        existing streets or other public facilities damaged in the development of the
        property OR execute and file with the City an agreement between the applicant
        and the City, specifying the period within which required improvements and
        repairs shall be completed and post a performance bond with the City, in
        accordance with the Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 7, Sections 7.03,
        7.05 and 7.06. Public improvements must include all improvements (including fiber
        conduit per Veneta Municipal Code Chapter 13.30.020(4)) required by Veneta
        Land Division Ordinance 494, the Planning Commission’s conditions of approval,
        and must be installed in accordance with plans approved by the City.

        Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Article 5 – Supplementary Provisions
        Section 5.14 – Improvements Requirements

         All applicants for land development shall comply with all public improvement
        requirements specified in Article 7 of the Veneta Land Division Ordinance and shall
        install improvements in accordance with specifications approved by the City Engineer.

        (1) Water and Sewer connections. All developments requiring water within the SFR,
            GR, CR, CC, IC, and I zones shall be connected to City water and sanitary sewers.
            Developments in the RR zone and H.C. zone on Highway 126, east of Territorial
            Road, shall be required to hook up to city water and sanitary sewer when available,
            but connections are not required for development to occur.

        As conditioned, the applicant complies with this standard, as all lots will be served
        by City water and sanitary sewers.

        (6) Utility and Drainage Easements. Before approval of a building permit, the City may
            require that an easement agreement be executed between the city and the property
            owner for sewer, water, electric, drainage, storm sewer or other public utility
            easements wherever necessary. The easements shall be at least fourteen (14) feet
            wide and located adjacent to lot or parcel lines, except for utility pole tieback
            easements which may be reduced to six (6) feet in width.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. The Final Plat for Phase
        1 shall include a blanket public drainage easement over the stormwater detention
        pond area, in accordance with the City Engineer and Veneta Land Development
        Ordinance No. 493, Section 5.14(6) – Utility and Drainage Easements. Prior to

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal            28
        building permit approval, recorded copies of all necessary utility and access
        easements shall be provided.

        Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter 13 – Public Services
        Chapter 13.30.020(4): Installation of Underground Facilities

        Underground utilities, sanitary sewers, storm drains, water mains, and broadband fiber
        conduit installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of streets. Stubs
        for surface connections for underground facilities, sanitary sewers, water services, and
        broadband conduit shall be placed to the limits of the City right of way when service
        connections are made and the end of all stubs shall be marked for future location.”

        As conditioned, the applicant complies with this standards. The Veneta City
        Council adopted Ordinance 509 on February 10, 2014 which requires construction
        of broadband fiber conduit to be installed. Prior to final plat, the applicant shall
        construct underground utilities including broadband fiber conduit in accordance
        with Veneta Municipal Code, Chapter 13.30.020(4) – Installation of Underground
        Facilities. Prior to public improvement plan approval, the applicant shall update
        the plans to include fiber conduit installation in accordance with Veneta Municipal
        Code, Chapter 13.30.020(4) – Installation of Underground Facilities. As a general
        note, the City Public Works Director has commented that the proposed plans
        depict gas utilities which are not required at this time.

        SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE
        (3) The surface water drainage shall be in conformance with the City’s Drainage
            Master Plan and other applicable City requirements, including Design Standards
            (Article 6) and Improvement Requirements (Article 7) of this Land Division
            Ordinance; and the requirements of the zoning district (Land Development
            Ordinance).

        Veneta Land Division Ordinance 494, Article 7 – Improvement Requirements
        Section 7.03 – Improvements in Subdivisions

        (2) Surface drainage and storm sewer system. Drainage facilities shall be provided
            within the subdivision and to connect the subdivision drainage to drainage ways or
            storm sewers outside the subdivision. Design of drainage within the subdivision, as
            approved by the City Engineer, shall take into account the capacity and grade
            necessary to maintain unrestricted flow from areas draining through the subdivision
            and to allow extension of the system to serve such area as per adopted Drainage
            Plan.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. The City of Veneta’s
        adopted Stormwater Manual is the 2008 Portland Stormwater Management
        Manual. A Stormwater Management Plan was completed for the Veneta Southwest
        Area Plan (SWAP) by Otak, Inc. dated November 10, 2006. Portland’s SWMM, the
        stormwater management plan for the SWAP and Veneta’s stormwater ordinance

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal               29
        requires post development peak runoff rates to match predevelopment levels. The
        City Engineer commented that the applicant’s drainage report identifies off-site
        areas to the west that currently drain through the site. Off-site drainage will need
        to be intercepted, routed around the proposed lots, and conveyed through the site
        for each phase of development. Prior to final plat and public improvement plan
        approvals for each phase, details for managing the off-site flows from the west shall
        be included in the public improvement plans in accordance with the City Engineer
        and Veneta Land Division Ordinance No. 494, Section 7.03(2) – Surface drainage
        and storm sewer system. The conveyance system to accommodate off-site flows
        shall be sized to convey a 25-year storm assuming full build out of the contributing
        area. If the off-site drainage will be routed to the on-site stormwater treatment and
        detention facilities, they will need to be sized to accommodate this flow. In addition,
        the proposed stormwater treatment manhole at the north end of Oaks Orchard
        Road is not an acceptable device for public maintenance according to the City
        Engineer. Stormwater treatment for the northern end of Oaks Orchard Road may
        occur via the street swales and detention pond constructed with Applegate Landing
        Phase 2.

        Prior to approval of the Final Plat for Phase 1, or prior to acceptance of the Public
        Improvements, the applicant shall execute and record stormwater agreements
        approved by the City Engineer, for maintenance of all stormwater swales and
        detention ponds. The stormwater agreements shall provide for City maintenance of
        the ponds and open drainages for functionality only. The Madrone Ridge
        Homeowner’s Association will be responsible for performing all other maintenance
        in accordance with the City Engineer.

        Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Article 5 – Supplementary Provisions
        Section 5.14 – Improvement Requirements

        All applicants for land development shall comply with all public improvement
        requirements specified in Article 7 of the Veneta Land Division Ordinance and shall
        install improvements in accordance with specifications approved by the City Engineer.

        (6) Utility and Drainage Easements. Before approval of a building permit, the City may
            require that an easement agreement be executed between the city and the property
            owner for sewer, water, electric, drainage, storm sewer or other public utility
            easements wherever necessary. The easements shall be at least fourteen (14) feet
            wide and located adjacent to lot or parcel lines, except for utility pole tieback
            easements which may be reduced to six (6) feet in width.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. Water meters shall be
        located behind the sidewalk in the public utility easement in accordance with the
        City Engineer. All public stormwater and sanitary sewer piping shall be located
        within public rights-of-way or in a public utility easement (PUE) adjacent to right-
        of-way, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer during the public



Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal           30
        improvement review process. Prior to building permit approval, recorded copies of
        all necessary utility and access easements shall be provided.

        Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Article 5 – Supplementary Provisions
        Section 5.16 – Stormwater Detention and Treatment
        As the City of Veneta develops, impervious surfaces create increased amounts of
        stormwater runoff, disrupting the natural hydrologic cycle. Without stormwater
        management, these conditions decrease groundwater recharge while increasing
        channel erosion and the potential for localized flooding. The City continues to use
        swales and other more natural methods to control and convey stormwater run-off,
        incorporating wetlands and other natural systems into stormwater drainage plans
        to the greatest extent possible rather than relying exclusively on pipes. Runoff
        from urban areas is a major source of pollution and watershed degradation. The
        City is currently a Designated Management Agency (DMA) under the Willamette
        Basin TMDL and as such, is responsible for reducing pollutant loads transported
        to surface waters from runoff. In order to protect and enhance watershed health
        and long-term livability, the City requires that development comply with the
        following stormwater management criteria.
        (1) For all projects that create greater than or equal to 1000 square feet of new
             impervious surface, stormwater detention and treatment facilities shall be
             provided. Detention and treatment facilities shall be designed and sized
             according to the City of Portland Stormwater Management Manual,
             Revision #4, August 1, 2008 which is adopted as the City’s Stormwater
             Management Manual. Where the manual and this section conflict, this
             section shall prevail.

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. A Stormwater
        Management Plan was approved as part of the entire SWAP. However, the
        applicant is proposing detention pond facilities located on Map and Tax Lot No. 18-
        06-01-00-01608, outside of Veneta City limits. The City Engineer has commented
        that the detention swale is proposed outside of the UGB is detaining water from the
        City system and redirecting it back into the City system and is proposed to serve
        public rights-of-way. Lane County Department of Public Works has commented
        that the detention pond facilities outside of city limits and in Lane County
        jurisdiction is not a use permitted by right within the existing ‘Impacted Forest’
        (F2) zone per Lane Code Chapter 16.211. Prior to final plat approval of a detention
        pond on Map and Tax Lot No. 18-06-01-00-01608, the applicant shall obtain special
        use permit approval for the pond under the process outlined in LC16.211(3)(j) and
        construct the pond, in accordance with Lane County. Lane County has also
        commented the special use permit is a Director-Level (commonly referred to as a
        Type 2) discretionary review process and approval of the permit cannot be
        guaranteed. Lane County will request City staff to comment on the Special Use
        Permit. Prior to Final Plat and Public Improvement Plan approval for Phase 1, the
        applicant shall apply for, and obtain, Lane County land use approval for
        construction of the proposed stormwater detention swale outside Veneta’s UGB as
        required by the City Engineer. Prior to Final Plat approval for Phase 1, the

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal             31
        applicant shall record a blanket public drainage easement, acceptable to the city
        attorney, over the stormwater detention swale area located south of Lots 1 and 2
        per the City Engineer. The easement shall also be illustrated on the Final Plat for
        Phase 1. The easement shall include provisions for City of Veneta staff and
        Madrone Ridge homeowners to construct, maintain, and access the stormwater
        facility. The detention swale area shall be fenced with access provided via the dead
        end of 8th Street. Prior to approval of the Final Plat for Phase 1, and prior to
        acceptance of the Public Improvements for Phase 1, the applicant shall execute and
        record stormwater agreements for maintenance of all stormwater swales and
        detention ponds. The stormwater agreements shall provide for City maintenance of
        the ponds and open drainages for functionality only in accordance with the City
        Engineer. The Madrone Ridge Homeowners’ Association will be responsible for
        performing all other maintenance.

        (2) The intent of these requirements is as follows:
             (a) To maintain runoff peak flows at predevelopment levels
             (b) To provide treatment of runoff to limit the transport of pollutants to
                 area waterways.
             (c) To limit accumulation of ponded water by discouraging the use of
                 detention ponds and other centralized stormwater facilities through the
                 dispersal of small detention and treatment facilities throughout a
                 development. Preference shall be given to detention and treatment
                 systems designed to drain completely within 24 hours to limit standing
                 water.
             (d) To encourage the use of vegetated treatment systems over
                 structural pollution control devices

        As conditioned, the proposal complies with this standard. Prior to public
        improvement plan approval, the detention treatment facilities landscape plantings
        shall conform to the adopted Portland Stormwater Management Manual and
        approved by the City Engineer.

        (3) Exceptions or alternatives to the requirements and standards of the
            Stormwater Management Manual may be allowed by the City Engineer
            based on specific site conditions provided that detention and treatment
            requirements are met in conformance with the intent as stated above.
            Applicants are encouraged to use either the Simplified Approach or
            Presumptive Approach to size facilities.

        As conditioned above, the proposal complies with this standard. The details of
        construction for Phase 4 will be reviewed during the Public Improvements review
        phase of this project to ensure that off-site water is being properly conveyed.
        Veneta Land Development Ordinance 493, Article 5 – Supplementary Provisions
        Section 5.26 – Parkland Dedication Requirements
                (a)     The required parkland shall be dedicated as a condition of approval for
                        the following:

Final Order S-2-14 – Madrone Ridge, Tentative Subdivision and Type C Tree Removal             32
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Territorial Hwy -- Perkins Rd                                                                                          QC JOB #: 12000111
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                           DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                       76           167                         Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                      10.5        3.6
                         5    43    28
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                   20.0 4.7 17.9


       6     10                           67   74
                                                                                                                     16.7   0.0                       4.5       5.4
             9               0.92          1
                                                                                                                            0.0                       0.0
       19    0                             6   47
                                                                                                                     0.0    0.0                      16.7      10.6
                         0    90    10
                                                                                                                                   0.0 3.3 0.0

                       49           100
                                                                                                                                   6.1         3.0



                              0                                                                                                     0     0    0



                                                                                                                            0                           0

             0                             0                                                                                0                           0

                                                                                                                            0                           0

                              0                                                                                                     0     0    0




                              NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                           NA                                                                                NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                 Territorial Hwy               Territorial Hwy                 Perkins Rd                  Perkins Rd                    Total        Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       0            3        1   0       1        4        0   0        0       1      0      0    0        0      1    0                 11
     7:05 AM       0            2        0   0       1        3        0   0        1       1      0      0    0        0      6    0                 14
     7:10 AM       0            2        0   0       3        1        0   0        0       1      0      0    0        0      8    0                 15
     7:15 AM       0            3        0   0       0        3        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0      8    0                 14
     7:20 AM       0            9        2   0       2        2        0   0        1       3      0      0    0        0      3    0                 22
     7:25 AM       0            5        0   0       1        1        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0      4    0                 12
     7:30 AM       0            4        1   0       2        2        0   0        2       0      0      0    0        0      5    0                 16
     7:35 AM       0            7        1   0       1        5        3   0        1       0      0      0    0        0      3    0                 21
     7:40 AM       0            6        0   0       3        4        1   0        2       0      0      0    1        0      6    0                 23
     7:45 AM       0            6        1   0       4        2        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0      7    0                 21
     7:50 AM       0            3        3   0       2        3        0   0        0       1      0      0    1        0      8    0                 21
     7:55 AM       0            8        1   0       2        8        0   0        1       1      0      0    0        0     10    0                 31              221
     8:00 AM       0            9        1   0       3        2        0   0        0       3      0      0    0        0      6    0                 24              234
     8:05 AM       0            9        0   0       2        6        1   0        1       1      0      0    2        1      6    0                 29              249
     8:10 AM       0           14        0   0       2        7        0   0        1       0      0      0    0        0      6    0                 30              264
     8:15 AM       0           10        0   0       4        1        0   0        1       0      0      0    0        0      3    0                 19              269
     8:20 AM       0            5        1   0       0        5        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0      2    0                 13              260
     8:25 AM       0            9        0   0       2        7        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        1      2    0                 21              269
     8:30 AM       0            3        0   0       3        2        0   0        1       0      0      0    0        0      5    0                 14              267
     8:35 AM       0            0        1   0       0        6        0   0        1       1      0      0    1        0      5    0                 15              261
     8:40 AM       0           11        0   0       1        3        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0      3    0                 18              256
     8:45 AM       0            4        0   0       3        4        0   0        0       1      0      0    0        0      0    0                 12              247
     8:50 AM       0            3        0   0       1        1        0   0        0       1      0      0    0        0      9    0                 15              241
     8:55 AM       0            9        0   0       3        2        0   0        1       0      0      0    0        0      4    0                 19              229
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                        Total
  All Vehicles     0           68      20    0       32      52        0   0        4       8      0      0    8        0    100    0                        292
 Heavy Trucks      0            0        0            4       0        0            0       0      0           0        0      4                              8
  Pedestrians                   0                             0                             0                           0                                     0
    Bicycles       0            0        0           0        0        0            0       0      0           0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 10:59 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 8th St -- Bolton Hill Rd                                                                                                QC JOB #: 12000113
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                            DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                       24           49                         Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                        12.5        4.1
                         5    7     12
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                    20.0 0.0 16.7


       21    11                          11   39
                                                                                                                     14.3   0.0                        0.0       5.1
             21              0.79        15
                                                                                                                            23.8                      13.3
       34    2                           13   63
                                                                                                                     17.6   50.0                       0.0      11.1
                         1    27    30
                                                                                                                                    0.0 7.4 0.0

                       22           58
                                                                                                                                    4.5         3.4



                              0                                                                                                      0     0    0



                                                                                                                            0                            0

             1                            2                                                                                 0                            0

                                                                                                                            0                            0

                              0                                                                                                      0     0    0




                             NA                                                                                                            NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                 NA                         NA




                             NA                                                                                                            NA



 5-Min Count                     8th St                       8th St                     Bolton Hill Rd               Bolton Hill Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                 Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right     U
     7:00 AM       0            1       3    0      0        0       0    0        0       1       0      0    0        1       0    0                  6
     7:05 AM       0            2       2    0      1        0       0    0        0       4       0      0    0        0       0    0                  9
     7:10 AM       0            1       2    0      1        0       0    0        1       3       0      0    6        2       1    0                 17
     7:15 AM       0            3       3    0      0        0       0    0        2       1       0      0    0        1       0    0                 10
     7:20 AM       0            4       4    0      0        1       0    0        2       3       0      0    0        2       0    0                 16
     7:25 AM       0            1       3    0      0        1       1    0        0       3       0      0    1        0       0    0                 10
     7:30 AM       0            2       2    0      2        0       0    0        1       2       0      0    1        1       0    0                 11
     7:35 AM       0            2       2    0      0        0       0    0        1       3       0      0    0        1       0    0                  9
     7:40 AM       0            2       1    0      0        0       1    0        1       2       1      0    1        0       1    0                 10
     7:45 AM       1            3       4    0      2        1       1    0        2       2       1      0    1        0       1    0                 19
     7:50 AM       0            1       5    0      3        0       1    0        2       0       0      0    0        4       1    0                 17
     7:55 AM       0            2       3    0      1        1       0    0        0       3       0      0    1        1       1    0                 13              147
     8:00 AM       0            5       2    0      2        0       0    0        1       2       0      0    2        1       2    0                 17              158
     8:05 AM       0            1       0    0      1        1       0    0        0       0       0      0    3        1       0    0                  7              156
     8:10 AM       0            3       1    0      1        0       1    0        0       0       0      0    0        1       3    0                 10              149
     8:15 AM       0            1       3    0      0        2       0    0        1       1       0      0    3        3       2    0                 16              155
     8:20 AM       0            0       1    0      1        1       0    0        1       2       0      0    0        0       0    0                  6              145
     8:25 AM       0            1       2    0      2        0       0    0        2       1       0      0    2        0       2    0                 12              147
     8:30 AM       1            2       1    0      0        0       0    0        1       1       0      0    1        2       0    0                  9              145
     8:35 AM       0            0       1    0      1        0       0    0        1       1       0      0    1        0       1    0                  6              142
     8:40 AM       0            0       0    0      0        0       2    0        0       2       0      0    0        0       0    0                  4              136
     8:45 AM       0            0       3    0      0        1       0    0        0       1       0      0    0        1       0    0                  6              123
     8:50 AM       1            0       2    0      0        0       1    0        0       1       0      0    0        2       0    0                  7              113
     8:55 AM       0            1       0    0      0        0       0    0        0       1       0      0    1        0       0    0                  3              103
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                   Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right     U                        Total
  All Vehicles     4           24     48     0      24       8       8    0        16     20       4      0    8       20     12     0                        196
 Heavy Trucks      0            4       0            4       0       0              0      0       0           0        0       0                              8
  Pedestrians                   0                            0                             4                            4                                      8
    Bicycles       0            0       0           0        0       0             0       0       0           0        0       0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 10:59 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Territorial Hwy -- Cheney Dr                                                                                          QC JOB #: 12000109
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                       98           211                         Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                     12.2        4.7
                         0    87    11
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 11.5 18.2


       0     0                            20   21
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                       5.0       4.8
             0               0.85          0
                                                                                                                           0.0                       0.0
       0     0                             1   15
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                       0.0      13.3
                         0   191    4
                                                                                                                                  0.0 4.7 0.0

                       88           195
                                                                                                                                  11.4        4.6



                              0                                                                                                    0     1    0



                                                                                                                           0                           0

             1                             1                                                                               0                           0

                                                                                                                           0                           0

                              2                                                                                                    0     0    0




                              NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                           NA                                                                               NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                 Territorial Hwy               Territorial Hwy                 Cheney Dr                   Cheney Dr                    Total        Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       0           10        0   0       1        7        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     6     0                24
     7:05 AM       0           10        0   0       0        3        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                15
     7:10 AM       0           13        0   0       0        2        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                17
     7:15 AM       0           11        0   0       0        7        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                20
     7:20 AM       0           16        0   0       1        3        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                22
     7:25 AM       0            7        0   0       3        3        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                15
     7:30 AM       0           11        1   0       0        8        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                22
     7:35 AM       0           18        0   0       0        7        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                27
     7:40 AM       0           14        1   0       1        6        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0                23
     7:45 AM       0           14        1   0       0       10        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0                26
     7:50 AM       0           20        0   0       0       11        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     3     0                34
     7:55 AM       0           23        0   0       1        6        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                32              277
     8:00 AM       0           17        0   0       2        6        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                27              280
     8:05 AM       0           20        1   0       1       11        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0     3     0                37              302
     8:10 AM       0           18        0   0       1        7        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     0     0                26              311
     8:15 AM       0           13        0   0       1        9        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     0     0                23              314
     8:20 AM       0            8        0   0       2        7        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                19              311
     8:25 AM       0           15        0   0       0       10        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                27              323
     8:30 AM       0            4        0   0       0        6        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0                11              312
     8:35 AM       0           11        0   0       1        2        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0     1     0                16              301
     8:40 AM       0            9        0   0       1        6        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                18              296
     8:45 AM       0           10        0   0       1        3        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     0     0                14              284
     8:50 AM       0           13        0   0       0        5        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     2     0                20              270
     8:55 AM       0           19        0   0       0        3        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     0     0                22              260
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     0          228        4   0       4      108        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0    24     0                       368
 Heavy Trucks      0            4        0           4        8        0            0       0      0           0        0     0                              16
  Pedestrians                   0                             0                             0                           0                                     0
    Bicycles       0            0        0           0        0        0            0       0      0           0        0     0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 10:59 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Territorial Hwy -- Bolton Hill Rd                                                                                       QC JOB #: 12000107
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                            DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                    134            328                         Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                        9.0         4.0
                       20    91    23
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                    15.0 8.8 4.3


       47    57                          38   50
                                                                                                                     6.4    8.8                        0.0       0.0
             9              0.88         10
                                                                                                                            0.0                        0.0
       82    16                           2   33
                                                                                                                     11.0   25.0                       0.0       3.0
                       17 233      1
                                                                                                                                    0.0 3.4 0.0

                    109            251
                                                                                                                                    11.0        3.2



                             0                                                                                                       0     1    0



                                                                                                                            0                            0

             2                            1                                                                                 0                            0

                                                                                                                            1                            0

                             0                                                                                                       0     2    0




                             NA                                                                                                            NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                 NA                         NA




                             NA                                                                                                            NA



 5-Min Count                Territorial Hwy               Territorial Hwy                Bolton Hill Rd               Bolton Hill Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                 Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right     U
     7:00 AM       0          10        0   0       1        5        3   0        2       1       1      0    1        0       2    0                 26
     7:05 AM       0          16        1   0       1        6        2   0        5       0       0      0    0        0       2    0                 33
     7:10 AM       0          15        0   0       1        2        1   0        4       0       0      0    0        0       6    0                 29
     7:15 AM       1          17        0   0       0        3        4   0        7       1       2      0    0        1       2    0                 38
     7:20 AM       1          14        0   0       2        5        1   0        5       0       1      0    0        0       0    0                 29
     7:25 AM       0          19        0   0       1        5        2   0        7       0       0      0    0        0       3    0                 37
     7:30 AM       0          11        0   0       3        7        2   0        6       0       0      0    0        0       0    0                 29
     7:35 AM       1          29        0   0       2        6        4   0        7       0       2      0    0        0       0    0                 51
     7:40 AM       1          15        0   0       1       10        2   0        6       0       1      0    0        0       1    0                 37
     7:45 AM       2          19        0   0       0       12        0   0        5       0       1      0    0        0       3    0                 42
     7:50 AM       3          18        0   0       1        6        1   0        5       4       0      0    0        0       7    0                 45
     7:55 AM       1          29        1   0       2        6        3   0        3       1       4      0    0        4       6    0                 60              456
     8:00 AM       1          25        0   0       5        8        2   0        5       2       4      0    0        0       4    0                 56              486
     8:05 AM       3          17        0   0       2       11        1   0        5       2       2      0    1        1       6    0                 51              504
     8:10 AM       3          22        0   0       3        8        0   0        1       0       0      0    1        0       4    0                 42              517
     8:15 AM       1          15        0   0       1        7        2   0        2       0       1      0    0        5       4    0                 38              517
     8:20 AM       2          11        0   0       2        9        2   0        6       0       1      0    0        0       4    0                 37              525
     8:25 AM       1          14        0   0       1       10        1   0        6       0       1      0    0        0       2    0                 36              524
     8:30 AM       1          14        0   0       4        6        2   0        4       1       4      0    1        0       0    0                 37              532
     8:35 AM       0           5        0   0       0        5        1   0        2       0       0      0    0        2       1    0                 16              497
     8:40 AM       1          20        0   0       0        2        0   0        3       0       1      0    0        0       3    0                 30              490
     8:45 AM       0           5        0   0       0        6        1   0        2       0       0      0    0        0       1    0                 15              463
     8:50 AM       0          19        0   0       1        6        0   0        5       0       0      0    0        0       2    0                 33              451
     8:55 AM       0          19        0   0       0        3        1   0        4       0       1      0    0        0       0    0                 28              419
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right     U                        Total
  All Vehicles     24        264        4   0       12      96      16    0        52     20     20       0    0       16     64     0                        588
 Heavy Trucks       0          8        0            0       0        0             0      0     12            0        0       0                              20
  Pedestrians                  0                             0                             0                            4                                       4
    Bicycles       0           0        0           0        0        0            0       0       0           0        0       0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 10:59 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Territorial Hwy -- OR 126                                                                                              QC JOB #: 12000105
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                           DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                    280          327                           Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                       6.4        8.0
                       27 117 136
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                   33.3 4.3 2.9


       159   52                         63   220
                                                                                                                    21.4   19.2                     11.1     15.5
             178          0.92         101
                                                                                                                           5.6                      21.8
       271   41                         56   484
                                                                                                                    8.1    4.9                       8.9      3.9
                       31 212 170
                                                                                                                                   9.7 4.2 2.9

                    214          413
                                                                                                                                   5.6        4.1



                           0                                                                                                        0    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                           0

             1                           0                                                                                 0                           0

                                                                                                                           0                           0

                           0                                                                                                        0    0    1




                           NA                                                                                                            NA




             NA                        NA                                                                                  NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                            NA



 5-Min Count              Territorial Hwy                 Territorial Hwy                  OR 126                      OR 126                       Total       Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Totals
 Beginning At     Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM        1       11      23    0         11       8        4   0        3       9      4      0     2       8      1    0                 85
     7:05 AM        6       12      19    0         14       8        2   0        2       7      2      0     3      10      2    0                 87
     7:10 AM       10        9      12    0         12       8        1   0        0      15      2      0     2       4      2    0                 77
     7:15 AM        5        8      17    0         10       6        3   0        2      18      3      0     5       4      5    0                 86
     7:20 AM        2        9      18    0          8       5        2   0        6      20      6      0     3       8      5    0                 92
     7:25 AM        1        9      19    0         10       5        4   0        5      23      5      0     2       4      2    0                 89
     7:30 AM        0       11      15    0         12      10        2   0        8      21      3      0     4       3      7    0                 96
     7:35 AM        4       12      17    0          9       6        1   0        5      26      1      0     5       8      7    0                101
     7:40 AM        4       14      20    0         12       4        1   0        4       9      1      0     5       8      3    0                 85
     7:45 AM        2       17      11    0         10       6        3   0        4      11      6      0     4      18      8    0                100
     7:50 AM        3       30      15    0         14       6        2   0        8       9      2      0     5       8      9    0                111
     7:55 AM        3       25      13    0         19      20        1   0        3       7      2      0     2      14      3    0                112            1121
     8:00 AM        2       20      12    0          6      18        4   0        4      11      4      0     9      11      3    0                104            1140
     8:05 AM        3       29        8   0         12      15        1   0        2      14      2      0     8       5      3    0                102            1155
     8:10 AM        0       20        9   0         11      12        4   0        2      12      5      0     2       5      7    0                 89            1167
     8:15 AM        7       16      13    0         13      10        2   0        1      15      4      0     7       9      6    0                103            1184
     8:20 AM        1        6      12    0         15      17        1   0        1      15      4      0     3      11      2    0                 88            1180
     8:25 AM        3        6      10    0          6      11        1   0        1      10      4      0     6      10      3    0                 71            1162
     8:30 AM        4        9      12    0          9       8        3   0        0      12      0      0     3      11      5    0                 76            1142
     8:35 AM        2       11        5   0          9       5        1   0        1      11      0      0     6      19      3    0                 73            1114
     8:40 AM        4       13        6   0          8       7        2   0        1       9      4      0     8      16      6    0                 84            1113
     8:45 AM        2        8      11    0         10       6        1   0        1      10      4      0     7      14      9    0                 83            1096
     8:50 AM        3        6      10    0          9      12        1   0        2      14      4      0    10      17      7    0                 95            1080
     8:55 AM        3       15        9   0          7       5        0   0        1      20      2      0     3       9      0    0                 74            1042
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     32      288     156    0        172     128      24    0        60    108    40       0    44     160    80     0                       1292
 Heavy Trucks       0       12        4             12       8        4             8      8      0            4      24    16                              100
  Pedestrians                0                               0                             0                           0                                     0
    Bicycles       0         0        0              0       0        0            0       0      0           0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 10:59 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Huston Rd -- OR 126                                                                                                      QC JOB #: 12000103
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                             DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                       29          13                            Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                       13.8        30.8
                       10    2     17
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                     10.0 50.0 11.8


       244   3                            8    239
                                                                                                                      14.8   33.3                       25.0      14.6
             495            1.02         211
                                                                                                                             3.4                        15.2
       509   11                          20    667
                                                                                                                      3.7    9.1                         5.0       3.4
                       23    2     155
                                                                                                                                     13.0 50.0 2.6

                       33          180
                                                                                                                                     9.1         4.4



                             0                                                                                                        0     1     0



                                                                                                                             0                             0

             0                            0                                                                                  0                             0

                                                                                                                             0                             0

                             0                                                                                                        0     0     0




                            NA                                                                                                              NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                  NA                          NA




                            NA                                                                                                              NA



 5-Min Count                  Huston Rd                       Huston Rd                      OR 126                      OR 126                         Total        Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                   Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       1           0      9     0         0        0      1     0        1      32      0      0    0        8      0    0                   52
     7:05 AM       1           1     15     0         0        0      1     0        0      45      0      0    2       15      0    0                   80
     7:10 AM       1           0     18     0         1        1      1     0        0      47      0      0    0       10      1    0                   80
     7:15 AM       2           0      9     0         1        1      0     0        0      33      0      0    0       11      0    0                   57
     7:20 AM       2           0     21     0         2        0      0     0        0      49      0      0    2       15      0    0                   91
     7:25 AM       0           0     15     0         2        0      0     0        0      57      1      0    1        6      0    0                   82
     7:30 AM       0           0     16     0         0        0      1     0        0      48      1      0    3       17      0    0                   86
     7:35 AM       1           0     20     0         0        0      0     0        0      48      1      0    1       23      1    0                   95
     7:40 AM       2           0     16     0         1        1      1     0        0      51      0      0    1       19      2    0                   94
     7:45 AM       3           0     12     0         1        0      1     0        1      39      0      0    2       21      0    0                   80
     7:50 AM       2           1      9     0         4        0      0     0        1      30      1      0    2       24      0    0                   74
     7:55 AM       4           0      9     0         0        0      3     0        0      37      1      0    1       24      1    0                   80              951
     8:00 AM       2           1     14     0         0        0      0     0        0      44      1      0    5       16      1    0                   84              983
     8:05 AM       1           0     11     0         2        1      3     0        1      34      1      0    2       11      1    0                   68              971
     8:10 AM       3           0      4     0         0        0      0     0        0      26      2      0    0       13      0    0                   48              939
     8:15 AM       3           0      8     0         5        0      1     0        0      32      2      0    0       22      2    0                   75              957
     8:20 AM       0           1      5     0         1        0      2     0        3      36      1      0    2       14      0    0                   65              931
     8:25 AM       1           0      3     0         1        0      2     0        2      31      1      0    2       16      0    0                   59              908
     8:30 AM       0           0      4     0         1        0      0     0        1      29      0      0    1       26      0    0                   62              884
     8:35 AM       0           1      7     0         2        0      1     0        1      26      0      0    1       21      0    0                   60              849
     8:40 AM       3           1      3     0         2        0      0     0        1      25      1      0    1       38      0    0                   75              830
     8:45 AM       0           0      5     0         0        1      2     0        0      24      0      0    1       34      0    0                   67              817
     8:50 AM       0           1      2     0         0        0      1     0        0      27      2      0    2       22      0    0                   57              800
     8:55 AM       0           0      6     0         0        0      2     0        0      41      1      0    3       21      0    0                   74              794
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                          Total
  All Vehicles     36          4    120     0         20       0     16     0        8     424      8      0    20     276      4    0                          936
 Heavy Trucks       8          4      8                0       0      4              0      16      0            0      24      0                                64
  Pedestrians                  0                               0                             0                           0                                        0
    Bicycles       0           0      0               0        0      0              0       0      0           0        0      0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 10:59 AM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 8th St -- Bolton Hill Rd                                                                                              QC JOB #: 12000114
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                       47           24                        Peak-Hour: 4:05 PM -- 5:05 PM                                       0.0        4.2
                       13     16    18
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0


       37    7                           12   59
                                                                                                                     2.7   0.0                      8.3       3.4
             9               1.03        22
                                                                                                                           0.0                      4.5
       18    2                           25   36
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
                         2    5     9
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0

                       43           16
                                                                                                                                  0.0        0.0



                              4                                                                                                    0    0    1



                                                                                                                           0                          0

             0                            1                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                              1                                                                                                    0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                     8th St                       8th St                     Bolton Hill Rd               Bolton Hill Rd               Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        0            1       0    0      1        2       1    0        0       1       0      0    0        0       1    0               7
    4:05 PM        0            0       1    0      2        1       1    0        0       2       0      0    2        1       2    0              12
    4:10 PM        0            0       0    0      0        0       5    0        2       1       0      0    1        3       1    0              13
    4:15 PM        0            1       2    0      0        2       1    0        1       0       0      0    3        1       1    0              12
    4:20 PM        0            2       3    0      0        2       0    0        0       0       0      0    1        2       1    0              11
    4:25 PM        0            0       2    0      0        0       2    0        0       0       0      0    0        3       1    0               8
    4:30 PM        1            0       0    0      2        0       0    0        2       0       0      0    0        2       1    0               8
    4:35 PM        0            0       0    0      4        1       0    0        0       2       0      0    3        4       2    0              16
    4:40 PM        0            0       0    0      2        1       2    0        0       1       1      0    2        0       0    0               9
    4:45 PM        0            1       0    0      1        3       0    0        0       0       0      0    4        1       1    0              11
    4:50 PM        0            0       1    0      3        2       0    0        1       2       0      0    1        4       0    0              14
    4:55 PM        0            0       0    0      2        1       0    0        0       0       1      0    3        1       1    0               9              130
    5:00 PM        1            1       0    0      2        3       2    0        1       1       0      0    5        0       1    0              17              140
    5:05 PM        0            0       1    0      1        0       0    0        0       1       0      0    1        3       1    0               8              136
    5:10 PM        0            0       1    0      1        2       3    0        0       4       0      0    1        1       1    0              14              137
    5:15 PM        0            1       1    0      0        0       2    0        1       0       0      0    3        4       1    0              13              138
    5:20 PM        0            2       1    0      1        1       3    0        0       0       0      0    0        1       2    0              11              138
    5:25 PM        0            0       0    0      0        4       3    0        1       0       0      0    3        1       0    0              12              142
    5:30 PM        0            2       2    0      1        0       3    0        0       2       0      0    3        3       0    0              16              150
    5:35 PM        0            1       1    0      2        5       0    0        3       2       0      0    1        0       1    0              16              150
    5:40 PM        1            0       0    0      4        1       3    0        0       1       1      0    3        1       1    0              16              157
    5:45 PM        0            1       1    0      5        4       1    0        0       4       0      0    1        2       0    0              19              165
    5:50 PM        1            0       0    0      0        2       2    0        0       1       0      0    1        3       0    0              10              161
    5:55 PM        0            0       2    0      1        2       0    0        1       1       1      0    2        1       2    0              13              165
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                   Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right     U                     Total
  All Vehicles     0            4       4    0      24      24       8    0        4      12       4      0    28      20       4    0                     136
 Heavy Trucks      0            0       0            0       0       0             0       0       0            0       0       0                           0
  Pedestrians                   0                            0                             0                            0                                   0
    Bicycles       0            0       0           0        0       0             0       0       0           0        0       0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 11:00 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Territorial Hwy -- Perkins Rd                                                                                         QC JOB #: 12000112
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                    166             148                         Peak-Hour: 4:05 PM -- 5:05 PM                                     4.8        8.1
                       10     86    70
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 8.1 1.4


       14    6                            66   83
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                       6.1       4.8
             4               0.95          3
                                                                                                                           0.0                       0.0
       12    2                            14   80
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                       0.0       2.5
                         1    76    6
                                                                                                                                  0.0 10.5 16.7

                    102             83
                                                                                                                                  6.9        10.8



                              0                                                                                                    1    1     0



                                                                                                                           1                           0

             0                             1                                                                               0                           1

                                                                                                                           0                           0

                              0                                                                                                    0    0     0




                              NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                           NA                                                                               NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count                 Territorial Hwy               Territorial Hwy                 Perkins Rd                  Perkins Rd                   Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0            4        1   0        2       9        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0      7    0                23
    4:05 PM        0            4        0   0        5       6        1   0        0       0      0      0    1        0      5    0                22
    4:10 PM        0            8        0   0        2      12        0   0        0       1      0      0    0        0      3    0                26
    4:15 PM        0            6        2   0        2      11        1   0        1       1      0      0    1        1      7    0                33
    4:20 PM        1            7        0   0        9       8        1   0        0       0      1      0    0        1      5    0                33
    4:25 PM        0            6        0   0        4       4        1   0        1       1      0      0    3        0      7    0                27
    4:30 PM        0            6        0   0        7       4        1   0        1       0      0      0    1        0      7    0                27
    4:35 PM        0            7        0   0        6       7        1   0        0       1      0      0    1        0      3    0                26
    4:40 PM        0            5        3   0        7       8        0   0        0       0      0      0    2        0      8    0                33
    4:45 PM        0            8        0   0        8       3        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0      5    0                25
    4:50 PM        0            6        1   0        6      11        2   0        0       0      0      0    0        0      7    0                33
    4:55 PM        0            8        0   0        7       4        2   0        2       0      1      0    1        0      5    0                30              338
    5:00 PM        0            5        0   0        7       8        0   0        1       0      0      0    3        1      4    0                29              344
    5:05 PM        0            5        0   0       10       6        1   0        1       0      0      0    0        0      5    0                28              350
    5:10 PM        0            6        1   0        4      11        2   0        0       0      0      0    1        2      3    0                30              354
    5:15 PM        0            3        0   0       10       8        1   0        0       0      0      0    1        0      6    0                29              350
    5:20 PM        0            7        2   0        6       2        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0      1    0                19              336
    5:25 PM        0            3        2   0        5       6        1   0        0       0      1      0    0        0      6    0                24              333
    5:30 PM        0            2        0   0        5       8        1   0        2       0      0      0    1        1      3    0                23              329
    5:35 PM        0            6        0   0        6      10        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0      4    0                26              329
    5:40 PM        0            2        0   0        1       8        0   0        0       0      0      0    2        0      6    0                19              315
    5:45 PM        0            6        0   0        6       4        2   0        0       0      0      0    1        0      6    0                25              315
    5:50 PM        0            5        0   0       13      11        1   0        1       0      0      0    0        1      4    0                36              318
    5:55 PM        0            3        0   0        5       5        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0      5    0                18              306
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     0           76      16    0       84      88        8   0        0       0      0      0    12       0     80    0                       364
 Heavy Trucks      0            8        4            0      16        0            0       0      0            0       0      0                             28
  Pedestrians                   0                             0                             0                           0                                     0
    Bicycles       0            0        0           0        0        0            0       0      0           0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 11:00 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Territorial Hwy -- Cheney Dr                                                                                          QC JOB #: 12000110
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                    222             178                         Peak-Hour: 4:05 PM -- 5:05 PM                                     5.4        6.7
                         0   190 32
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 4.7 9.4


       0     0                            16   21
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0               0.98          0
                                                                                                                           0.0                      0.0
       0     0                             5   35
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                      0.0       8.6
                         0   162    3
                                                                                                                                  0.0 7.4 0.0

                    195             165
                                                                                                                                  4.6        7.3



                              0                                                                                                    0    2    0



                                                                                                                           0                          1

             10                            1                                                                               0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                              1                                                                                                    0    2    0




                              NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                           NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                              NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count                 Territorial Hwy               Territorial Hwy                 Cheney Dr                   Cheney Dr                   Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0           13        1   0       3       14        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0     0     0               32
    4:05 PM        0           12        0   0       2       17        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     3     0               34
    4:10 PM        0           16        0   0       1       10        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0               28
    4:15 PM        0           12        0   0       6       18        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     3     0               39
    4:20 PM        0           13        0   0       4       16        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0               34
    4:25 PM        0           23        0   0       5       15        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0               44
    4:30 PM        0           12        0   0       3       18        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0               34
    4:35 PM        0           10        0   0       2       14        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0     1     0               28
    4:40 PM        0           16        0   0       2       16        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0               35
    4:45 PM        0           14        0   0       3       16        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     0     0               33
    4:50 PM        0           14        0   0       1       16        0   0        0       0      0      0    3        0     2     0               36
    4:55 PM        0           11        2   0       1       11        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0               26              403
    5:00 PM        0            9        1   0       2       23        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0     1     0               37              408
    5:05 PM        0            8        2   0       4       15        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0               30              404
    5:10 PM        0            8        0   0       0       23        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0               32              408
    5:15 PM        0           11        1   0       3       18        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     1     0               34              403
    5:20 PM        0           11        1   0       1       19        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     0     0               32              401
    5:25 PM        0            9        0   0       2       10        0   0        0       0      0      0    2        0     0     0               23              380
    5:30 PM        0            8        1   0       3       14        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0     1     0               28              374
    5:35 PM        0            9        0   0       0       10        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     0     0               19              365
    5:40 PM        0           15        0   0       3       18        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0     0     0               37              367
    5:45 PM        0           10        0   0       3       26        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0     1     0               41              375
    5:50 PM        0           13        1   0       3       17        0   0        0       0      0      0    0        0     3     0               37              376
    5:55 PM        0           12        0   0       2       11        0   0        0       0      0      0    1        0     2     0               28              378
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0          176        0   0       24     192        0   0        0       0      0      0    12       0    12     0                      416
 Heavy Trucks      0            0        0            0      12        0            0       0      0            0       0     0                             12
  Pedestrians                   0                             0                             8                           0                                    8
    Bicycles       0            0        0           0        0        0            0       0      0           0        0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 11:00 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Territorial Hwy -- Bolton Hill Rd                                                                                    QC JOB #: 12000108
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                         DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                    312          215                         Peak-Hour: 4:05 PM -- 5:05 PM                                       4.5        5.1
                       41 240 31
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                                 2.4 4.6 6.5


       65    18                        22   32
                                                                                                                   4.6   5.6                       4.5       3.1
             9            1.03          7
                                                                                                                         11.1                      0.0
       51    24                         3   44
                                                                                                                   3.9   0.0                       0.0       6.8
                       17 175    4
                                                                                                                                 11.8 5.1 0.0

                    267          196
                                                                                                                                 4.1        5.6



                           0                                                                                                      0    1    0



                                                                                                                         0                           0

             13                         0                                                                                0                           0

                                                                                                                         1                           0

                           0                                                                                                      0    1    0




                           NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                        NA                                                                                NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count              Territorial Hwy               Territorial Hwy                Bolton Hill Rd               Bolton Hill Rd                Total       Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At     Left     Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        2        15        0   0       2       19        1   0        2       0       3      0    1        0       4    0               49
    4:05 PM        0        15        0   0       2       25        3   0        1       2       1      0    1        0       3    0               53
    4:10 PM        2        10        3   0       2       18        3   0        2       0       3      0    0        0       1    0               44
    4:15 PM        1        22        1   0       3       19        4   0        2       0       0      0    0        1       4    0               57
    4:20 PM        2        15        0   0       6       25        2   0        1       0       1      0    0        0       2    0               54
    4:25 PM        1        17        0   0       2       18        2   0        4       0       4      0    1        0       5    0               54
    4:30 PM        3        18        0   0       2       17        2   0        1       2       1      0    0        2       1    0               49
    4:35 PM        1        16        0   0       4       23        3   0        0       0       1      0    0        1       0    0               49
    4:40 PM        2        18        0   0       2       16        5   0        2       2       4      0    0        1       3    0               55
    4:45 PM        2         9        0   0       3       16        4   0        0       0       2      0    0        0       1    0               37
    4:50 PM        1        11        0   0       1       29        4   0        2       0       1      0    1        0       1    0               51
    4:55 PM        2        17        0   0       4       12        3   0        3       3       4      0    0        2       0    0               50              602
    5:00 PM        0         7        0   0       0       22        6   0        0       0       2      0    0        0       1    0               38              591
    5:05 PM        2        10        0   0       2       25        4   0        3       0       2      0    0        2       2    0               52              590
    5:10 PM        2         9        0   0       6       30        5   0        2       0       1      0    0        1       0    0               56              602
    5:15 PM        2         9        0   0       6       10        3   0        4       0       3      0    0        1       0    0               38              583
    5:20 PM        1        11        0   0       1       24        5   0        1       0       0      0    0        1       1    0               45              574
    5:25 PM        1        10        0   0       1       15        3   0        6       0       3      0    0        0       2    0               41              561
    5:30 PM        0        12        0   0       2       18        6   0        2       0       1      0    0        0       0    0               41              553
    5:35 PM        1         9        1   0       1       21        3   0        5       0       1      0    0        0       2    0               44              548
    5:40 PM        0        12        0   0       2       24        4   0        1       1       1      0    0        1       3    0               49              542
    5:45 PM        2        13        0   0       0       14        1   0        1       1       4      0    0        0       3    0               39              544
    5:50 PM        1         9        0   0       3       28        7   0        5       1       3      0    0        0       1    0               58              551
    5:55 PM        0        20        0   0       1       12        4   0        1       0       1      0    0        0       4    0               43              544
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left     Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right     U                      Total
  All Vehicles     20      152        0   0       24     244      52    0        16      8     28       0    4        4     20     0                      572
 Heavy Trucks       4        4        0            0      16        0             0      4       0           0        0       0                            28
  Pedestrians                0                             0                             8                            0                                     8
    Bicycles       0         1        0           0        0        0            0       0       0           0        0       0                             1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 11:00 AM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Territorial Hwy -- OR 126                                                                                             QC JOB #: 12000106
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                    314          387                           Peak-Hour: 4:05 PM -- 5:05 PM                                      5.1        3.9
                       45 201 68
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                                  8.9 4.5 4.4


       354   39                        174   616
                                                                                                                    5.4   12.8                      2.3      3.4
             217          0.91         261
                                                                                                                          9.7                       4.6
       325   69                        181   380
                                                                                                                    8.9   4.3                       2.8      9.2
                       48 174 95
                                                                                                                                  6.3 3.4 11.6

                    451          317
                                                                                                                                  3.8        6.3



                           0                                                                                                       0    1    0



                                                                                                                          0                           0

             5                           2                                                                                0                           0

                                                                                                                          0                           0

                           4                                                                                                       0    1    0




                           NA                                                                                                           NA




             NA                        NA                                                                                 NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                           NA



 5-Min Count              Territorial Hwy                 Territorial Hwy                  OR 126                      OR 126                      Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0        22      14    0          8      23        4   0        4      13      2      0     6      17    15     0               128
    4:05 PM        6        11        1   0          6      17        6   0        4      21      5      0    15      19    14     0               125
    4:10 PM        6        15        7   0          4       8        2   0        2      18      5      0    15      24    20     0               126
    4:15 PM        6        11        8   0         13      31        4   0        4      19     11      0     8      16    11     0               142
    4:20 PM        4        15        6   0          7      13        0   0        1      16      5      0    15      19    12     0               113
    4:25 PM        7        19      11    0          3      18        3   0        6      11      3      0    18      33    12     0               144
    4:30 PM        3        11        8   0          6      15        6   0        4      12      2      0    18      22    18     0               125
    4:35 PM        3        12        6   0          3      20        3   0        4      17      7      0    13      19    11     0               118
    4:40 PM        0        18      14    0          5      12        2   0        3      39    10       0    10      29    14     0               156
    4:45 PM        1        20        8   0          5      20        3   0        2       9      6      0    17      17    15     0               123
    4:50 PM        4        11        8   0          7      15        8   0        3      25      1      0    23      25    23     0               153
    4:55 PM        2        22        7   0          3      15        4   0        4      16      8      0    14      23      9    0               127            1580
    5:00 PM        6         9      11    0          6      17        4   0        2      14      6      0    15      15    15     0               120            1572
    5:05 PM        6        10        6   0          3      20        4   0        6      14      5      0    13      21    15     0               123            1570
    5:10 PM        4        16        9   0          3      15        1   0        3      20      5      0    12      16    11     0               115            1559
    5:15 PM        2        21        5   0          8      17        2   0        3      21      5      0    12      27    23     0               146            1563
    5:20 PM        3        16        7   0          7      11        4   0        1       9      8      0    18      23    14     0               121            1571
    5:25 PM        3        20        7   0          1      18        4   0        8      15      7      0    16      15    15     0               129            1556
    5:30 PM        3        13        7   0          9      23        2   0        5      13      1      0    23      11      7    0               117            1548
    5:35 PM        1        17        2   0          5      27        2   0        2      12      5      0    17      18    18     0               126            1556
    5:40 PM        3         2        2   0          3      11        3   0        5      20      9      0    10      23    14     0               105            1505
    5:45 PM        1        32        3   0          6      22        3   0        2      15      7      0    17      21    13     0               142            1524
    5:50 PM        4        13        4   0          3      16        2   0        2      11      2      0     9      15    16     0                97            1468
    5:55 PM        4        22        5   0          4      14        4   0        2      15      2      0    10      15    11     0               108            1449
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     20      196     120    0         68     188      52    0        32    292    68       0   200     284   208     0                      1728
 Heavy Trucks       0        4      12               4      16        4             8     36      8            4       4      4                            104
  Pedestrians                0                               0                             0                           0                                    0
    Bicycles       0         1        0             0        0        0            0       0      0            0       0      0                             1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 11:00 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Huston Rd -- OR 126                                                                                                    QC JOB #: 12000104
 CITY/STATE: Veneta, OR                                                                                                           DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                       27          31                          Peak-Hour: 4:05 PM -- 5:05 PM                                       7.4        12.9
                       11    8     8
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                                   9.1 0.0 12.5


       633   11                          13   749
                                                                                                                     2.5   18.2                       7.7      2.5
             349            0.93        612
                                                                                                                           7.4                        2.3
       375   15                         124   393
                                                                                                                     7.7   6.7                        3.2      7.1
                       10    7     36
                                                                                                                                   10.0 14.3 2.8

                    147            53
                                                                                                                                   3.4        5.7



                             0                                                                                                      0    0     0



                                                                                                                           0                            0

             1                            0                                                                                0                            0

                                                                                                                           1                            0

                             0                                                                                                      1    1     0




                            NA                                                                                                           NA




             NA                         NA                                                                                 NA                         NA




                            NA                                                                                                           NA



 5-Min Count                  Huston Rd                      Huston Rd                      OR 126                      OR 126                       Total      Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        1           0      4     0        0        1      1     0        0      27      0      0    11      38      1    0                 84
    4:05 PM        1           0      1     0        2        1      0     0        2      36      1      0    14      53      2    0                113
    4:10 PM        2           1      2     0        1        1      2     0        1      22      1      0     8      45      1    0                 87
    4:15 PM        1           0      3     0        0        2      1     0        0      39      0      0     8      44      2    0                100
    4:20 PM        0           1      4     0        1        0      2     0        1      29      2      0    10      54      0    0                104
    4:25 PM        2           1      5     0        1        0      1     0        0      24      1      0     6      56      2    0                 99
    4:30 PM        0           1      4     0        0        0      0     0        1      21      1      0    11      55      2    0                 96
    4:35 PM        0           1      4     0        0        1      1     0        2      20      1      0    13      45      1    0                 89
    4:40 PM        2           0      3     0        1        1      0     0        0      47      2      0     6      47      1    0                110
    4:45 PM        1           0      3     0        0        0      2     0        1      32      2      0    13      55      0    0                109
    4:50 PM        1           0      3     0        0        1      1     0        2      25      1      0    14      58      0    0                106
    4:55 PM        0           0      4     0        1        0      1     0        0      33      2      0     6      45      2    0                 94            1191
    5:00 PM        0           2      0     0        1        1      0     0        1      21      1      0    15      55      0    0                 97            1204
    5:05 PM        1           0      0     0        0        0      2     0        2      33      1      1     7      50      0    0                 97            1188
    5:10 PM        1           0      1     0        0        1      3     0        0      30      1      0     2      34      0    0                 73            1174
    5:15 PM        2           0      1     0        0        0      3     0        1      24      3      0    14      61      1    0                110            1184
    5:20 PM        2           0      2     0        1        2      2     0        2      28      5      0     7      52      3    0                106            1186
    5:25 PM        1           0      4     0        2        0      2     0        1      30      1      0    14      41      2    0                 98            1185
    5:30 PM        2           0      2     0        1        0      1     0        0      20      2      0    16      30      5    0                 79            1168
    5:35 PM        0           0      1     0        0        0      1     0        0      28      1      0    16      58      1    0                106            1185
    5:40 PM        2           1      3     0        1        0      1     0        0      23      3      0    15      48      4    0                101            1176
    5:45 PM        1           0      3     0        0        0      1     0        0      14      4      0    11      42      1    0                 77            1144
    5:50 PM        3           0      2     0        0        0      1     0        3      23      0      0    11      46      0    0                 89            1127
    5:55 PM        0           1      4     0        0        0      1     0        2      12      3      0    10      33      1    0                 67            1100
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     16          0     36     0        4        8     12     0        12    416    20       0   132     640      4    0                       1300
 Heavy Trucks       4          0      0              4        0      0               0     20      0            0       4      0                             32
  Pedestrians                  0                              0                             0                           0                                     0
    Bicycles       0           0      0              0        0      0              0       0      0            0       0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 11:00 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Central Rd -- OR 126                                                                                                    QC JOB #: 12000102
 CITY/STATE: Eugene, OR                                                                                                            DATE: Wed, Jan 15 2014
                       57           129                          Peak-Hour: 4:05 PM -- 5:05 PM                                      7.0        5.4
                       53     0      4
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                                    5.7 0.0 25.0


       464   124                           5    416
                                                                                                                       7.5   5.6                      0.0      7.7
             801             0.97         411
                                                                                                                             3.0                      7.8
       926   1                             0    805
                                                                                                                       3.3   0.0                      0.0      3.1
                         0    0      0
                                                                                                                                    0.0 0.0 0.0

                         1           0
                                                                                                                                    0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                      0    0    0



                                                                                                                             0                          0

             0                             0                                                                                 0                          0

                                                                                                                             0                          0

                              0                                                                                                      0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                           NA




             NA                           NA                                                                                 NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                           NA



 5-Min Count                   Central Rd                      Central Rd                     OR 126                      OR 126                     Total      Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0            0       0    0         1        0       2    0         8     52      0      0    0       33      2    0               98
    4:05 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       5    0         4     59      0      0    0       34      0    0              102
    4:10 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       6    0        11     69      0      0    0       32      1    0              119
    4:15 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       6    0         7     58      1      0    0       28      1    0              101
    4:20 PM        0            0       0    0         1        0       5    0        10     75      0      0    0       37      0    0              128
    4:25 PM        0            0       0    0         1        0       7    0        11     66      0      0    0       36      1    0              122
    4:30 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       1    0        13     70      0      0    0       32      0    0              116
    4:35 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       4    0        13     72      0      0    0       29      0    0              118
    4:40 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       2    0         4     61      0      0    0       26      2    0               95
    4:45 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       3    0        17     63      0      0    0       54      0    0              137
    4:50 PM        0            0       0    0         2        0       2    0        14     74      0      0    0       37      0    0              129
    4:55 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       8    0         8     65      0      0    0       29      0    0              110            1375
    5:00 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       4    0        12     69      0      0    0       37      0    0              122            1399
    5:05 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       4    0         9     60      0      0    0       25      0    0               98            1395
    5:10 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       3    0         9     38      0      0    1       33      0    0               84            1360
    5:15 PM        1            0       0    0         0        0       2    0        13     82      0      0    0       26      1    0              125            1384
    5:20 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       6    0        11     66      0      0    0       25      0    0              108            1364
    5:25 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       5    0         9     62      0      0    0       30      0    0              106            1348
    5:30 PM        0            0       0    0         0        0       2    0        15     50      0      0    0       37      0    0              104            1336
    5:35 PM        1            0       0    0         0        0       3    0         5     79      0      0    0       24      2    0              114            1332
    5:40 PM        1            0       0    0         0        0       0    0         9     68      0      0    0       24      2    0              104            1341
    5:45 PM        0            0       0    0         1        0       5    0        10     71      0      0    0       26      0    0              113            1317
    5:50 PM        0            0       0    0         1        1       3    0        11     63      0      0    0       15      1    0               95            1283
    5:55 PM        0            0       0    0         2        0       2    0        13     41      0      0    0       30      0    0               88            1261
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U       Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles     0            0       0    0         8        0      28    0      140     792      0      0    0      468      8    0                     1444
 Heavy Trucks      0            0       0              0        0       4             8      12      0           0       32      0                           56
  Pedestrians                   0                               0                             0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0            0       0              0        0       0             0       0      0           0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/21/2014 11:00 AM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                        Gary's Traffic Data
                                                                            310 Pitney Lane, Unit 39

                                                                           Junction City, OR                          97448

                                                                     Fast, Accurate, High Quality Counts

                                                                                                                        File Name              : Veneta Hwy 126 @ Hwy 200
                                                                                                                        Site Code              : Hwy 126
                                                                                                                        Start Date             : 6/10/2014
                                                                                                                        Page No                :1
                                                                                  Groups Printed- Unshifted
                    TERRITORIAL HWY                                           HWY 126                TERRITORIAL HWY                                        HWY 126
                       From North                                            From East                   From South                                           From West
Start Time    Left Thru Right Peds                  App. Total       Left Thru Right Peds    App. Total    Left Thru Right Peds   App. Total     Left Thru Right Peds             App. Total   Int. Total
 04:00 PM      21   65    11     0                              97    26   70    35     0       131         22   66    33     0      121          13    43   27     0                 83         432
 04:15 PM      25   54    12     0                              91    52   72    36     0       160         11   48    19     0       78          17    48   21     1                 87         416
 04:30 PM      14   42     6     0                              62    39   65    33     0       137          7   71    20     0       98          17    61   19     0                 97         394
 04:45 PM      19   50    15     0                              84    11   21    19     0        51          7   49    23     0       79          12    47   15     8                 82         296
     Total     79 211     44     0                             334   128 228 123        0       479         47 234     95     0      376          59 199     82     9                349        1538

 05:00 PM      10     56    16           0                      82    21    13    21     0       55          13    55   14    0       82            24       57        13    1        95         314
 05:15 PM      14     76    15           0                     105    15    39    38     0       92           9    64   22    0       95            16       46        22    3        87         379
 05:30 PM      15     72    21           0                     108    21    29    29     0       79          17    62   11    0       90            13       45        16    2        76         353
 05:45 PM      16     83    13           0                     112    43    42    29     0      114          15    62   16    0       93            19       45        18    1        83         402
     Total     55    287    65           0                     407   100   123   117     0      340          54   243   63    0      360            72      193        69    7       341        1448

Grand Total    134 498 109               0                      228 351 240
                                                               741                       0      819  101 477 158              0      736         131 392 151                 16      690        2986
 Apprch %     18.1 67.2 14.7             0                     27.8 42.9 29.3            0          13.7 64.8 21.5            0                   19 56.8 21.9              2.3
  Total %      4.5 16.7  3.7             0                24.8  7.6 11.8    8            0     27.4  3.4   16  5.3            0     24.6         4.4 13.1  5.1              0.5     23.1


                                                                                         TERRITORIAL HWY
                                                                                        Out     In    Total
                                                                                         848     741   1589


                                                                                         109  498          134    0
                                                                                       Right Thru         Left Peds
                              1251


                                              131




                                                                                                                                               Right Thru
                              Total




                                             Left




                                                                                                                                                 240



                                                                                                                                                             Out
                                                                                                                                                              684




                                                                                                 North
                                                         392
                                             Peds Right Thru




                                                                                                                                                             HWY 126
                                                                                                                                                      351
                                   690
                                   In




                                                                                                                                                               In




                                                                                         6/10/2014 04:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                819
                                                    151
                           HWY 126




                                                                                                                                               Left Peds




                                                                                         6/10/2014 05:45 PM
                                                                                                                                                228
                            561




                                                                                         Unshifted
                           Out




                                                                                                                                                             Total
                                                                                                                                                             1503
                                               16




                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                       Left Thru Right Peds
                                                                                        101  477   158    0


                                                                                         877     736   1613
                                                                                        Out     In    Total
                                                                                         TERRITORIAL HWY
