                                                 DRAFT

 1                               CITY OF DELTONA, FLORIDA
 2                           PLANNING & ZONING BOARD MEETING
 3                              WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 15, 2014
 4
 5   A Regular Meeting of the Deltona Planning and Zoning Board was held on Wednesday, January
 6   15, 2014, in the City’s Commission Chambers located at 2345 Providence Boulevard, Deltona,
 7   Florida.
 8
 9   1.     CALL TO ORDER:
10
11   The meeting was called to order at 7:00 p.m. by Secretary Olasimbo.
12
13   2.     ROLL CALL:
14
15   Chairman                             David McKnight                Present
16   Vice-Chairman                        Victor Ramos                  Present
17   Member                               Tom Burbank                   Present
18   Member                               Wendy Hickey                  Absent-Excused
19   Member                               Noble Olasimbo                Present
20   Member                               Adam Walosik                  Present
21   Member                               Herb Zischkau                 Absent-Unexcused
22
23   Also present: Planning & Development Director, Chris Bowley, AICP; Ron Paradise, Assistant
24   Director of Planning and Development; City Attorney, Becky Vose; Administrative Assistant,
25   Kathrine Kyp.
26
27   3.     APPROVAL OF MINUTES:
28
29   A.     Minutes:
30
31          1. Meeting – December 18, 2013.
32
33   Motion by Member Olasimbo, seconded by Member Burbank to adopt the minutes of the
34   Planning & Zoning Board Meeting of December 18, 2013, as presented.
35
36   Motion carried unanimously.
37
38
39   4.     PUBLIC COMMENTS:
40
41   Daniel Dudley, resident from 1089 Pearl Tree Rd., came before the Board to discuss the Saxon
42   Sterling project. Chris Bowley stated, at the December 18, 2013, Planning and Zoning Board
43   meeting, it was discussed that since the Saxon Sterling agenda item was deferred to date certain of
44   February 19, 2014, the Board cannot have discussion on the matter until that time. Member Ramos
45   asked Mr. Bowley if Mr. Dudley could speak on the issue now. Mr. Bowley referred to City
46   Attorney Becky Vose, who stated the appropriate action would be to make a presentation to the
47   Board on February 19, 2014 when the public hearing takes place. Ms. Vose directed Mr. Dudley
48   to address any questions to Staff in private after the meeting, if so desired.
                                               DRAFT
     City of Deltona, Florida
     Planning & Zoning Board Meeting
     January 15, 2014
     Page 2 of 3

 1   5.      OLD BUSINESS: None
 2
 3   6.      NEW BUSINESS:
 4
 5           A.       Election of Officers.
 6
 7   Secretary Olasimbo called for nominations for the position of Chairman. Member Ramos
 8   nominated David McKnight. With no further nominations for the position of Chairman,
 9   nominations were closed. The motion was seconded by Member Burbank and the motion carried
10   unanimously.
11
12   Chairman McKnight called for nominations for the position of Vice-Chairman. Member Walosik
13   nominated Tom Burbank. With no further nominations for the position of Vice-Chairman,
14   nominations were closed. The motion was seconded by Member Ramos and the motion carried
15   unanimously.
16
17   Chairman McKnight called for nominations for the position of Secretary. Member Walosik
18   nominated Noble Olasimbo. With no further nominations for the position of Secretary,
19   nominations were closed. The motion was seconded by Member Burbank and the motion carried
20   unanimously.
21
22          B.     Ordinance No. 03-2014, Amending Chapter 70, Section 30 “Definitions”,
23   repealing existing floodplain regulations of the Land Development Code (Chapter 90),
24   adopting new Chapter 90 regulations, and adopting new floodplain maps.
25
26   Mr. Paradise provided a brief summary on Ordinance No. 03-2014.
27
28   Motion by Member Burbank, seconded by Member Olasimbo, to recommend that the City
29   Commission adopt Ordinance No. 03-2014, Amending Chapter 70, Section 30 “Definitions”,
30   repealing existing floodplain regulations of the Land Development Code (Chapter 90),
31   adopting new Chapter 90 regulations, and adopting new floodplain maps as presented.
32
33   Motion carried unanimously.
34
35   7.      DISCUSSION:
36
37   A. By the Board:
38
39   Member Burbank asked that Staff bring the Board up to date on the status of the discussions to
40   allow chickens in resident’s back yards.
41
42   Member McKnight asked if Member Zischkau had called or emailed Staff to notify of his absence
43   at tonight’s meeting. Ms. Kyp stated, the last known response from Member Zischkau, was that he
44   was to be in attendance of tonight’s meeting. Member McKnight stated that Member Zischkau has
45   missed several meetings and would like the Board to emphasize to him, and the Commissioner
                                                DRAFT
     City of Deltona, Florida
     Planning & Zoning Board Meeting
     January 15, 2014
     Page 3 of 3

 1   that appointed him, the importance of Member Zischkau attending the meeting or at least notifying
 2   Staff and the Board of his attendance.
 3
 4   B. By the City Attorney:
 5
 6   Ms. Vose updated the Board on the discussions regarding chickens. She stated that two City
 7   Commission meetings ago, they had voted not to move forward on it.
 8
 9   C. By Planning & Development Staff: None
10
11   8.      ADJOURNMENT:
12
13   There being no further business, the meeting adjourned at 7:17 p.m.
14
15
16
17                                                      ____________________________________
18   ATTEST:                                            David McKnight, CHAIRMAN
19
20   ________________________________________
21   Kathrine Kyp, RECORDING SECRETARY
                          AGENDA MEMO

TO:            Planning and Zoning Board               AGENDA DATE: February 19, 2014

FROM:          Chris Bowley, AICP, Director            AGENDA ITEM: 6A
               Planning and Development Services

SUBJECT:       RZ13-008, BPUD Rezoning for Saxon-Sterling Silver (Ordinance No. 02-2014)



 LOCATION:      The subject property is located at the northwest and northeast corners of the intersection
                of Saxon Blvd. and Sterling Silver Blvd.
 BACKGROUND:    The City of Deltona Planning and Development Services Department has received an
                application from Deltona Group Investors, LLC, to rezone the subject property from
                MPUD to BPUD.

                The proposed property to be rezoned has an extensive history. In 2005, the subject
                property and adjacent land, which totaled over 20 acres, was rezoned to Mixed Use
                Planned Unit Development (MPUD) that contained four (4) lots. According to the
                approved MPUD Development Agreement (DA), each lot was earmarked for different
                uses. The uses included a residential component and commercial entitlements. The
                property was platted into four (4) lots and recorded into the public records as the
                Retirement Community at Sterling Park MPUD. In 2006, a final site plan was approved
                for lot 3 of the MPUD, which allowed for a 118-unit age-targeted assisted living
                facility. To date, the assisted living facility is the only use to be developed on the
                Retirement Community at Sterling Park MPUD property.

                The applicant has now applied to rezone only lots 1, 2, and 4 and other residual land
                obtained from the vacation of road “B” from MPUD to BPUD. The rezoning
                application has been submitted with a new DA and a Master Development Plan (MDP)
                that features two (2) development scenarios (Options 1 and 2). Option 1 is commercial-
                retail oriented, featuring the ability to construct spaces for a myriad of uses, including
                and not limited to fast food restaurants, retail leasable area, a convenience store with
                fuel sales, and a medium-sized grocery store. Option 2 retains the grocery and
                convenience store formats on lots 2 and 4, as combined, and includes an office- medical
                office use on lot 1, in lieu of commercial-retail space at that location.

                For more information concerning this proposal, including detailed graphics, public
                service analysis, etc., proposed Conditions of Approval, please see the attached staff
                report.




                                             -1-
 ORIGINATING
 DEPARTMENT:       Department of Planning & Development Services

 PRESENTED BY
 & STAFF
 RECOMMENDATION:   Presented by Chris Bowley, AICP, Planning & Development Services Director. Staff
                   recommends that only with the inclusion of the following Conditions of Approval
                   and the proposed changes by staff and GMB to the DA and TIA, respectively,
                   approval of Project RZ13-008; Ordinance No. 02-2014.

                   1. Limit hours of operation on lots 2 and 4 for commercial uses from 7:00 AM
                      to 10:00 PM for services, deliveries, trash collection, and general use;
                   2. Place service areas away from residential uses to the greatest extent possible
                      and have those service areas screened from adjacent properties;
                   3. Limit a cap of 0.16 FAR on lots 2 and 4 (combined) that could allow for a
                      ±44,000 SF facility, as listed on the MDP, and a ±5,000 SF commercial
                      outparcel; following subdivision of the property, per Chapter 106 of the Land
                      Development Code;
                   4. Scale, orient, mass, and locate any proposed commercial development as
                      close to Saxon Blvd. as possible;
                   5. Limit permitted land uses on lot 1 to office uses and lots 2 and 4 to uses as
                      listed in the C-1 zoning category, to exclude bars/nightclubs, gas stations,
                      convenience stores, fast food restaurants, automobile service stations – type
                      C, and other uses not allowed in the C-1 zoning category; and
                   6. Provide access management, as recommended in GMB’s review of the
                      submitted TIA, to provide a signalized intersection, a deceleration lane along
                      the frontage of lots 2 and 4, to maintain the existing 1-ft. non-vehicular
                      ingress and egress easement along the frontage of lots 2 and 4, and comply
                      with the Land Development Code for access management and other design
                      standards.

POTENTIAL
MOTION:            “I hereby move to approve Project RZ13-008, Ordinance No. 02-2014, with the
                   listed Conditions of Approval in the staff report and revisions to the
                   Development Agreement and Transportation Impact Analysis, as presented.”

ATTACHMENTS:       RZ13-008 Staff Report
                   Ordinance No. 02-2014




                                         -2-
                                                                CITY OF DELTONA



Memorandum
To:          Planning and Zoning Board

From:        Chris Bowley, AICP

Date:    December 7, 2013
Revised: February 4, 2014

Re:          Project No. RZ13-008: Amendment to the Official Zoning Map for the property
             known as Saxon-Sterling Silver, located at the intersection of Sterling Silver and
             Saxon Boulevards.



      I. SUMMARY OF APPLICATION:

        APPLICANT: CPH, Inc.
                   Larry Wray, P.E.
                   500 W. Fulton Street
                   Sanford, FL 32771

        Request: The City of Deltona has received an application from Deltona Group Investors,
        LLC, to rezone the subject property from MPUD to BPUD and amend the Master
        Development Plan (MDP) and Development Agreement (DA) (See Exhibit A).

        A.      SITE INFORMATION:

                1.     Tax Parcel No.:          8130-78-00-0020, 8130-78-00-0040
                                                8130-78-00-000B, 8130-78-00-0001
                                                8130-78-00-0010, 8130-78-00-0003

                2.     Property Addresses:      1001 Alabaster Way.
                3.     Property Acreage:        ±11.78 acres.
                4.     Property Location:       Located at the northwest and northeast corners of
                                                the intersection of Saxon Blvd. and Sterling Silver
                                                Blvd.




                                                                                        Page 1 of 17
        5.   Property Legal Description: Lot 1, 2, and 4 tracts “B”, “C” and road “B”, of
             the retirement community at Sterling Park MPUD, according to the plat
             thereof as recorded in Map Book 53, Pages 59 and 60 of the public records of
             Volusia County, Florida.




Figure 1: Location map




                                                                              Page 2 of 17
Figure 2: Aerial Photo




                         Page 3 of 17
Figure 3: Existing Zoning

B.    Existing Zoning:

      1.     Subject Property:
             Existing:   MPUD
             Requested: BPUD

      2.     Adjacent Properties
             North:     MPUD and R-1AA
             South:     C-1, R-1, and R-1A


                                             Page 4 of 17
             East:      Public (School) and R-1
             West:      R-1




Figure 4: Proposed Zoning




                                                  Page 5 of 17
   Figure 5: Plat Map

C. Proposed Zoning:
   Business Planned Unit Development (BPUD) The purpose and intent of the planned
   unit development is to provide for integrated developments, which are consistent with the
   Comprehensive Plan, so as to promote the orderly development of compatible land uses.
   Further, it is intended that a proposed development shall be sensitive to existing adjacent
   and future land uses, the natural environment, and the impact upon supporting public
   infrastructure. A BPUD may consist of uses found within the commercial zoning
   classifications contained within Chapter 110 of the City’s Land Development Code.

D. Back Ground
   The proposed property to be rezoned to BPUD has an extensive history. In 2005, the
   subject property and adjacent land, which totaled over 20 acres, was rezoned to Mixed
   Use Planned Unit Development (MPUD) that contained four (4) lots (See Figure 5).
   According to the approved MPUD DA, each lot was earmarked for different uses. The
   uses included a multi-family residential component, office, and commercial entitlements.
   The property was platted into four (4) lots and recorded into the public records as the
   Retirement Community at Sterling Park MPUD. In 2006, a final site plan was approved



                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   for lot 3 of the MPUD, which allowed for a 118-unit age-targeted assisted living facility
   (multi-family residential). To date, the assisted living facility is the only use to be
   developed on the MPUD property.

   A network of access easements and rights-of-way were required as part of the approval of
   the MPUD. The intent of the designed access was to provide safe ingress and egress for
   all of the proposed lots within the development with the least amount of impact to the
   critical City thoroughfare of Saxon Blvd. The access design was also to encourage cross-
   access to other developments in the area for interconnectivity, to facilitate internal trip
   capture, and to provide access to the adjacent school, office complex, and a City lift-
   station. The access network evolved and in 2008, the property owner abandoned a right-
   of-way listed on the plat as road “B”, which at the time granted a full-access right along
   Saxon Blvd. As part of that abandonment, the City was deeded a public right-of-way
   depicted on the plat as tract “A” (now Alabaster Way). Since 2007, lots 1, 2, and 4 have
   remained vacant and undeveloped.

   The applicant has now applied to rezone only lots 1, 2, and 4 and other residual land
   obtained from the vacation of road “B” from MPUD to BPUD. The rezoning application
   has been submitted with a new DA and a Master Development Plan (MDP) that features
   two (2) development scenarios (Options 1 and 2). Option 1 is commercial-retail oriented,
   featuring the ability to construct spaces for a myriad of uses, including and not limited to
   fast food restaurants, retail leasable area, a convenience store with fuel sales, and a
   medium-sized grocery store. Option 2 retains the grocery and convenience store formats
   on lots 2 and 4, as combined, and includes an office- medical office use on lot 1, in lieu of
   commercial-retail space at that location.

   While commercial development can be constructed on lot 1 under the current entitlements
   today, these uses would be developed closest to existing residential homes to the north
   and west and be in close proximity to the multi-family development on lot 3. Option 1
   continues that trend and also places the ability to construct commercial on lots 2 and 4.
   Option 2 moves commercial entitlements to lots 2 and 4 and restricts office development
   to lot 1 away from residential homes.

E. Support Information

   Public Facilities
   a. Potable Water:   Deltona Water
   b. Sanitary Sewer: Deltona Water
   c. Fire Protection: City Fire Station 65
   d. Law Enforcement: County Sheriff’s Office (VCSO)
   e. Electricity:     Duke Energy




                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
F. Matters for Consideration – Section 110-1101, City Code of Ordinances, states that the City
   shall consider the following matters, when reviewing applications for amendments to the
   Official Zoning Map:

   1. Whether it is consistent with all adopted elements of the Comprehensive Plan.
      The City is underserved by commercial uses and there is a land-use imbalance
      between residential and non-residential land uses. To respond to this, the City’s
      Comprehensive Plan contains policies that encourage a diversification of land uses
      within the City. The revised MDP is meant to simplify the MPUD, making it more
      viable and flexible towards the local real estate market. Therefore, the proposal to
      update the MDP is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.

   2. Its impact upon the environment or natural resources.
      The property is largely undeveloped; primarily scrub and pine flat woods. The land is
      located on the DeLand Ridge geologic feature. The soil is predominately Astatula
      Fine Sand, with a portion of Paola Fine Sand. According to the September 2011 and
      soon to be updated 2014 FEMA flood zone maps; the subject property is not located
      within a 100 year floodplain.

       The site is ±11.78 acres and may currently be used as habitat for small wildlife.
       Large animals likely do not use the site. Gopher tortoises may be associated with the
       site and the tortoises within the development will have to be relocated following state
       and federal permitting procedures.

   3. Its impact upon the economy of any affected area.
      The proposed impact upon the local economy will depend on the development pattern
      listed in Options 1 and 2. Both scenarios would create temporary construction jobs,
      but medical offices would ultimately create an employment center and, thus, higher
      paying professional jobs in Option 2, instead of service-oriented jobs in Option 1. If
      the property does develop with an office capacity under the proposed zoning, such
      development would help diversify the City’s tax base.

   4. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article XIV of the Land Development Code,
      Ordinance No. 92-25 [Chapter 86, Code of Ordinances], as it may be amended
      from time to time, its impact upon necessary governmental services such as
      schools, sewage disposal, potable water, drainage, fire and police protection,
      solid waste or transportation systems.
      a. Schools: The Volusia County School Board staff has indicated that this rezoning
          will not affect local schools.
      b. Sewage Disposal: The site will be served by City sewer and capacity will be
          available.
      c. Potable Water: Deltona Water will serve the site and sufficient potable water
          capacity is available.




                                                                                   Page 8 of 17
d. Drainage: All site related stormwater runoff will be managed on-site and all
   stormwater management facilities will be constructed in accordance with the
   necessary requirements of the City’s Land Development Code and other
   permitting agencies.
e. Transportation Systems: The applicant has submitted a Traffic Impact Analysis
   (TIA) as part of the application package. While the MDP contains two (2)
   development scenarios, the TIA only addresses Option 1 – retail (±14,000 SF),
   fast food (two buildings each being ±4,500 SF), convenience store with gas
   pumps (±5,700 SF) and a grocery store (±44,000 SF). The Option 2 that features
   the medical office use was not included in the TIA, but would be less of a traffic
   generator than Option 1. Further, the TIA was formulated with a new access plan
   that is being proposed by the applicant. The new access plan can have an impact
   on traffic characteristics, both on-site and off-site.

   According to the TIA, Option 1 would generate 15,676 gross daily trips.
   Factoring in pass-by rates, the net new trips would be reduced to 7,095 trips; or a
   45% reduction. This type of pass-by reduction is not unusual for the type of uses
   proposed. The end result is that the project is of ample magnitude to generate a
   significant amount of traffic.

   Traffic is not necessarily a negative attribute. A lot of traffic implies economic
   activity and vitality and certainly enhances land-use opportunities for property
   abutting major, well-traveled thoroughfares. High traffic volumes also represent s
   a maximization of a significant public investment – roads. To manage traffic, the
   City has established level of service (LOS) standards for roads within the City.
   The LOS for Saxon Blvd. is “E”. LOS “E” can be described as a facility that is
   operating at the maximum capacity with traffic generally still flowing. Stoppages
   and some delays may be expected during peak hours.

   As part of TIA investigation, numerous road segments were reviewed – especially
   Saxon Blvd. from Veterans Memorial Parkway (Orange City) to East Normandy
   Blvd. Based on the submitted TIA trip distribution, of which City staff contends
   is representative of the local traffic patterns, three (3) segments of Saxon Blvd.
   have been identified as being adversely impacted by the development proposal.
   The Saxon Blvd. segments are from the FDOT parking ride to I-4, I-4 to Finland
   Dr., and Finland Dr. to Normandy Blvd; of which the first segment is not within
   the City’s jurisdiction and the other two (2) segments are within the City. The
   fact that the Saxon Blvd. corridor from I-4 to N. Normandy Blvd. has been
   identified by the TIA as problematic, validates existing conditions. Those Saxon
   Blvd. roadway segments are currently operating at a level of service “F” even
   without the development that is associated with this rezoning request (LOS “F”
   represents a failure of traffic movement and delays are common and lengthy.)




                                                                           Page 9 of 17
However, according to the submitted TIA, the impact on the segments of Saxon
Blvd. from I-4 to Finland Dr. and Finland Dr. to Normandy Blvd. would be very
small. The TIA quantifies the impact as 3.7%, but does not suggest any remedial
actions to address this deficiency. The TIA also identified the signalized
intersections at Saxon Blvd. at Finland Dr. and Saxon Blvd. and Normandy Blvd.
as failing. The TIA suggests that the Saxon Blvd/Finland Dr. signal could be
retimed to cycle five-seconds longer than the current timing; which would
improve flow enough to make the intersection operate at an acceptable level of
service. However, retiming the intersection signal would involve the logistically
complex retiming of all of the Saxon Blvd. signals from Enterprise Rd. to Finland
Dr. through the installation of an signal interconnect. The Saxon Blvd/Normandy
Blvd. intersection is currently operating at an LOS of “F”. The TIA indicates that
the delay at the intersection after development of the property to be rezoned will
be measured at 4.6 seconds. Expressed in real world terms, it could mean more
motorist sit through the first signal cycle before progressing through the
intersection during the second cycle.

As a note, the submitted TIA did review Tivoli Dr. between Saxon Blvd. and
Providence Blvd. Tivoli Dr., notwithstanding serving as a collector function, is
classified as a local road and, according to the City’s Comprehensive Plan local
roads are not to fall below a LOS of “D”. The TIA erroneously indicates that
segment of Tivoli Dr. has a LOS of “E”. An analysis of traffic counts for the
subject segment of Tivoli Dr. revealed that the roadway currently operates at a
LOS of “C”. The trips generated by the project will impact Tivoli Dr., but it is
unclear if the project will cause the Tivoli Drive segment to operate below the
required threshold of an LOS of “D”.

An important component of this project, even from the first rezoning in 2005, is
access management. The original MPUD DA was rife with language to ensure
cross-access with a development to the south, provide internal connections
between development nodes, and to limit access to Saxon Blvd.; especially
through the creation of road “B”, if warranted. This coincided with intensity and
land use limitations to mitigate traffic volumes.

To understand the intent of the access management, the geographic context of the
property needs to be reviewed. The property fronts on Saxon Blvd. The segment
of Saxon Blvd. where the property is located is a four (4) lane facility with a
posted speed limit of 45 mph. The property is also located nearly at the apex of a
curve as Saxon Blvd. transitions to a westerly direction. Limiting access to
roadway thoroughfares is common planning practice and is something that has
occurred in the City for many years to protect the capacity and function of the
thoroughfare as designed. The intent is to restrict turning maneuvers and
driveway cuts, which slow traffic flow and create the potential for traffic
accidents. The latter reason is acute with the curvature of the road and design



                                                                       Page 10 of 17
speed of the segment of Saxon Blvd. associated with the project. Traffic should
be directed to a safe ingress and egress, which would be the signalized
intersection of Saxon Blvd. and Sterling Silver Blvd. However, to warrant a need
for the aforementioned intersection to be signalized, traffic should be directed to
this controlled access point for safety and functionality purposes. Finally, the
need for access management is also supported by adopted roadway design
standards.

The original MPUD limited access along Saxon Blvd. to three (3) strategic points.
One point was located along the southern margin of the property where the
property abuts an existing development known as the Saxon Medical Park. There
was full access planned and platted at this point and the access was intended to be
joint, or shared between the Saxon Medical Park site and the property proposed to
be rezoned, as listed in the respective approved DAs for the projects.

The existing MPUD DA called for the common access point. In addition, a 2004
Developer’s Agreement between the City and the owner of the Saxon Medical
Park required cooperation to facilitate joint access with adjacent uses. This access
was connected to an access feature referred to on the Retirement Community at
Sterling Park MPUD plat as road “B”. However, road “B” was vacated by the
applicant in 2008, which removed the full access permitted on the subject site.
The next access from Saxon Blvd. is a full access at the intersection of Sterling
Silver Blvd. and Saxon Blvd. This access point exists today and is being used by
a residential area and the aforementioned assisted living facility. The intersection
of Sterling Silver Blvd. and Saxon Blvd. is approved to be signalized. According
to the MPUD DA, the applicant is responsible for erecting a traffic signal at the
Saxon Blvd/Sterling Silver Blvd. intersection associated with the development of
lots 1, 2, and 4 of the MPUD site. Finally, for lot 1 located west of Sterling Silver
Blvd., a right-in and right-out only access is provided onto Saxon Blvd. However,
the intent is that a landscape island be built in the Saxon Blvd. median across
from the subject access point to discourage illegal left turns that cross several
lanes of traffic. Other access to the lots would come from Sterling Silver Blvd.
and Alabaster Way, which includes existing driveway cuts into the lots 2 and 4.

A purpose of the existing MPUD access plan was to maximize the use of a
central, signalized intersection. This would be safer, especially in light of the
travel speeds and the curvature of Saxon Blvd. associated with the property. The
access plan is also designed to protect the level of service of City roads and
protecting level of service on City roads enables future development in the City to
utilize the capacity savings derived from appropriate access management. The
applicant is proposing changes to the access plan. The new proposal, as part of
the BPUD rezoning application, abandons the cross-access requirement between
the BPUD site and the Saxon Medical Park and proposes to create a new access
point, located roughly equidistant along the frontage of lots 2 and 4. The



                                                                         Page 11 of 17
proposed access point is proposed to be limited to right-in and right-out turning
movements and to be constructed with a turn lane.

This proposed access would be problematic, because the access point and related
turn lane increases the potential for traffic conflicts. The proposed turn lane will
commence immediately after the existing access to the Saxon Medical Park site to
the south, as governed by roadway design standards. This would create a situation
that, as cars are attempting to negotiate a right or left turn onto Saxon Blvd. from
the Medical Park, cars would also be slowing and maneuvering to transition to the
deceleration lane leading to the proposed driveway cut. This is compounded by
the fact that the posted speed of 45 mph, in conjunction with the convex curve,
makes traffic management in the area more difficult to navigate, is an unsafe
design, and does not adhere to adopted roadway design standards. In addition, if
the signal at the intersection of Saxon Blvd. and Sterling Silver Blvd. is activated,
the proposed access point would create additional traffic friction. If traffic does
not use the Saxon Blvd. and Sterling Silver Blvd. intersection, a signal for the
intersection may not be warranted for the intersection. Without a signal, making
left turns into and out of Sterling Silver Blvd. would be difficult and unsafe.
Finally, the potential to introduce oversized vehicles into the proposed limited
access point would further compound traffic safety and may limit the function and
capacity of Saxon Blvd.

The applicant is responsible for signalizing the intersection of Sterling Silver
Blvd. and Saxon Blvd., per the original MPUD DA that governed this area. The
change is that the applicant will construct a string-pole signal system instead of
the mast arm design, as approved by City as part of the original MPUD DA. The
TIA did include a signal warrant element. However, the background data for the
signal warrant conclusions is inconsistent. For example, the 5-6 p.m. period
shows a total of 339 trips on the Hourly Trip Generation determination. The
Warrant 1 item shows a total of 286 trips and the Appendix D, p.m. peak period
shows a total of 245 trips. Finally, Appendix E, Intersection Analysis, Future
Total Analysis, shows a different 282 p.m. peak trips.

The applicant is proposing to eliminate the original DA requirement for median
operations associated with the right-in and right-out access from lot 1 to Saxon
Blvd. The requirement for the raised median was designed to enhance traffic
safety and protect traffic capacity on Saxon Blvd to allow for non-residential
intensive land uses at the subject site. Right turn islands, sometimes referred to as
‘pork chops’, are routinely violated by motorist who drive over the islands to
make illegal left turns and the inclusion of ‘bat wings’ on those ‘pork chops’ will
not suffice for safety. The raised median will more thoroughly discourage illegal
left turns.




                                                                         Page 12 of 17
Based on the above, the following will be required for access management and
mitigation for traffic safety:

1. Revise the submitted TIA to include those changes and corrections of
   inconsistencies listed in the GMB peer review letter to the City, dated January
   21, 2014 (See Exhibit B).
2. The City Land Development Code includes detailed and technical
   requirements with regard to roadway design and access within Chapter 96.
   There will be over 15,000 trips turning in and out of the property every day.
   The site is located on a four (4) lane City thoroughfare that has a posted speed
   limit of 45 miles per hour. There is one existing access to the property to be
   rezoned – Sterling Silver Blvd. According to Section 96-37, there will need to
   be deceleration lanes for both left and right turning movements on to Sterling
   Silver Blvd. According to Section 96-37(a)(10)(c)(5)(i), a left turn lane with
   200’ of storage and 100’ of transition will be a required improvement along
   Saxon Blvd. to facilitate turning movements onto Sterling Silver Blvd.
3. The City and/or County may require more storage, if warranted by the ultimate
   development program. As part of the applicant’s TIA, a dual left turn lane
   from Saxon Blvd. to Sterling Silver Blvd. is recommended for traffic safety.
   The duel left turn lane would generate ample storage and ensure that more cars
   would be able to access the property that would be warranted by the proposed
   development program. The dual left turn lane would require that a lane be
   added to Sterling Silver Blvd. from Saxon Blvd. to Alabaster Way.
4. The City Land Development Code Section 96-37(a)(10)(c)(5)(ii) will require a
   right turn lane from Saxon Blvd. onto Sterling Silver Blvd. The required
   dimension of the right turn lane is a minimum of 150 feet of storage and 100
   feet of transition. Scaling the 250 foot design of the right turn lane reveals
   that nearly all of the property frontage on Saxon Blvd., east of the Saxon
   Blvd/Sterling Silver Blvd. intersection should be devoted to a
   deceleration/right turn lane. The right turn lane would render the requested
   right-in and right-out access between lots 2 and 4 of the project in direct
   conflict and is also considered too close to the proposed signal at Sterling
   Silver Blvd. intersection. Thus, the full access point where road “B” was
   located along with the joint access to the Saxon Medical Park property
   provides a safer condition.

There are two off-site components within the TIA to be addressed. One is the
traffic volumes and off-site impacts and the other is off-site mobility, safety and
access management. There will be off-site impacts to road way segments and
intersections. These congested areas are constrained points – Saxon Blvd. from I-
4 to Normandy Blvd. and the intersections of Saxon Blvd and Finland Dr. and
Saxon Blvd. and N. Normandy Blvd. The segments of Saxon Blvd. are
constrained without the project and are currently operating below the allowable
LOS of “E”. According to the submitted TIA, the project will contribute another



                                                                       Page 13 of 17
3.7% impact to these segments. Typical methods to address this condition are to
deny the project based on a lack of roadway capacity, scale back the project in
intensity to minimize traffic impacts, mitigate for off-site impacts, or accept
higher traffic volumes in certain areas with the understanding that general
mobility and safety will be maintained. To encourage appropriate development
and to reduce sprawl, the City allows backlogged roads to be degraded up to 20%
from the adopted LOS. The flexibility to approve development, notwithstanding
allowable LOS thresholds, is described in the following Comprehensive Plan
policy:

Policy CIE1-1.4
The determination of concurrency for backlogged facilities, included in the
Thoroughfare System segments shall be consistent with the revised Land
Development Regulations and established in the following manner (9J-
5.016(3)(c)(1,3,4&6):

a. Establish Benchmark Traffic Counts
The most recent twenty-four hour traffic counts taken prior to the adoption of this
Comprehensive Plan shall be used as the benchmark counts for each backlogged
road identified in the Transportation Element.
b. Set Percent Thresholds of Benchmark Traffic Counts
Each of these backlogged thoroughfare roads shall not be allowed to degrade its
operational service standards on a peak hour basis (using the most recent sanction
FDOT Highway Capacity Tables) by allowing no more than twenty (20) percent of
the peak hour bench mark counts for such facilities in The City. Some backlogged
thoroughfare roads will only be allowed to be degraded ten (10) or fifteen (15)
percent from the adopted Level of Service.
c. Track Development - Trip Generation/Distribution
The City shall track all proposed new developments and based on generally accepted
traffic modeling procedures identify the likely number of trips generated by such
developments and their distribution specifically for this objective to the previously
identified backlogged thoroughfare roads.            Tracking shall start upon the
Comprehensive Plan's effective date of the revised Land Development Regulations.
d. Tracking on a Cumulative Basis
This tracking of the additional trips to the twenty percent threshold of the benchmark
counts and trips originating within the boundaries of the Future Transportation Map
shall be done on a cumulative basis following the adoption of this plan.
e. Cumulative Thresholds Twenty, Fifteen and Ten Percent
The City shall not approve any additional final development orders, (excluding
vested properties) including building permits, once the percent threshold for projects
that would generate trips in excess of ten/fifteen/twenty percent on a peak hour-basis,
unless a final development order is subject to the adoption and implementation of an
Area-wide Traffic Action Mitigation Plan. An Area-wide Traffic Action Mitigation
Plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following activities:
 additional or modified turn lanes



                                                                           Page 14 of 17
               additional or modified signalization
               incentives for mass transit use where available
               incentives for van/carpooling programs
               promote staggered work hours
               operating lanes
              f. 100 percent mitigation of the impacts of a proposed development
              It shall be the goal of each Area-wide Traffic Action Mitigation Plan to achieve 100
              percent mitigation of the impacts of a proposed development. Such plans shall
              include, when applicable, participants in addition to the property owner or applicant
              in question such as but not limited to adjacent property owners and business
              establishments.

              Providing flexibility with regard to traffic LOS standards is important for the City
              to achieve economic goals than the free flow of traffic during relatively short
              periods of time during any given day on just a few short segments of roadway.
              Overriding goals include promoting compact urban development patterns that also
              limits the need for annexations, diversify the tax base, address the jobs/housing
              imbalance that drives many of the traffic patterns within the City; provide more
              retail and service opportunity to support the existing population, as well as protect
              the mobility of the City.

              Saxon Blvd. is a Volusia County road. Therefore, the County does have oversight
              in how Saxon Blvd. will be accessed through the Use Permit process. The County
              Code requirements for deceleration lanes and related storage dimensions are
              identical to those of the City. In addition, the County has the same basic
              transportation goals as the City to ensure safe and efficient mobility. While, the
              County may issue a Use Permit for access based on several parameters, the City is
              responsible for managing and approving the rezoning and related MDP that
              addresses access and traffic. Therefore, the City will uphold its Land
              Development Code requirements to ensure that safe access management that
              meets the City’s and County’s roadway design standards are met. The current
              access management approved under the existing MPUD is warranted to be
              adequate for the project. The newly proposed access management needs to be
              amended for staff to support this rezoning application. Finally, the City will
              uphold the existing one-foot non-vehicular ingress and egress easement on the
              existing plat along Saxon Blvd. to protect the capacity and function of that
              thoroughfare.

Any changes in circumstances or conditions affecting the area.
There has been no significant change affecting the area.

Any mistakes in the original classification.
No known mistakes in the MPUD original classification.




                                                                                       Page 15 of 17
Its effect upon the public health, welfare, safety or morals.
As part of the rezoning application to BPUD, the applicant has submitted a new DA. Staff has
reviewed the DA and has made comments in a Microsoft Word strike-through and underline
format but did not attempt to rewrite the DA. The DA with staff comments is attached.

CONCLUSION/STAFF RECOMMENDATION
In 2005, the subject property was approved for commercial and office uses on lot 1, with a floor area
ratio (FAR) cap of 0.25. Lots 2 and 4 were also approved for medical office use (0.12 FAR cap) and
for general office use (0.25 FAR cap). The approved MPUD contemplated a mixture of land uses
with the assisted living facility on lot 3 and commercial and office uses within the overall project. The
master development program, with its limitation on land uses, intensities, and access management,
was intended to provide a mixed-use program over the four lots, but more importantly, sought to
control access management through a series of interconnected roadway facilities, easements, and a
traffic signal designed to afford safe ingress and egress. These measures also attempted to facilitate
some level of compatibility between more intensive non-residential uses and the less intensive
adjacent residential homes by placing FAR caps on development in a limited and quantifiable manner.

The applicant is proposing a development program that would greatly increase the range of permitted
uses, intensities, location, and access management from that previously approved. The MDP
submittal and accompanying DA seeks approval for two (2) development scenarios on lot 1 that
provides a development alternative at the rezoning level and also allows for commercial development
on lots 2 and 4. While both scenarios contemplate commercial development on lots 2 and 4, Option 1
would also continue to allow for commercial development on lot 1; thus, permitting commercial
development throughout the project. Option 2 affords a more balanced development program by
interchanging the location of office and commercial uses as currently approved, from commercial use
on lot 1 to office use and from office use on lots 2 and 4 to commercial use. Under this scenario, the
more intensive commercial development would be located away from the existing single family
residential homes and placed on a tract buffered by the existing Alabaster Way right-of-way.

Staff has reviewed the proposed development program submitted by the applicant with the
accompanying DA and compared it to the previous approvals in 2005. The proposed development
program was reviewed in relation to and upholding the City’s goals, objectives, and policies in the
Comprehensive Plan, and regulatory criteria in the Land Development Code that requires adjacency
and compatibility between land uses. Part of that compatibility and function is associated with access
management and the accommodation of existing and proposed capacity of the area roadway network
for current conditions and following project build-out. Further, the applicant submitted a TIA and the
City used a peer review traffic consultant (GMB) to ensure that the recommended roadway network
improvements are functional, as designed. An important component of that is to ensure that public
health, safety, and welfare is paramount.

Of the scenarios submitted by the applicant, Option 2 achieves the following:

    1. Is within the 0.25 FAR cap for lot 1;




                                                                                             Page 16 of 17
   2. Generates fewer average daily trips than the more intensive commercial uses proposed in
      Option 1;
   3. In design, is more compatible with adjacent land uses through separation between more
      intensive non-residential land uses and less intensive residential land uses, odors, noise, light,
      hours of operation, etc.;
   4. Is less service oriented with the potential for fewer oversized vehicles to be present; and
   5. Potentially can provide an employment center with less land use intensity.

When viewed holistically, Option 2 provides greater potential for land use compatibility and access
management on the three lots within the BPUD. Option 2 is also favorable to the existing roadway
network. This scenario would place commercial or office development along the frontage of Saxon
Blvd., with a public right-of-way (Alabaster Way) as a separation from residential uses. This utilizes
the frontage along Saxon Boulevard, to the greatest potential, and removes the potential for
commercial development on lot 1. The ultimate goal is to provide more compatibility from adjacent
land uses, site function, and to achieve a balance to allow for development. For further definition, see
Exhibit B (attached BPUD DA) that has been revised in strike-through and underline format from the
version proposed by the applicant.

To promote adjacency and compatibility in keeping with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Land
Development Code, staff is proposing the following Conditions of Approval be included to be able to
rezone the subject property to BPUD:

   1. Limit hours of operation on lots 2 and 4 for commercial uses from 7:00 AM to 10:00 PM for
      services, deliveries, trash collection, and general use;
   2. Place service areas away from residential uses to the greatest extent possible and have those
      service areas screened from adjacent properties;
   3. Limit a cap of 0.16 FAR on lots 2 and 4 (combined) that could allow for a ±44,000 SF facility,
      as listed on the MDP, and a ±5,000 SF commercial outparcel; following subdivision of the
      property, per Chapter 106 of the Land Development Code;
   4. Scale, orient, mass, and locate any proposed commercial development as close to Saxon Blvd.
      as possible;
   5. Limit permitted land uses on lot 1 to office uses and lots 2 and 4 to uses as listed in the C-1
      zoning category, to exclude bars/nightclubs, gas stations, convenience stores, fast food
      restaurants, automobile service stations – type C, and other uses not allowed in the C-1 zoning
      category; and
   6. Provide access management, as recommended in GMB’s review of the submitted TIA, to
      provide a signalized intersection, a deceleration lane along the frontage of lots 2 and 4, to
      maintain the existing 1-ft. non-vehicular ingress and egress easement along the frontage of lots
      2 and 4, and comply with the Land Development Code for access management and other
      design standards.

Only with the inclusion of the above-listed Conditions of Approval and the proposed changes by staff
and GMB to the DA and TIA, respectively, staff will support and recommend approval of Project
RZ13-008.



                                                                                            Page 17 of 17
TO:           Mr. Ron Paradise
FROM:         Jorge Tolosa, P.E.
DATE:         January 27, 2014
RE:           Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
              Transportation Impact Analysis
              GMB Project No.: 13-162.01

 The purpose of this memorandum is to provide a review of the Saxon Sterling
 Silver BPUD Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) dated November 2013.
 Specific comments and findings are provided below.

  Comment # 1 (General Comment):
  The TIA only addresses scenario one which is comprised of retail (14,000 square
  feet), fast food (two buildings each being 4,500 square feet), convenience store
  with gas pumps (5,700 square feet), and a grocery store (44,000 square feet).
  The second scenario that features the medical office use was not included in the
  TIA. Please note that additional comments may be provided upon the submittal
  of a TIA addressing the second scenario.

  Comment # 2 (Site Access):
  As seen in the site plan included in page 6, a 1 foot non-vehicular easement
  prohibits the proposed Driveways 1 and 2. As such the traffic analysis should be
  revised based on access to the site being provided only at Sterling Silver
  Boulevard and Alabaster Way. In addition, Figure 2-2 (page 6) shows four (4)
  access points along Alabaster Way. However, the site access description in page
  3 of the report only references three (3) access points to Alabaster Way. Please
  revise this discrepancy.

  Comment # 3 (Table 3-1):
  Please use the equations (instead of the rates) provided in the Institute of
  Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, 9th Edition to
  estimate the trip generation for the 44 KSF supermarket (ITE Code 850) during
  the p.m. peak hour and the 14 KSF shopping center (ITE Code 820) during the
  a.m. peak hour. Please revise Table 3-1 and all the associated analysis
  accordingly.
Review of Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
Transportation Impact Analysis
January 27, 2014
Page 2 of 11


    Comment # 4 (Pass-By Capture):
    The methodology document included in Appendix A states that “the pass-by trips
    will be checked to be less than 14% of the adjacent street peak hour traffic”. However, based
    on a review of the trip generation calculations included in Appendix B, the pass
    by trip capture is anticipated to be 373 trips (171 NE Corner and 202 NW
    Corner) during the a.m. peak hour and 456 trips (282 NE Corner and 174 NW
    Corner) during the p.m. peak hour. Furthermore, Appendix B also includes a
    pass-by capture check calculation which shows that Saxon Boulevard from
    Normandy Boulevard to Tivoli Drive has a year 2011 peak hour background
    traffic of 2,223 trips. As such, it is noted that the pass by trip capture reduction
    for the development during both, the a.m. peak hour and p.m. peak hour is
    higher than 14% of the adjacent street peak hour traffic (2,223 trips x 14% = 311
    trips). Please ensure that the pass by capture trips from the total development
    does not exceed 14% of the adjacent street peak hour traffic. Please revise Table
    3-2 and all the corresponding analysis accordingly.

    Comment # 5 (LOS Standard):
    Pursuant to Policy T1-4.3 of the City of Deltona Transportation Element, the
    adopted LOS standard for local roadways is D. As such, please revise the LOS
    standard for Tivoli Drive from Normandy Boulevard to Providence Boulevard
    from E to D in Tables 4-1 and 5-1.

    Comment # 6 (Table 4-1):
    Please revise Table 4-1 based on the following comments and recommendations:
          The number of lanes along Normandy Boulevard from Deltona Boulevard
           to Providence Boulevard should be revised from 3 lanes to 2 lanes.
          The number of lanes along Normandy Boulevard from Providence
           Boulevard to Saxon Boulevard should be revised from 2 lanes to 3 lanes.
           As such the peak hour two way capacity for this segment should be
           revised from 1,269 to 1,332 (1,410 service volumes at LOS E x 0.9
           adjustment for non-state roadways x 1.05 adjustment for 2 lane divided
           roadways).
Review of Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
Transportation Impact Analysis
January 27, 2014
Page 3 of 11


         Please revise the project trip calculations in this table. For example, the
          project traffic along Saxon Boulevard from Normandy Boulevard to
          Sterling Boulevard should be revised from 275 to 278 (524 p.m. peak hour
          net external trips x 53% distribution = 278 trips).

    Comment # 7 (Project Traffic Distribution):
    Please provide a model plot showing the distributions for Saxon Boulevard from
    Enterprise Road to I-4.

    Comment # 8 (Table 5-1):
    It is noted that Table 5-1 indicates that the development is anticipated to have
    an adverse impact on two (2) roadway segments along Saxon Boulevard (from I-
    4 to Finland Drive and from Finland Drive to Normandy Boulevard) during the
    future year 2016 conditions. It is recommended that the TIA provides remedial
    actions to address these deficiencies. In addition, please revise Table 5-1 based
    on the following comments and recommendations to ensure that no additional
    roadway segments are anticipated to be adversely impacted by the
    development:
         Please revise the number of lanes along Saxon Boulevard from Sterling
          Silver Boulevard to Tivoli Drive from 2 lanes to 4 lanes.
         The peak hour two way capacities, included in Table 5-1, for the roadway
          segments of Saxon Boulevard (from Sterling Silver Boulevard to
          Normandy Boulevard), Tivoli Drive (from Saxon Boulevard to Providence
          Boulevard), and Normandy Boulevard (from Saxon Boulevard to Deltona
          Boulevard) should be revised to be consistent with the capacities
          included in Table 4-1.
         Please ensure that there is consistency between Tables 4-1 and 5-1. For
          example, the project traffic along Saxon Boulevard from Normandy
          Boulevard to Sterling Boulevard is shown as 275 in Table 4-1 and 276 in
          Table 5-1.
         It is noted that the existing year 2013 traffic volumes were grown (by an
          annual growth rate of 2.5%) from the year 2012 volumes provided in the
          Volusia County 2012 Average Annual Daily Traffic & Historical Counts
Review of Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
Transportation Impact Analysis
January 27, 2014
Page 4 of 11


          spreadsheet. Please make sure to include the base year for the existing
          conditions in the table header to facilitate any further reviews. Likewise,
          please indicate the future analysis year in the table header.
         Please revise the existing year 2013 volumes for the roadway segments of
          Saxon Boulevard from Sterling Silver Boulevard to Tivoli Drive from 896
          to 2,239.
         Please revise the existing year 2013 volumes for the roadway segments of
          Saxon Boulevard from Tivoli Drive to Providence Boulevard from 771 to
          896.
         Please revise the existing year 2013 volumes for the roadway segments of
          Saxon Boulevard from Providence Boulevard to Normandy Boulevard
          from 509 to 771.
         Please provide an explanation of how the year 2013 volumes were derived
          for the roadway segment of Normandy Boulevard from Saxon Boulevard
          to Deltona Boulevard. Based on a review of Figure 1, it is noted that the
          two way p.m. peal hour volume along this roadway segment is currently
          954 trips (439 NB and 515 SB) while Table 5-1 shows a p.m. peak two way
          traffic volume of 693 trips. Please explain this discrepancy and revise as
          necessary.

    Comment # 9 (Appendix C):
    Please provide the intersection traffic movement count for the intersection of
    Tivoli Drive and Providence Boulevard during the a.m. peak hour conditions.

    Comment # 10 (Appendix D):
    Please revise the intersection traffic volume derivations included in Appendix C
    (and all the associated intersection analyses) based on the following comments
    and recommendations:
         Please ensure that the a.m. peak and p.m. peak hour project traffic
          distributions along the movements of the study area intersections
          included in Figures 3A and 3B are consistent with the project trip
          distributions included in Figure 4-1. For example, the project traffic
Review of Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
Transportation Impact Analysis
January 27, 2014
Page 5 of 11


           distributions along the movements of the intersection of Saxon Boulevard
           and Normandy Boulevard should be revised as follows:
           Eastbound thru from 47% to              Westbound left from 2% to
             27%.                                      13%.
           Northbound right from 2% to             Westbound thru from 47% to
             13%                                       27%.
           Southbound left from 4% to              Westbound right from 4% to
             13%.                                      13%.
          Please revise the calculations used in deriving the project traffic volumes
           included in Figure 5A for the a.m. peak and p.m. peak hour conditions.
           For example, under the assumption that the project traffic distribution
           percentages included in Figure 3A were correct, the project traffic
           volumes at the intersection of Saxon Boulevard and Tivoli Drive would
           have to be revised as follows:
                Eastbound left from 8 to 14 (21% x 67 outbound trips = 14 trips).
                Eastbound thru from 9 to 15 (23% x 67 outbound trips = 15 trips).
                Eastbound right from 1 to 2 (3% x 67 outbound trips = 2 trips).
                Southbound right from 24 to 18 (21% x 85 inbound trips = 18 trips).
                Westbound thru from 12 to 20 (23% x 85 inbound trips = 20 trips).
                Northbound left from 2 to 3 (3% x 85 inbound trips = 3 trips).
          We were not able to figure out how the pass by trips were assigned at the
           intersection of Saxon Boulevard and Sterling Silver Boulevard and the
           project entrances. Please provide a stand-alone figure showing the pass by
           trips during the a.m. peak and the p.m. peak hours.
          Please revise the a.m. peak and p.m. peak future total intersection traffic
           volumes derivation based on the above comments and revise the
           intersection analyses. Please ensure to include all the calculations used in
           deriving the future total intersection traffic volumes. For example, the
           Figure should show Future Background Traffic + NE Quadrant Project
           Traffic + NE Quadrant Pass By Traffic + NW Quadrant Project Traffic +
           NW Quadrant Pass By Traffic = Total Traffic.
Review of Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
Transportation Impact Analysis
January 27, 2014
Page 6 of 11


    Comment # 11 (Appendix E):
    The traffic volumes shown in the HCS summary sheets included in Appendix E
    and the future total traffic volumes included in Figure 6 of Appendix C are not
    consistent for all of the analysis intersections. For example, the a.m. peak hour
    total traffic volumes at the intersection of Saxon Boulevard and Sterling Silver
    Boulevard in the eastbound approach should be revised from 171 to 120 for the
    left turn movement and 509 to 531 for the thru movement. Please ensure that the
    2016 future total traffic volumes included in Appendix C are inputted correctly
    in HCS. In addition, please revise the analysis results as necessary.

    Comment # 12 (Table 5-2):
    Please revise Table 5-2 and all the associated analysis based on the following
    comments and recommendations:
           As mentioned on Comment # 5, the City adopted LOS standard for
            Tivoli Drive from Normandy Boulevard to Providence Boulevard is D. As
            such, please revise the LOS standard for the intersections of Saxon
            Boulevard and Tivoli Drive and Providence Boulevard to Tivoli Drive
            from E to D. In addition, since the intersection of Saxon Boulevard and
            Tivoli Drive is anticipated to operate at LOS E during the year 2016,
            please identify the improvements necessary to alleviate the anticipated
            adversities at this intersection.
           As noted in this table, the intersection of the Saxon Blvd and Finland
            Drive is anticipated to operate at LOS F during the 2016 future total
            a.m. peak hour conditions. The applicant states that by modifying the
            cycle length from 120 to 125 seconds during the a.m. peak hour, the
            intersection is expected to operate at an acceptable LOS. It is to be
            noted however, that in order to modify the cycle length at this
            intersection, all the signalized intersections along the Saxon Boulevard
            corridor would have to be retimed since this is part of a computerized
            signal system and there are traffic impacts to the interchange ramps.
           It is indicated in page 15 of the report that “The intersection of Saxon
            Boulevard & Normandy Boulevard is operating at LOS F in existing and future
Review of Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
Transportation Impact Analysis
January 27, 2014
Page 7 of 11


            background conditions. In future total conditions, with the addition of project traffic
            this intersection continues to operate at LOS F. However, the intersection delay is
            anticipated to increase by only 4.6 seconds, which is less than 5% of the future
            background conditions intersection delay.” Please provide analysis to identify
            the improvements that would be needed at this intersection to alleviate
            the expected adversities during the existing, future background traffic,
            and future total traffic conditions.

    Comment # 13 (Table 5-3):
    Please revise the LOS for the future p.m. peak hour conditions along the
    westbound approach of the unsignalized intersection of Sterling Silver Blvd and
    Alabaster Way from E to F. In addition, please provide analysis of this
    intersection for the total future conditions with the addition of the
    recommended northbound right turn lane and the northbound left turn lane (as
    indicated in the turn lane analysis) to ensure that all the intersection
    movements will operate at an acceptable LOS D (as mentioned in Comment # 5,
    the City of Deltona adopted LOS standard for local roadways is D).

    Comment # 14 (Appendix H):
    Please revise the signal warrant analysis based on the previous comments. In
    addition, the signal warrant analysis must be revised to account for the
    anticipated year 2016 conditions. As such, please grow the traffic volumes on
    the major and minor approach volumes by the agreed upon annual rate of 2.5%.
    Furthermore, please provide a table showing the derivation of traffic volumes
    along the minor approach. The minor approach should include future
    background conditions in addition to project traffic as identified in the
    “Shopping Center Hourly Trip Generation Determination Table” included in
    Appendix H. It is to be noted that the County will allow the signal at this
    intersection to be built and placed on flash mode until traffic volumes warrant.
Review of Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
Transportation Impact Analysis
January 27, 2014
Page 8 of 11


    Comment # 15 (Crash Data):

    Please provide a figure showing the crash analysis at the intersection of Saxon
    Boulevard and Sterling Silver Boulevard. Please provide the crash data in an
    Appendix.

    Comment # 16 (Turn Lane Analysis):
    Please revise the Turn Lane Analysis Section based on the above comments and
    the following recommendations and observations:

         The traffic volumes included in the Turn Lane Analysis in Appendix F are
          consistent with the traffic volumes used in the HCS analysis (included in
          Appendix E). However, the traffic volumes are inconsistent with the
          traffic volumes included in Figure 6 of Appendix C. Please explain this
          discrepancy and update the analysis if necessary.
         The City of Deltona Land Development Code (LDC) Section 96-
          37(a)(10)(c)(5)(ii) indicates that a right-turn lane with a minimum of 150
          feet of storage and 100 feet of transition shall be required at each driveway
          when the speed limit equals or exceeds 35 miles per hour or if the
          development will generate 100 or more right-turn movements during the
          peak hour. Since the westbound right turn movement of the intersection
          of Saxon Boulevard and Sterling Silver Boulevard is anticipated to have
          more than 100 trips during both the a.m. and p.m. peak hours, it is
          recommended that a right turn lane in the westbound approach of this
          intersection be provided. Furthermore, the northbound right turn
          movement at the intersection of Sterling Silver Boulevard and Alabaster
          Way (Driveway 3) is anticipated to service 242 trips during the year 2016
          p.m. peak hour conditions. As such, it is recommended that Table 7-1 be
          revised to indicate that a minimum of 150 feet of storage and 100 feet of
          transition will be required at the northbound right turn lane of this
          intersection.
Review of Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
Transportation Impact Analysis
January 27, 2014
Page 9 of 11


         Please determine if right turn lanes or left turn lanes are required at the
          project driveways along Alabaster Way based on the requirements
          included in the City of Deltona LDC Section 96-37(a)(10)(c)(5).

    Comment # 17 (Driveway 1):
    As mentioned in Comment # 2 above, a 1 foot non-vehicular easement prohibits
    the proposed Driveway 1. Consistent with Comment # 16, a right turn lane
    with a minimum of 150 feet of storage and 100 feet of transition is required in
    the westbound approach of the intersection of Saxon Boulevard and Sterling
    Silver Boulevard. Furthermore, in accordance with the City of Deltona LDC
    Section 96-37(a)(10)(c)(5)(ii), a right turn lane of at least 250 feet (a minimum
    of 150 feet of storage and 100 feet transition) would be required at the proposed
    Driveway 1, since Saxon Boulevard in front of the development has a posted
    speed limit of 40 mph. Based on the requirements to provide a 250 feet right
    turn lane along the westbound approach of Saxon Boulevard at Sterling Silver
    Boulevard and a 250 feet right turn lane at the proposed Driveway 1, it is noted
    that nearly all the property frontage on Saxon Boulevard should be devoted to a
    deceleration/right turn lane.

    As noted in the City of Deltona’s Agenda Memorandum to the Planning and
    Zoning Board (dated December 18, 2013), the right turn lane for Driveway 1 will
    commence immediately after the existing access to the existing Saxon Medical
    Park site to the south. The construction of Driveway 1 would create additional
    traffic conflicts where cars attempting a right or left turn onto Saxon Boulevard
    from the Medical Park would have to negotiate with cars slowing and
    maneuvering to transition to the deceleration lane leading to the proposed
    Driveway 1. This is compounded by the fact that the posted speed of 40 mph, in
    conjunction with the convex curve, makes traffic management in the area more
    difficult to navigate and is an unsafe design.

    In addition, Table 96-6B included in the City of Deltona LDC Section 96-
    37(a)(10)(c)(2)(iv) includes the driveway centerline spacing requirements for
    thoroughfares with a speed limit higher than 35 mph. According to Table 96-6B,
Review of Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
Transportation Impact Analysis
January 27, 2014
Page 10 of 11


    the minimum distance between centerlines of the intersection of Saxon
    Boulevard (a proposed signalized intersection) and the proposed Driveway 1 (an
    intermediate driveway with more than 50 vehicles but less than 150 vehicles) is
    380 feet. Similarly, the minimum distance between the proposed Driveway 1 (an
    intermediate driveway) and the Saxon Medical Park driveway (assumed to be
    an intermediate driveway) is 360 feet. It is to be noted that the distance
    between the centerlines of the intersection of Saxon Boulevard at Sterling Silver
    Boulevard and the Saxon Medical Park driveway is approximately 570 feet
    which is less than the combined driveway spacing of 740 feet that would be
    required if Driveway 1 was constructed (380 feet between Saxon Boulevard at
    Sterling Silver Boulevard and Driveway 1 in addition to 360 feet between
    Driveway 1 and the Saxon Medical Park driveway).

    Comment # 18 (Alternative Mode Analysis):
    As noted in the Volusia County Comments (dated December 3, 2013), the TPO
    Guidelines section 4(d) specify a requirement to assess sidewalks, bikeways,
    and transit routes of users (including special needs). The site plan needs to
    address how walking, biking, and transit ridership will be encouraged. Please
    review this section of the guidelines, with particular focus on VOTRAN’s
    Transit Development Guidelines. Specifically, the county will be looking for safe
    cross-Saxon access between the commercial properties and the nearby
    residences and also students. The Guidelines can be found on the Volusia TPO
    website: www.volusiatpo.org. Please specifically show how transit riders will
    be able to access the site.

    Comment # 19 (General Comment):
    It is recommended that the applicant provides a revised TIA addressing the
    above comments as they relate to site access, trip generation, project traffic
    distribution, project traffic assignment, existing LOS assessment, future LOS
    assessment, and alternative mode analysis. The revised TIA should identify if
    any additional roadway segments or intersections are anticipated to be
    adversely impacted by the development during the year 2016 conditions.
Review of Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
Transportation Impact Analysis
January 27, 2014
Page 11 of 11


Conclusions:
In summary, based on the peer review relating to the TIA supporting the Saxon
Silver BPUD, it is noted that the proposed development will have adverse impacts
on the City of Deltona transportation network. Therefore, GMB recommends that
the City of Deltona transmits these comments to the Applicant and that a revised
TIA be provided addressing these comments. Should you have any questions on the
above, please feel free to call me at (407) 898-5424 ext. 208 or email me at
jtolosa@gmb.cc.
    Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)
For Submittal to the City of Deltona & Volusia County

           Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD
                      Retail Center

NE and NW Corners of Saxon Blvd. & Sterling Silver Blvd.
                     Deltona, FL

                      Prepared for:



                        WRS, Inc.
                   550 Long Point Road
                  Mount Pleasant, SC 29464          November 2013




              5601 Mariner Street, Suite 240
                    Tampa, FL 33609
                   Tel: (813) 288-0233
                   Fax: (813) 288-0433
              Contact: Raghu K. Veturi, P.E.




                                                        RAGHU K. VETURI, P.E.
                                                              68918
W9401.1-Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL                  Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)




                       CERTIFICATION BY PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER

I hereby certify that I am a Professional Engineer in the State of Florida and have been trained in
Traffic Engineering and that I was responsible for and in charge of the preparation of this
Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA).




                                                                             Raghu K. Veturi, P.E.
                                                                       Florida PE Number: 68918




CPH, Inc.                                                                            November 2013
                                                                 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS
                                                                     SUBMISSION CHECKLIST

                                                                      DESCRIPTION                                    INFORMATION INCLUDED
                                                                                                               YES     NO N/A      Remarks1
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS REPORT DATA




                                             4 Printed TIA Copies Signed and Sealed by Professional
                                             Engineer                                                          x
                                             1 Electronic version of the TIA & all analysis computer files     x
                                             Site Location relative to surrounding roadway network (map)       x
                                             Description of proposed land uses                                  x
                                             Proposed Build-out schedule                                       x
                                             Study area boundaries including all Thoroughfare Road             x
                                             segments and intersections within appropriate radius (map)
                                             Existing Traffic Volumes                                          x
                                             Existing roadway segment analysis                                 x
                                             Existing intersection analysis                                    x
                                             List scheduled improvements within first three years of County,
                                                                                                                x
                                             FDOT, and/or City Capital Improvement Programs
                                             Proposed development trip generation/internal capture/pass by
                                                                                                               x
                                             capture
                                             Proposed development trip distribution and assignment (map)       x
                                             Future Background Traffic Volume Estimates                        x
                                             Projected future roadway segment analysis                         x
                                             Future Total Peak-Hour(s) Traffic Volume Estimates (Background    x
                                             + Vested + Project Trips)
                                             Projected future Peak-Hour(s) roadway intersection analysis       x
                                             including proposed turn lanes and signals
                                             Projected Future Roadway Concurrency Analysis                      x
                                             Conclusions and Recommended Improvements                           x
                                             Site access recommendations                                        x
                                             Concurrency mitigation strategy                                                 x
                                             Methodology Documentation & Conceptual Site Plan                   x
                                             Traffic Count Data & Inventory of Existing Road Conditions         x
APPENDIX DATA




                                             Confirmation of Scheduled Improvements (Copy of Appropriate
                                             CIE)
                                                                                                                x
                                             Existing Conditions Analysis Worksheets (HCS Printouts)            x
                                             Background Traffic Growth Worksheets                               x
                                             Trip Generation, Internal Capture, Pass-By Capture Worksheets      x
                                             Future Conditions Analysis Worksheets (HCS Printouts)              x
                                             Turn Lanes Analysis Worksheets (Queue Length)                      x
                                             Signal Warrant Analysis                                             x
                                             Multi Way STOP Warrant Analysis                                                 x
                                             1 – Remarks: Justify “NO” and “N/A”

Submitted By: _______________                                                             _                  Raghu K. Veturi, P.E.
                                                                                              Printed Name:________________________
                                                                        Date:___________________________




                                                                                              14
W9401.1–Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL                                            Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)



                                                   TABLE OF CONTENTS



1.0     Executive Summary............................................................................................................ 1
2.0     Introduction ......................................................................................................................... 3
        2.1       Site Access .............................................................................................................. 3
3.0     Trip Generation................................................................................................................... 7
4.0     Trip Distribution and Assignment ....................................................................................... 9
        4.1       Significance Test ................................................................................................... 11
        4.2       Study Area ............................................................................................................. 12
        4.3       Traffic Data Collection ........................................................................................... 12
5.0     Analysis Scenarios ........................................................................................................... 13
        5.1       Scheduled/Planned/Funded/Improvements .......................................................... 13
        5.2       Roadway Analysis ................................................................................................. 13
        5.3       Intersection Analysis.............................................................................................. 15
6.0     Traffic Signal Warrant Analyses ....................................................................................... 17
        6.1       Field Observations and Data Collection ................................................................ 17
        6.2       Signal Warrant Analysis......................................................................................... 17
        6.3       Crash Analysis....................................................................................................... 18
        6.4       Results ................................................................................................................... 18
7.0     Turn Lane Analysis........................................................................................................... 19
8.0     Recommendations............................................................................................................ 20
9.0     Conclusions ...................................................................................................................... 21



                                                       LIST OF TABLES



Table 3-1       ITE Trip Generation (Gross Trips) ............................................................................. 7
Table 3-2       ITE Trip Generation (Net-New Trips)......................................................................... 7
Table 4-1       Significance Test...................................................................................................... 11
Table 5-1       Peak Hour Two-Way Roadway Analysis ................................................................. 14
Table 5-2       AM/PM Peak Hour Signalized Intersection LOS and Delay .................................... 15
Table 5-3       AM/PM Peak Hour Unsginalized Intersection Approach Levels of Service............. 16
Table 6-1       Traffic Signal Warrant Analysis Results................................................................... 18




CPH, Inc.                                                            i                                                    November 2013
W9401.1–Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL                                         Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)



                                                   LIST OF FIGURES



Figure 2-1   Site Location Map ...................................................................................................... 5
Figure 2-2   Site Plan..................................................................................................................... 6
Figure 4-1   Trip Distribution........................................................................................................ 10



                                                LIST OF APPENDICES


APPENDIX A       METHODOLOGY CORRESPONDENCE

APPENDIX B       TRIP GENERATION

APPENDIX C       TRAFFIC DATA

APPENDIX D       TRAFFIC VOLUME FIGURES

APPENDIX E       INTERSECTION ANALYSIS WORKSHEETS

APPENDIX F       TURN LANE WARRANT ANALYSIS WORKSHEETS

APPENDIX G       REFERENCES

APPENDIX H       TRAFFIC SIGNAL WARRANT ANALYSIS




CPH, Inc.                                                         ii                                                   November 2013
W9401.1–Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL                Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)




1.0       Executive Summary

The applicant proposes to develop a retail center in the northeast quadrant and northwest
quadrant of the intersection of Saxon Boulevard and Sterling Silver Boulevard in City of Deltona,
Volusia County, Florida. The Retail Center will consist of the following developments:


Northeast Corner of Saxon Boulevard and Sterling Silver Boulevard
      •   44,000 square foot (sf) Supermarket; and
      •   5,700 square foot (sf) Convenience Market with Gasoline Pumps.


Northwest Corner of Saxon Boulevard and Sterling Silver Boulevard
      •   14,000 square foot (sf) Shopping Center;
      •   4,500 square foot (sf) Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-Through Window; and
      •   4,500 square foot (sf) Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-Through Window.


The two sites are currently vacant. The project is anticipated to be complete and operational in
the year 2016. Access from the site to the roadway network is proposed through: two (2) right-
in/right-out driveways on Saxon Boulevard, one (1) full access driveway on Sterling Silver
Boulevard, one (1) right-in/right-out/left-in driveway on Sterling Silver Boulevard, two (2) full
access driveways on Alabaster Way, and one (1) right-in driveway on Alabaster Way.


The study area roadways are expected to operate at acceptable levels of service with the
exception of the following roadway segments:
      •   Saxon Boulevard from I-4 to Finland Drive; and
      •   Saxon Boulevard from Finland Drive to Normandy Boulevard.


These two roadway segments are classified as critical roadways and are deficient in existing
conditions. The proposed project impact on these two roadways is 3.7%, which is not a significant
impact.


The study area signalized intersections are expected to operate at acceptable LOS with the
exception of the following for future conditions:
      •   Saxon Boulevard & Finland Drive in AM peak hour; and
      •   Saxon Boulevard & Normandy Boulevard in AM peak hour.




CPH, Inc.                                           1                                November 2013
W9401.1–Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL                  Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)



The intersection of Saxon Boulevard & Finland Drive is currently operating at a 120 seconds
cycle length during the AM peak hour. By modifying the cycle length to 125 seconds this
intersection is expected to operate at acceptable levels of service.


The intersection of Saxon Boulevard & Normandy Boulevard is operating at LOS F in existing and
future background conditions. In future total conditions, with the addition of project traffic this
intersection continues to operate at LOS F. However, the intersection delay is anticipated to
increase by only 4.6 seconds, which is less than 5% of the future background conditions
intersection delay.


The study area unsignalized intersections are expected to operate at acceptable LOS with the
exception of Saxon Boulevard & Sterling Silver Boulevard.


The following improvements are recommended as a result of this analysis:
    •   for the intersection of Saxon Boulevard & Finland Drive, modify am peak hour cycle
        length from 120 seconds to 125 seconds;
    •   for the intersection of Saxon Boulevard & Sterling Silver Boulevard, add second
        southbound left-turn lane at Saxon Boulevard & Sterling Silver Boulevard and provide
        signalization;
    •   a 185’ Westbound right-turn lane at Saxon Boulevard & Driveway 1;
    •   a 185’ Westbound right-turn lane at Saxon Boulevard & Driveway 2;
    •   a 170’ Northbound left-turn lane at Sterling Silver Boulevard & Alabaster Way; and
    •   a 145’ Northbound right-turn lane at Sterling Silver Boulevard & Alabaster Way.




CPH, Inc.                                         2                                    November 2013
W9401.1–Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL                    Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)



2.0       Introduction

The applicant proposes to develop a retail center in the northeast quadrant and northwest
quadrant of the intersection of Saxon Boulevard and Sterling Silver Boulevard in City of Deltona,
Volusia County, Florida. The proposed retail center will consist of the following land uses:


Northeast Corner of Saxon Boulevard and Sterling Silver Boulevard
      •   44,000 square foot (sf) Supermarket; and
      •   5,700 square foot (sf) Convenience Market with Gasoline Pumps.


Northwest Corner of Saxon Boulevard and Sterling Silver Boulevard
      •   14,000 square foot (sf) Shopping Center;
      •   4,500 square foot (sf) Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-Through Window; and
      •   4,500 square foot (sf) Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-Through Window.


Please see Figures 2-1 and Figure 2-2 for site location map and site plan for reference. The two
sites are currently vacant. The project is anticipated to be completed and operational in the year
2016. The report is being provided in accordance with City of Deltona and Volusia County
requirements for transportation impact analysis (TIA). This report addresses the following:


      1. traffic impacts of the project;
      2. traffic concurrency requirements;
      3. specific recommendations for safe and adequate access to and from the site; and
      4. traffic signal warrant analysis at the intersection of Saxon Boulevard & Sterling Silver
          Boulevard based upon projected traffic volumes.


CPH has coordinated with the City of Deltona and Volusia County staff prior to commencing the
study and submitted a TIA methodology.

2.1       Site Access

Access to the project site is proposed through the following driveways:
      •   two (2) right-in/right-out driveways on Saxon Boulevard (Driveway 1 and Driveway 2);
      •   one (1) full access driveway on Sterling Silver Boulevard (Driveway 3);
      •   one (1) right-in/right-out/left-in driveway on Sterling Silver Boulevard (Driveway 4);
      •   two (2) full access driveways on Alabaster Way; and
      •   one (1) right-in driveway on Alabaster Way.




CPH, Inc.                                           3                                    November 2013
W9401.1–Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL               Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)



Saxon Boulevard is a four-lane divided roadway with a posted speed limit of 40 miles per hour
and is under the jurisdiction of Volusia County. Sterling Silver Boulevard is a two-lane divided
roadway which is under the jurisdiction of City of Deltona. Alabaster Way is a two-lane undivided
local road under the jurisdiction of City of Deltona.


2.2     Traffic Study Methodology


CPH has coordinated with the City of Deltona and Volusia County staff prior to commencing the
analysis and submitted a TIA methodology. This analysis has been prepared to be consistent with
Volusia County and City of Deltona TIA requirements and the agreed upon methodology. Please
see the attached methodology correspondence in Appendix A for reference.




CPH, Inc.                                          4                                November 2013
                              PROJECT
                                SITE




                                                    PROJECT
                                                      SITE




            Figure 2-1 Site Location Map
            Saxon Sterling Silver - BPUD
NE and NW Corners of Saxon Blvd. & Sterling Silver Blvd.
                  Deltona, Florida


                                                   5
                          Figure 2-2   Site Plan




                              DRIVEWAY 4


                          DRIVEWAY 3




DRIVEWAY 2




             DRIVEWAY 1




                                       6
W9401.1–Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL                  Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)




3.0     Trip Generation

The trip generation potential for the proposed project was determined based upon the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, 9th Edition. Internal capture and pass-by
rates were applied based upon ITE Trip Generation Handbook. Pass-by trips were checked to be
less than 14% of the adjacent street peak hour traffic. Tables 3-1 and 3-2, shows a summary of
ITE Trip Generation. Please see Appendix B for trip generation worksheets.

Table 3-1        ITE Trip Generation (Gross Trips)

                                                           ITE
                                                                                       AM        PM
                                                          Land   Size      Gross
                    Land Use                                                          Peak      Peak
                                                          Use    (ksf)     Daily
                                                                                      Hour      Hour
                                                          Code
                         Supermarket                      850    44.0      4,499       150       417
  NE         Convenience Market with Gasoline
                                                          853    5.7       4,820       233       290
 Corner                  Pumps
                                        Sub-Total                          9,318       383       707
                       Shopping Center                    820    14.0      1,892        13       160
              Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-
                                                          934    4.5       2,233       204       147
  NW                 Through Window
 Corner       Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-
                                                          934    4.5       2,233       204       147
                     Through Window
                                        Sub-Total                          6,357       422       454
                                    TOTAL                                 15,676       805      1,162
Note: ksf = thousand square feet.

Table 3-2        ITE Trip Generation (Net-New Trips)

                                                                  ITE
                                                                                      AM        PM
                                                                 Land      Size
                          Land Use                                                   Peak      Peak
                                                                 Use       (ksf)
                                                                                     Hour      Hour
                                                                 Code
                                     Supermarket                 850       44.0       77        230
                        Convenience Market with Gasoline
   NE Corner                                                     853        5.7       75         79
                                    Pumps
                                               Sub-Total                              152       309
                                    Shopping Center              820       14.0        7         85
                         Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-
                                                                 934        4.5       103        65
                                Through Window
  NW Corner
                         Fast Food Restaurant with Drive-
                                                                 934        4.5       103        65
                                Through Window
                                               Sub-Total                              213       215
                                       TOTAL                                          365       524
Note: ksf = thousand square feet.




CPH, Inc.                                             7                                November 2013
W9401.1–Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL              Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)



Based upon trip generation projection, it is anticipated that the proposed project will generate
approximately 15,676 gross daily trips with 365 net-new trips during AM peak hour and 524 net-
new trips during PM peak hour.




CPH, Inc.                                         8                                November 2013
W9401.1–Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL                Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)



4.0     Trip Distribution and Assignment

Trip distribution for the proposed project was determined based upon Florida Standard Urban
Transportation Model Structure (FSUTMS) using Central Florida Regional Planning Model
(CFRPM) version 5.2. Please see Figure 4-1 for project traffic distribution. Distribution plot and
detailed traffic distribution by movement at the study area intersections are shown in traffic
volume figures attached in Appendix D.




CPH, Inc.                                         9                                  November 2013
Figure 4-1   Trip Distribution



                                 N




        10
W9401.1–Saxon Sterling Silver BPUD, Deltona, FL                             Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)




4.1       Significance Test

The study area for the proposed project was determined based upon a link significance test per
Volusia County TIA Requirements. Please see Table 4-1 for link significance test.

Table 4-1            Significance Test

                                                                           Peak
                                             Number                        Hour        Project
                                                      Area      Adopted                             Project        %
Roadway          From             To            of                         Two-      Distribution
                                                      Type       LOS                                 Trips    Significance
                                              Lanes                         Way          (%)
                                                                          Capacity
                               Finland
                   I-4                         4L     UA          E        3,222        23%          120         3.71%
                                Drive
                 Finland      Normandy
                                               4L     UA          E        3,222        23%          120         3.71%
                  Drive       Boulevard
                               Sterling
               Normandy
                                Silver         4L     UA          E        3,222        53%          275         8.55%
               Boulevard
                              Boulevard
 Saxon          Sterling
Boulevard        Silver       Tivoli Drive     4L     UA          E        3,222        47%          244         7.58%
               Boulevard
                              Providence
               Tivoli Drive                    2L     UA          E        1,015        21%          109        10.75%
                              Boulevard
               Providence     Normandy
                                               2L     UA          E        1,015        14%           73         7.17%
               Boulevard      Boulevard
               Normandy         Doyle
                                               2L     UA          E        1,152         9%           47         4.06%
               Boulevard         Road
               Normandy         Saxon
                                               2L     UA          E        1,015         9%           47         4.61%
               Boulevard      Boulevard
Tivoli Drive
                 Saxon        Providence
                                               2L     UA          E        1,015        17%           88         8.70%
               Boulevard      Boulevard
                 Elckam         Saxon
                                               4L     UA          E        2,736        13%           68         2.47%
               Boulevard      Boulevard
                 Saxon         Deltona
                                               2L     UA          E        1,015        13%           68         6.65%
               Boulevard      Boulevard
Normandy        Deltona
                              Tivoli Drive     3L     UA          E        1,015         1%           5          0.51%
Boulevard      Boulevard
                              Providence
               Tivoli Drive                    3L     UA          E        1,015         5%           26         2.56%
                              Boulevard
               Providence       Saxon
                                               2L     UA          E        1,269         2%           10         0.82%
               Boulevard      Boulevard
 Deltona       Normandy       Cloverleaf
                                               4L     UA          E        2,736        11%           57         2.09%
Boulevard      Boulevard      Boulevard
               Fort Smith
                              Tivoli Drive     4L     UA          E        2,736        16%           83         3.04%
               Boulevard
Providence                 Saxon
               Tivoli Drive               2L      UA       E        1,269                3%           16         1.23%
Boulevard                Boulevard
              Saxon      Normandy
                                          2L      UA       E        1,015                3%           16         1.54%
             Boulevard   Boulevard
Peak Hour Two-Way Capacities were derived from FDOT LOS Tables 2012




CPH, Inc.                                                  11                                       November 2013
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Finland Dr -- Saxon Blvd                                                                                         QC JOB #: 11213801
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                    DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                    270          63                            Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                                 0.7        4.8

                    243 12       15
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                             0.8 0.0 0.0


       2251   45                         11   1927
                                                                                                                1.3   2.2                      18.2         1.5
              502         0.94         1888
                                                                                                                      4.2                          1.4
       567    20                         28    534
                                                                                                                4.1   5.0                          0.0      4.3

                    119    8     17
                                                                                                                             1.7 0.0 11.8

                    60           144
                                                                                                                             1.7        2.8



                           2                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                             0

              0                           0                                                                           1                             0

                                                                                                                      0                             0

                           1                                                                                                  0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                       NA




              NA                        NA                                                                            NA                           NA




                          NA                                                                                                       NA

                                                                                                                                                           R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count          Finland Dr                             Finland Dr                   Saxon Blvd                  Saxon Blvd                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                           (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U                 R*   Left Thru Right U        R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    7:00 AM    21    0      0     0              2    4     4     37     0    18    11 119      2     0    0     3 377     4      0            0         602
    7:15 AM    30    0      1     0              1    4     1     36     0    14     6 139      6     0    0     6 441     1      0            0         686
    7:30 AM    41    3      3     0              3    7     4     50     0    11    12 127      1     0    0     4 504     1      0            0         771
    7:45 AM    23    3      3     0              4    2     1     62     0     9    15 115      4     0    0    11 492     6      0            0         750      2809
    8:00 AM    25    2      1     0              1    2     6     54     0     7    11 121      8     1    1     7 451     3      0            0         701      2908
    8:15 AM    25    2      2     0              4    3     1     31     0    23     9 116      4     0    1     3 367     2      0            0         593      2815
    8:30 AM    16    1      0     0              3    6     1     22     0    27    11 153      7     1    2     2 324     1      0            1         578      2622
    8:45 AM    12    2      1     0              3    5     5     22     0    10    14 154      4     0    0     2 328     4      0            0         566      2438




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                            Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U                R*   Left Thru Right U        R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles 164   12    12    0              12    28   16 200      0      44    48 508      4    0     0    16 2016     4    0             0            3084
 Heavy Trucks    0    0     0                          0    0     8                  0    4     0                0   24     0                                36
  Pedestrians         0                                     0                             0                           0                                       0
    Bicycles     0    0     0                          0    0     0                  0    1     0                0    0     0                                 1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Finland Dr -- Saxon Blvd                                                                                         QC JOB #: 11213802
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                    DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                     141          237                          Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                 0.7        1.3

                     100 24       17
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 5.9


       1145   173                        17   1031
                                                                                                                1.7   0.6                          5.9      1.8
              1817         0.93         942
                                                                                                                      1.5                          1.8
       2046   56                         72   1955
                                                                                                                1.4   0.0                          1.4      1.5

                     103 48 121
                                                                                                                             2.9 2.1 0.0

                     153          272
                                                                                                                             0.7        1.5



                            0                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                             0

              4                           0                                                                           0                             2

                                                                                                                      0                             0

                            0                                                                                                 0    1    0




                           NA                                                                                                      NA




              NA                        NA                                                                            NA                           NA




                           NA                                                                                                      NA

                                                                                                                                                           R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count          Finland Dr                             Finland Dr                   Saxon Blvd                  Saxon Blvd                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                           (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U                 R*   Left Thru Right U        R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    4:00 PM    15   12     20     0             12    3     7     12     0     5    33 363    14      0    1    19 192     6      0            0         714
    4:15 PM    21    9     14     0              9    2     2     11     0    11    29 378      7     0    0    16 214     6      0            0         729
    4:30 PM    26   13     26     0             10    0     6     14     0    11    39 396    13      0    2    11 249     1      0            0         817
    4:45 PM    21   12     16     1              4    4     9     14     0    13    39 460      9     0    0    12 243     2      0            0         859      3119
    5:00 PM    24   15     25     0              6    4     1      2     0    17    42 444      9     1    1    21 239     2      0            0         853      3258
    5:15 PM    31   10     26     0              6    5     8      9     0    18    52 486    18      0    2    17 245     8      0            0         941      3470
    5:30 PM    26   11     32     0              6    4     6     10     0    17    39 427    17      0    0    22 215     5      0            0         837      3490
    5:45 PM    18   13     26     0              4    6     4      7     0    21    35 435      8     0    1    21 221     3      0            0         823      3454




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                            Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U                R*   Left Thru Right U        R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles 124   40 104      0              24    20   32    36    0      72   208 1944    72    0     8    68 980     32    0             0            3764
 Heavy Trucks    4    0     0                          4    0     0                  0   32     0                0   20     0                                60
  Pedestrians         0                                     0                             0                           0                                       0
    Bicycles     0    0     0                          0    0     0                  0    0     0                0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Normandy Blvd -- Saxon Blvd                                                                                    QC JOB #: 11213803
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                  DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                    671          303                          Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                                2.1        3.6

                    461 132 78
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                           1.5 1.5 6.4


       1855   125                       56    1256
                                                                                                              1.5   7.2                          1.8      1.5
              313         0.93         1160
                                                                                                                    5.1                          1.4
       527    89                        40     405
                                                                                                              5.1   2.2                          5.0      5.2

                    234 122 14
                                                                                                                           1.7 0.8 0.0

                    261          370
                                                                                                                           2.3        1.4



                           0                                                                                                0    0    0



                                                                                                                    0                             0

              0                          0                                                                          0                             0

                                                                                                                    0                             0

                           0                                                                                                0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                     NA




              NA                        NA                                                                          NA                           NA




                          NA                                                                                                     NA

                                                                                                                                                         R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count       Normandy Blvd                          Normandy Blvd                 Saxon Blvd                  Saxon Blvd                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                           (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U                 R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    7:00 AM    49   19     4    0                3     5   16    67    0    24    25   47     4     0    6     7 261    18      0            0         555
    7:15 AM    62   41     0    0                0    25   24    84    0    22    27   80   13      0   13     7 256    14      0            0         668
    7:30 AM    55   27     4    0                4    31   28 109      0    15    40   81   12      0   11    10 314    14      0            1         756
    7:45 AM    72   32     3    0                0    17   35 103      0    13    34   67     8     0   14    12 300    14      0            0         724      2703
    8:00 AM    45   22     3    0                0     5   45    98    0    17    24   85     4     0   14    11 290    12      0            1         676      2824
    8:15 AM    68   30     4    0                1    11   39    63    0    26    22   72   19      0    5    17 191     6      0            1         575      2731
    8:30 AM    43   37     3    0                2     9   11    51    0    25    26   85   22      0   15     7 210    20      0            0         566      2541
    8:45 AM    46   31     6    0                1    17   44    54    0    14    36   92     9     0   14    14 178     6      0            1         563      2380




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                            Southbound                   Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U                R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles 220 108     16    0              16   124 112 436       0    60   160 324     48    0    44    40 1256    56    0             4            3024
 Heavy Trucks    0    0     0                          4    0     4                0    0     0                0   20     0                                28
  Pedestrians         0                                     0                           0                           0                                       0
    Bicycles     0    0     0                          0    0     0                0    0     0                0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Normandy Blvd -- Saxon Blvd                                                                                    QC JOB #: 11213804
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                  DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                     475          590                         Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                2.5        1.9

                     219 170 86
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                           1.8 4.1 1.2


       1019   378                        46    678
                                                                                                              1.8   1.3                          4.3      2.5
              1251         0.97         599
                                                                                                                    1.8                          2.2
       1894   265                        33   1369
                                                                                                              1.5   0.8                          6.1      1.8

                     201 166 32
                                                                                                                           0.5 2.4 3.1

                     468          399
                                                                                                                           2.4        1.5



                            0                                                                                               0    0    0



                                                                                                                    0                             0

              1                           1                                                                         0                             0

                                                                                                                    0                             0

                            0                                                                                               0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                    NA




              NA                        NA                                                                          NA                           NA




                           NA                                                                                                    NA

                                                                                                                                                         R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count       Normandy Blvd                          Normandy Blvd                 Saxon Blvd                  Saxon Blvd                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                           (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U                 R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    4:00 PM    40   28     5    0                2    13   33    23    0    11    77 261    48      0    9     8 141      8     0            0         707
    4:15 PM    43   32     3    0                1    12   33    48    0    13    91 237    54      0   13     4 123      9     0            0         716
    4:30 PM    52   39     6    0                1    11   31    35    0    20    80 272    47      0   14     7 148      9     0            0         772
    4:45 PM    40   35    10    0                3    23   35    36    0    18    98 293    48      0   22     6 150      5     0            2         824      3019
    5:00 PM    47   47     5    0                0    19   35    33    0    12    93 297    40      0   22     7 181     11     0            1         850      3162
    5:15 PM    56   37     7    0                1    22   52    51    0    16    93 315    50      0   18    11 146    12      0            0         887      3333
    5:30 PM    50   44    10    0                1    21   35    41    0    12    89 320    54      0   17     7 142    10      0            2         855      3416
    5:45 PM    48   38     8    0                0    24   48    36    0    18   103 319    48      0   16     8 130      8     0            2         854      3446




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                            Southbound                   Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U                R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles 224 148     28    0               4    88 208 204       0    64   372 1260 200      0    72    44 584     48    0             0            3548
 Heavy Trucks    0    0     0                          0    0     8                8   36     0                4   12     4                                72
  Pedestrians         0                                     0                           0                           4                                       4
    Bicycles     0    0     0                          0    0     0                0    0     0                0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Sterling Silver Blvd -- Saxon Blvd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11213805
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                      DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                    39          17                           Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                                     0.0         5.9

                    28    1     10
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       1185   10                       7    1163
                                                                                                                 1.2   0.0                        14.3         1.3
              477        0.86        1151
                                                                                                                       3.6                            1.2
       491    4                        5    495
                                                                                                                 3.9   50.0                           0.0      3.4

                    6     0     8
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                    10          14
                                                                                                                               20.0        0.0



                          4                                                                                                     0     0    0



                                                                                                                       0                               1

              0                        0                                                                               1                               0

                                                                                                                       0                               0

                          0                                                                                                     0     0    0




                         NA                                                                                                           NA




              NA                      NA                                                                               NA                             NA




                         NA                                                                                                           NA

                                                                                                                                                              R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count      Sterling Silver Blvd                 Sterling Silver Blvd                Saxon Blvd                  Saxon Blvd                          Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                         (Southbound)                     (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U               R*   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U                R*
    7:00 AM    0      0     1      0           0    1      0     6      0       0    1    79     0     0    0    0 231      3      0              0         322
    7:15 AM    1      0     2      0           0    2      0    10      0       0    0 135       2     0    0    1 248      0      0              0         401
    7:30 AM    3      0     3      0           0    2      0     2      0       0    3 164       0     0    0    1 314      3      0              0         495
    7:45 AM    1      0     2      0           0    4      0     9      0       0    7 101       1     0    0    0 318      3      0              0         446      1664
    8:00 AM    1      0     1      0           0    2      1     7      0       0    0    77     1     0    0    3 271      1      0              0         365      1707
    8:15 AM    2      0     0      0           0    0      0     7      0       0    1    95     1     0    0    1 199      4      0              0         310      1616
    8:30 AM    2      1     4      0           0    0      0     5      0       0    1    78     1     0    0    1 198      0      0              0         291      1412
    8:45 AM    2      0     0      0           0    1      0     4      0       0    6 111       1     0    0    1 179      2      0              0         307      1273




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                          Southbound                        Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U              R*   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U                R*            Total
  All Vehicles  12    0    12    0             0     8    0     8    0          0    12 656      0    0     0     4 1256    12    0               0            1980
 Heavy Trucks    0    0     0                        0    0     0                     0   12     0                0   16     0                                  28
  Pedestrians         0                                   4                                0                           0                                         4
    Bicycles     0    0     0                        0    0     0                     0    0     0                0    0     0                                   0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Sterling Silver Blvd -- Saxon Blvd                                                                                QC JOB #: 11213806
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                     DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                     28          40                          Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                    0.0        2.5

                     18    0     10
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0


       628    30                       10   619
                                                                                                                 1.8   3.3                          0.0      1.8
              1113        0.96        603
                                                                                                                       1.5                          1.8
       1151   8                         6   1132
                                                                                                                 1.6   0.0                          0.0      1.5

                     7     0     9
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

                     14          16
                                                                                                                              0.0        0.0



                           5                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                       0                             0

              1                         0                                                                              0                             0

                                                                                                                       0                             0

                           0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                        NA




              NA                      NA                                                                               NA                           NA




                          NA                                                                                                        NA

                                                                                                                                                            R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count      Sterling Silver Blvd                 Sterling Silver Blvd                Saxon Blvd                  Saxon Blvd                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                         (Southbound)                     (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U               R*   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    4:00 PM    1      1     1      0           0    2      0     7      0       0    4 225       3     0    0    1 126      1      0            0         372
    4:15 PM    0      0     2      0           0    2      0     3      0       0    2 223       3     0    0    3 132      2      1            0         373
    4:30 PM    5      0     1      0           0    2      0     6      0       0    3 237       3     0    0    0 158      1      0            0         416
    4:45 PM    1      0     2      0           0    0      0     2      0       0    8 257       4     0    0    1 155      3      0            0         433      1594
    5:00 PM    2      0     2      0           0    3      0     7      0       0    7 272       2     0    0    6 168      4      0            0         473      1695
    5:15 PM    1      0     2      0           0    1      0     3      0       0    8 273       0     0    0    0 155      2      0            0         445      1767
    5:30 PM    1      0     2      0           0    3      0     2      0       0    8 288       2     0    0    0 151      1      0            0         458      1809
    5:45 PM    3      0     3      0           0    3      0     6      0       0    7 280       4     0    0    0 129      3      0            0         438      1814




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                          Southbound                        Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U              R*   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles   8    0     8    0             0    12    0    28    0          0    28 1088     8    0     0    24 672     16    0             0            1892
 Heavy Trucks    0    0     0                        0    0     0                     0   24     0                0    0     0                                24
  Pedestrians         0                                   8                                0                           0                                       8
    Bicycles     0    0     0                        0    0     0                     0    0     0                0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Tivoli Dr -- Saxon Blvd                                                                                      QC JOB #: 11213807
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                   560          178                         Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                                2.3        5.1

                   462 70       28
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                         1.3 8.6 3.6


       983   118                        6   462
                                                                                                            1.4   4.2                          0.0      1.7
             170         0.88         447
                                                                                                                  5.9                          1.6
       331   43                         9   211
                                                                                                            5.1   4.7                      11.1         5.2

                   74     54    13
                                                                                                                         1.4 7.4 0.0

                   122          141
                                                                                                                         7.4        3.5



                          2                                                                                               0    0    0



                                                                                                                  0                             0

             1                          1                                                                         0                             0

                                                                                                                  0                             0

                          3                                                                                               0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                       NA                                                                          NA                           NA




                         NA                                                                                                    NA

                                                                                                                                                       R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count          Tivoli Dr                           Tivoli Dr                   Saxon Blvd                  Saxon Blvd                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                        (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U              R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    7:00 AM    15    7     1     0            0     0    9    76     0    20    28   27     0     0    2    0 100      0      0            0         285
    7:15 AM    17   15     1     0            1     3   12    81     0    28    30   41     4     0    7    1 111      2      0            1         355
    7:30 AM    23   19     2     0            2     8   21 114       0    16    27   53     8     0    7    2 123      0      0            0         425
    7:45 AM    20    9     3     0            0    10   14 100       0    23    26   32     5     0    3    2 110      2      0            1         360      1425
    8:00 AM    14   11     2     0            2     7   23    81     0    19    35   44     7     0    2    4 103      0      0            0         354      1494
    8:15 AM    12   10     2     0            0     4   17    63     0    20    36   31     7     0    1    1    86    1      0            0         291      1430
    8:30 AM    22   21     0     0            1     2   18    54     0    23    34   30     4     0    2    2 100      5      0            0         318      1323
    8:45 AM    10   15     0     0            0     0   18    49     0    26    42   44     2     0    1    1    88    4      0            1         301      1264




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                         Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U             R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles  92   76     8    0            8    32   84 456      0     64   108 212     32    0    28     8 492      0    0             0            1700
 Heavy Trucks    0    8     0                       0    8     8                 8    4     0                0    8     0                                44
  Pedestrians         8                                  8                            0                           0                                      16
    Bicycles     0    0     0                       0    0     0                 0    0     0                0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Tivoli Dr -- Saxon Blvd                                                                                       QC JOB #: 11213808
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                 DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                    335          555                        Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                 0.6        2.0

                    223 84       28
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                          0.4 1.2 0.0


       493    456                        9   243
                                                                                                             1.6   2.0                          0.0      2.5
              506         0.96         227
                                                                                                                   1.2                          2.6
       1023   61                         7   553
                                                                                                             1.5   0.0                          0.0      1.1

                    43     90    19
                                                                                                                          2.3 2.2 0.0

                    152          152
                                                                                                                          0.7        2.0



                           2                                                                                               0    0    0



                                                                                                                   0                             0

              0                          0                                                                         0                             0

                                                                                                                   0                             0

                           1                                                                                               0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                    NA




              NA                       NA                                                                          NA                           NA




                          NA                                                                                                    NA

                                                                                                                                                        R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count          Tivoli Dr                            Tivoli Dr                   Saxon Blvd                  Saxon Blvd                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                         (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U               R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    4:00 PM     3   23     1     0             1     2   16    22     0    18   114   84     5     0    4    2    73    1      0            0         369
    4:15 PM     8   25     1     0             0     3   18    26     0    26   106   98   10      0    3    2    62    0      0            0         388
    4:30 PM    10   24     1     0             0     7   15    45     0    15    97 108      9     0    4    1    69    1      0            0         406
    4:45 PM    11   16     0     0             0     2   21    38     0    25   101 102      8     0    7    4    68    1      0            0         404      1567
    5:00 PM     7   24     0     0             3     3   28    40     0    19   116 117      8     0    6    1    67    3      0            0         442      1640
    5:15 PM    12   17     1     0             1     1   10    15     0    33   123 118      9     0    2    2    63    2      0            0         409      1661
    5:30 PM    12   22     8     0             0    10   23    37     0    22   126 128      6     0    5    3    49    4      0            0         455      1710
    5:45 PM    12   27     4     0             2    14   23    39     0    18    91 143    16      0    9    1    48    0      0            0         447      1753




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                          Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U              R*   Left Thru Right U       R*   Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles  48   88    32    0             0    40   92 148      0     88   504 512     24    0    20    12 196     16    0             0            1820
 Heavy Trucks    0    4     0                        0    0     0                 8   12     0                0    8     0                                32
  Pedestrians         4                                   0                            0                           0                                       4
    Bicycles     0    0     0                        0    0     0                 0    0     0                0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Providence Blvd -- Tivoli Dr                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11213810
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                   620          815                      Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                   1.1        2.0

                   257 356       7
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                         0.8 1.4 0.0


       301   454                      18   37
                                                                                                            0.7   2.2                          0.0      0.0
             17          0.94         10
                                                                                                                  0.0                          0.0
       500   29                        9   32
                                                                                                            2.4   6.9                          0.0      0.0

                   34 343        8
                                                                                                                         0.0 1.7 0.0

                   394          385
                                                                                                                         1.8        1.6



                          0                                                                                               0    0    0



                                                                                                                  0                             0

             0                         2                                                                          0                             0

                                                                                                                  0                             0

                          0                                                                                               0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                       NA                                                                          NA                           NA




                         NA                                                                                                    NA

                                                                                                                                                       R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count       Providence Blvd                   Providence Blvd                   Tivoli Dr                   Tivoli Dr                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U            R*   Left Thru Right U        R*    Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    4:00 PM     9   54     1     0          0    3    60    23     0     26    119    3     3     0    1    2     1     3     0            0         308
    4:15 PM     5   56     1     0          0    1    77    31     0     22    116    2     4     0    1    2     0     2     0            1         321
    4:30 PM     3   53     1     0          0    0    69    31     0     22     92    3     9     0    1    2     1     2     0            0         289
    4:45 PM     6   98     3     0          1    5    59    43     0     26     97    5     4     0    1    1     2     2     0            3         356      1274
    5:00 PM     5   77     6     0          0    2    73    30     0     33    102    4    13     0    0    6     3     3     0            2         359      1325
    5:15 PM     8   75     1     0          0    2    85    22     0     28    133    5     4     0    0    1     4     4     0            3         375      1379
    5:30 PM    11   92     0     0          0    1 101      31     0     38    122    5     5     0    1    1     0     2     0            1         411      1501
    5:45 PM    10   99     1     0          0    2    97    40     0     35     97    3     6     0    0    1     3     2     0            1         397      1542




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                       Southbound                      Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U        R*    Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles  44 368      0    0          0     4 404 124       0      152   488   20    20    0     4     4    0     8    0             4            1644
 Heavy Trucks    0    0     0                     0    4     0                   8    0     0                0    0     0                                12
  Pedestrians         0                                0                              0                           4                                       4
    Bicycles     0    0     0                     0    0     0                   0    0     0                0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Providence Blvd -- Tivoli Dr                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11213810
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                   620          815                      Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                   1.1        2.0

                   257 356       7
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                         0.8 1.4 0.0


       301   454                      18   37
                                                                                                            0.7   2.2                          0.0      0.0
             17          0.94         10
                                                                                                                  0.0                          0.0
       500   29                        9   32
                                                                                                            2.4   6.9                          0.0      0.0

                   34 343        8
                                                                                                                         0.0 1.7 0.0

                   394          385
                                                                                                                         1.8        1.6



                          0                                                                                               0    0    0



                                                                                                                  0                             0

             0                         2                                                                          0                             0

                                                                                                                  0                             0

                          0                                                                                               0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                       NA                                                                          NA                           NA




                         NA                                                                                                    NA

                                                                                                                                                       R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count       Providence Blvd                   Providence Blvd                   Tivoli Dr                   Tivoli Dr                        Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U            R*   Left Thru Right U        R*    Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    4:00 PM     9   54     1     0          0    3    60    23     0     26    119    3     3     0    1    2     1     3     0            0         308
    4:15 PM     5   56     1     0          0    1    77    31     0     22    116    2     4     0    1    2     0     2     0            1         321
    4:30 PM     3   53     1     0          0    0    69    31     0     22     92    3     9     0    1    2     1     2     0            0         289
    4:45 PM     6   98     3     0          1    5    59    43     0     26     97    5     4     0    1    1     2     2     0            3         356      1274
    5:00 PM     5   77     6     0          0    2    73    30     0     33    102    4    13     0    0    6     3     3     0            2         359      1325
    5:15 PM     8   75     1     0          0    2    85    22     0     28    133    5     4     0    0    1     4     4     0            3         375      1379
    5:30 PM    11   92     0     0          0    1 101      31     0     38    122    5     5     0    1    1     0     2     0            1         411      1501
    5:45 PM    10   99     1     0          0    2    97    40     0     35     97    3     6     0    0    1     3     2     0            1         397      1542




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                       Southbound                      Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U        R*    Left Thru Right U      R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles  44 368      0    0          0     4 404 124       0      152   488   20    20    0     4     4    0     8    0             4            1644
 Heavy Trucks    0    0     0                     0    4     0                   8    0     0                0    0     0                                12
  Pedestrians         0                                0                              0                           4                                       4
    Bicycles     0    0     0                     0    0     0                   0    0     0                0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Sterling Silver Blvd -- Alabaster Way                                                                        QC JOB #: 11213811
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                   34          13                        Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                   0.0        0.0

                   0     34    0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                         0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                       1    3
                                                                                                            0.0   0.0                          0.0      0.0
             0          0.64         0
                                                                                                                  0.0                          0.0
       0     0                       2    7
                                                                                                            0.0   0.0                          0.0      0.0

                   0     12    7
                                                                                                                         0.0 0.0 0.0

                   36          19
                                                                                                                         0.0        0.0



                         0                                                                                                0    0    0



                                                                                                                  0                             0

             7                       0                                                                            0                             0

                                                                                                                  0                             0

                         0                                                                                                0    0    0




                        NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                     NA                                                                            NA                           NA




                        NA                                                                                                     NA

                                                                                                                                                       R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count      Sterling Silver Blvd             Sterling Silver Blvd              Alabaster Way              Alabaster Way                       Total Hourly
    Period           (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                     (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    7:00 AM    0      4     0      0       0    0      7     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    0     0    0     0             0          11
    7:15 AM    0      0     0      0       0    0    12      0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    0     0    0     0             0          12
    7:30 AM    0      3     2      0       0    0      6     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    0     0    0     0             0          11
    7:45 AM    0      5     5      0       0    0      9     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    2     0    1     0             0          22        56
    8:00 AM    0      1     0      0       0    0      8     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    2     0    0     0             0          11        56
    8:15 AM    0      3     2      0       0    0      5     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    2     0    0     0             0          12        56
    8:30 AM    0      1     1      0       0    0      5     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    0     0    0     0             0           7        52
    8:45 AM    0      3     4      0       0    0      5     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    0     0    0     0             0          12        42




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                      Southbound                        Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U          R*   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles   0   20    20    0         0     0   36     0    0          0     0    0     0    0    0     8    0     4    0             0             88
 Heavy Trucks    0    0     0                    0    0     0                     0    0     0               0    0     0                                 0
  Pedestrians         0                               0                                8                          0                                       8
    Bicycles     0    0     0                    0    0     0                     0    0     0               0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Sterling Silver Blvd -- Alabaster Way                                                                        QC JOB #: 11213812
 CITY/STATE: Deltona, FL                                                                                                DATE: Wed, Sep 11 2013
                   21          33                        Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                   0.0        3.0

                   0     21    0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                         0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                       0    7
                                                                                                            0.0   0.0                          0.0      0.0
             0          0.80         0
                                                                                                                  0.0                          0.0
       0     0                       7    6
                                                                                                            0.0   0.0                          0.0      0.0

                   0     33    6
                                                                                                                         0.0 3.0 0.0

                   28          39
                                                                                                                         0.0        2.6



                         0                                                                                                0    0    0



                                                                                                                  0                             0

             2                       0                                                                            0                             0

                                                                                                                  0                             0

                         0                                                                                                0    0    0




                        NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                     NA                                                                            NA                           NA




                        NA                                                                                                     NA

                                                                                                                                                       R* = RTOR
 15-Min Count      Sterling Silver Blvd             Sterling Silver Blvd              Alabaster Way              Alabaster Way                       Total Hourly
    Period            (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                     (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U              R*
    4:00 PM    0      4     3      0       0    0      2     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    8     0    0     0             0          17
    4:15 PM    0      4     0      0       0    0      4     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    1     0    0     0             0           9
    4:30 PM    0      2     2      0       0    0      4     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    4     0    0     0             0          12
    4:45 PM    0     11     1      0       0    0      1     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    1     0    0     0             0          14        52
    5:00 PM    0      8     3      0       0    0      8     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    2     0    0     0             0          21        56
    5:15 PM    0      7     3      0       0    0      4     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    0     0    0     0             0          14        61
    5:30 PM    0      8     0      0       0    0      4     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    1     0    0     0             0          13        62
    5:45 PM    0    10      0      0       0    0      5     0      0       0    0     0     0    0    0    4     0    0     0             0          19        67




 Peak 15-Min          Northbound                      Southbound                        Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right U          R*   Left Thru Right U           R*   Left Thru Right U     R*   Left Thru Right U              R*            Total
  All Vehicles   0   32    12    0         0     0   32     0    0          0     0    0     0    0    0     8    0     0    0             0             84
 Heavy Trucks    0    0     0                    0    0     0                     0    0     0               0    0     0                                 0
  Pedestrians         0                               0                                0                          0                                       0
    Bicycles     0    0     0                    0    0     0                     0    0     0               0    0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/17/2013 7:30 AM                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                            Traffic Engineering Data Solutions, Inc.
                                                                                           80 Spring Vista Drive
                                                                                            DeBary, FL 32713
                                                                                                                                                                         File Name        : Not Named 2
                                                                                                                                                                         Site Code        : 00000000
                                                                                                                                                                         Start Date       : 5/6/2013
                                                                                                                                                                         Page No          :1


                                                                                    Groups Printed- All Vehicles
                             FINLAND                                       FINLAND                          SAXON                                                         SAXON
                                Northbound                                     Southbound                      Eastbound                                                    Westbound
 Start Time        Left Thru Right Peds            App. Total    Left       Thru Right Peds App. Total Left Thru Right Peds                      App. Total    Left Thru Right Peds             App. Total   Int. Total
   07:00 AM         23     0    2     0                25          4           3   53     0       60     6 114      6     0                         126          5 390      5     0               400          611
   07:15 AM         28     1    5     0                34          8           3   43     0       54     7 135      2     0                         144          5 474      2     0               481          713
   07:30 AM         35     1    9     0                45          3           3   73     0       79    13 165      7     0                         185          7 447      4     1               459          768
   07:45 AM         25     1    8     0                34         10           2   50     0       62     9 154      2     0                         165          8 485      2     0               495          756
       Total       111     3   24     0               138         25          11 219      0    255      35 568     17     0                         620         25 1796    13     1              1835         2848

   08:00 AM          18         0      6      0        24            2        1      61       0        64           7      142       3      0       152            5 476            9      0      490          730
   08:15 AM          27         1      4      0        32            4        6      42       1        53           6      126       2      2       136            3 317            3      0      323          544
   08:30 AM          18         3      6      0        27            1        4      39       0        44          14      144      12      0       170            5 359            0      0      364          605
   08:45 AM          11         3      7      0        21            3        2      45       1        51          16      150       6      0       172            8 330            5      1      344          588
       Total         74         7     23      0       104           10       13     187       2       212          43      562      23      2       630           21 1482          17      1     1521         2467

*** BREAK ***

   04:00 PM          22        16     29      0        67            4        5      39       0        48         34 404            11      0      449             8      193       5      2       208         772
   04:15 PM          18         4     19      0        41            6       11      26       1        44         40 392            11      0      443            24      240       5      0       269         797
   04:30 PM          23        11     25      0        59            5       11      26       0        42         32 380             6      0      418             9      231       1      0       241         760
   04:45 PM          32         8     27      0        67            2        7      25       0        34         39 395            17      0      451            19      220       4      2       245         797
       Total         95        39    100      0       234           17       34     116       1       168        145 1571           45      0     1761            60      884      15      4       963        3126

   05:00 PM          23        13     35      0        71             1       5      24       1        31         56 435            15      0      506            13      247       2      0      262          870
   05:15 PM          23        13     39      0        75             2       6      22       0        30         41 485            16      0      542            13      228       7      2      250          897
   05:30 PM          20        15     26      0        61             3       3      19       0        25         49 479            13      2      543            18      242       7      0      267          896
   05:45 PM          17        12     32      0        61             2       9      27       0        38         47 437            12      1      497            17      233       5      0      255          851
       Total         83        53    132      0       268             8      23      92       1       124        193 1836           56      3     2088            61      950      21      2     1034         3514

  Grand Total      363 102 279                0       744          60   81 614                4       759        416 4537          141      5     5099         167 5112            66      8     5353 11955
   Apprch %       48.8 13.7 37.5              0                   7.9 10.7 80.9             0.5                  8.2   89          2.8    0.1                  3.1 95.5           1.2    0.1
    Total %          3  0.9  2.3              0        6.2        0.5  0.7  5.1               0        6.3       3.5   38          1.2      0      42.7        1.4 42.8           0.6    0.1      44.8




                             FINLAND                                       FINLAND                                         SAXON                                          SAXON
                                Northbound                                    Southbound                                     Eastbound                                      Westbound
 Start Time Left Thru Right Peds App. Total Left Thru Right Peds                                   App. Total    Left Thru Right Peds            App. Total    Left Thru Right Peds             App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 07:00 AM to 11:45 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:15 AM
  07:15 AM     28        1     5     0       34     8  3   43  0                                        54            7    135       2      0       144             5     474       2      0       481          713
  07:30 AM     35        1      9    0       45     3  3   73  0                                         79         13     165       7      0       185             7     447       4      1       459           768
  07:45 AM     25        1     8     0       34    10  2   50  0                                       62           9      154       2      0       165             8      485      2      0       495         756
  08:00 AM     18        0     6     0       24     2  1   61  0                                       64           7      142       3      0       152            5 476            9      0      490          730
 Total Volume 106        3    28     0      137    23  9 227   0                                      259          36      596      14      0       646           25 1882          17      1     1925         2967
 % App. Total      77.4        2.2   20.4      0                  8.9         3.5   87.6       0                  5.6      92.3     2.2      0                  1.3       97.8     0.9    0.1
        PHF        .757       .750   .778   .000      .761       .575       .750    .777    .000      .820       .692      .903    .500   .000      .873       .781       .970    .472   .250      .972         .966

Peak Hour Analysis From 07:00 AM to 11:45 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Each Approach Begins at:
                  07:00 AM                                      07:15 AM                                        07:15 AM                                      07:15 AM

   +0 mins.   23    0    2   0                          25            8         3    43       0         54            7    135       2      0       144             5     474       2      0       481
  +15 mins.   28     1   5   0                          34            3        3      73      0            79         13     165      7     0           185         7     447       4       1      459
  +30 mins.    35   1     9  0                             45         10       2     50       0         62            9    154       2      0       165              8      485     2      0           495

  +45 mins.   25    1    8   0                          34            2        1     61       0         64            7    142       3      0       152             5     476        9     0       490
      Total                                                                                                                                                               188
             111    3   24   0                        138           23         9    227       0       259          36      596      14      0       646           25               17      1     1925
    Volume                                                                                                                                                                  2
    % App.
            80.4  2.2 17.4   0                                    8.9       3.5 87.6          0                   5.6 92.3         2.2      0                   1.3 97.8          0.9    0.1
      Total
       PHF .793 .750 .667 .000                       .767 .575 .750 .777 .000                        .820 .692 .903 .500 .000                      .873 .781 .970 .472 .250                       .972
                                             Traffic Engineering Data Solutions, Inc.
                                                                                           80 Spring Vista Drive
                                                                                            DeBary, FL 32713
                                                                                                                                                     File Name                 : AM_PM Peak TMC
                                                                                                                                                     Site Code                 : 00000000
                                                                                                                                                     Start Date                : 5/6/2013
                                                                                                                                                     Page No                   :1


                                                                                   Groups Printed- Heavy Vehicles
                             FINLAND                                        FINLAND                          SAXON                                                      SAXON
                                Northbound                                     Southbound                       Eastbound                                                 Westbound
 Start Time        Left Thru Right Peds             App. Total    Left       Thru Right Peds App. Total Left Thru Right Peds                    App. Total    Left Thru Right Peds           App. Total   Int. Total
   07:00 AM          0     0    1     0                    1        0           2    0     0        2     1     8    0     0                          9         1     1    0     0                 2           14
   07:15 AM          0     0    0     0                    0        1           0    0     0        1     1     3    0     0                          4         0     3    0     0                 3            8
   07:30 AM          1     0    0     0                    1        0           0    0     0        0     0     2    0     0                          2         0     4    0     1                 5            8
   07:45 AM          1     0    0     0                    1        0           0    0     0        0     0     1    0     0                          1         0     2    0     0                 2            4
       Total         2     0    1     0                    3        1           2    0     0        3     2    14    0     0                         16         1   10     0     1                12           34

   08:00 AM             0       0        0     0           0           0       0      0       0           0           0      3      0      0          3            0      3      0      0          3            6
   08:15 AM             1       0        0     0           1           1       0      0       0           1           0      4      0      2          6            0      1      0      0          1            9
   08:30 AM             0       0        0     0           0           0       1      0       0           1           0      1      0      0          1            0      3      0      0          3            5
   08:45 AM             0       0        1     0           1           0       0      0       1           1           0      4      0      0          4            0      4      1      1          6           12
       Total            1       0        1     0           2           1       1      0       1           3           0     12      0      2         14            0     11      1      1         13           32

*** BREAK ***

   04:00 PM             0       0        0     0           0           1       0      0       0           1           0      5      0      0          5            0      1      0      2          3            9
   04:15 PM             1       0        0     0           1           0       0      0       1           1           0      2      0      0          2            0      6      0      0          6           10
   04:30 PM             1       0        0     0           1           1       0      0       0           1           0      0      0      0          0            0      3      0      0          3            5
   04:45 PM             0       0        0     0           0           0       0      0       0           0           0      4      0      0          4            0      5      0      0          5            9
       Total            2       0        0     0           2           2       0      0       1           3           0     11      0      0         11            0     15      0      2         17           33

   05:00 PM             0       0        0     0           0           0       0      0       1           1           2      4      0      0           6           0      6      0      0          6           13
   05:15 PM             0       0        0     0           0           0       0      0       0           0           0      0      0      0           0           0      3      0      2          5            5
   05:30 PM             0       0        0     0           0           0       0      0       0           0           0      0      0      0           0           0      2      0      0          2            2
   05:45 PM             0       0        0     0           0           0       0      0       0           0           0      1      0      1           2           0      1      0      0          1            3
       Total            0       0        0     0           0           0       0      0       1           1           2      5      0      1           8           0     12      0      2         14           23

  Grand Total        5          0    2         0           7         4         3      0       3         10          4   42          0      3         49          1   48          1    6           56         122
   Apprch %       71.4          0 28.6         0                    40        30      0      30                   8.2 85.7          0    6.1                   1.8 85.7        1.8 10.7
    Total %        4.1          0  1.6         0        5.7        3.3       2.5      0     2.5        8.2        3.3 34.4          0    2.5      40.2         0.8 39.3        0.8  4.9        45.9




                             FINLAND                                        FINLAND                                        SAXON                                        SAXON
                                Northbound                                     Southbound                                    Eastbound                                    Westbound
 Start Time Left Thru Right Peds App. Total Left Thru Right Peds                                   App. Total    Left Thru Right Peds           App. Total    Left Thru Right Peds           App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 07:00 AM to 11:45 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:00 AM
  07:00 AM      0        0      1    0        1     0  2   0   0                                           2          1      8      0      0            9          1      1      0      0           2           14
  07:15 AM      0        0     0     0        0     1  0   0   0                                          1           1      3      0      0          4            0      3      0      0           3           8
  07:30 AM       1       0     0     0        1     0  0   0   0                                          0           0      2      0      0          2            0      4      0      1            5          8
  07:45 AM      1        0     0     0        1     0  0   0   0                                          0           0      1      0      0          1            0      2      0      0          2            4
 Total Volume   2        0     1     0        3     1  2   0   0                                          3           2     14      0      0         16            1     10      0      1         12           34
 % App. Total      66.7          0   33.3       0                 33.3       66.7      0       0                 12.5      87.5      0      0                  8.3      83.3      0    8.3
        PHF        .500       .000   .250    .000      .750       .250       .250   .000    .000      .375       .500      .438   .000   .000      .444       .250      .625   .000   .250      .600         .607

Peak Hour Analysis From 07:00 AM to 11:45 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Each Approach Begins at:
                  07:00 AM                                       07:00 AM                                       07:00 AM                                     07:15 AM

   +0 mins.    0   0     1   0                               1         0        2     0       0             2          1      8     0      0             9         0      3      0      0           3
  +15 mins.    0   0    0    0                             0            1      0      0       0           1           1      3      0      0           4           0       4     0       1            5

  +30 mins.     1  0    0    0                             1           0       0      0       0           0           0      2      0      0           2           0      2      0      0           2
  +45 mins.    1   0    0    0                             1           0       0      0       0           0           0      1      0      0           1           0      3      0      0           3
      Total
               2   0    1    0                             3           1       2      0       0           3           2     14      0      0         16            0     12      0      1         13
    Volume
    % App.
            66.7   0 33.3    0                                   33.3 66.7            0       0                 12.5 87.5           0      0                       0 92.3        0    7.7
      Total
       PHF .500 .000 .250 .000                        .750 .250 .250 .000 .000                       .375 .500 .438 .000 .000                     .444 .000 .750 .000 .250                     .650
                                                                                                                              File Name     : Not Named 2
                                                                                                                              Site Code     : 00000000
                                                                                                                              Start Date    : 1/14/2014
                                                                                                                              Page No       :1


                                                                    Groups Printed- All Vehicles
                    APACHE                                 APACHE                           SAXON                                SAXON
                      Northbound                              Southbound                       Eastbound                           Westbound
Start Time    Left Thru Right Peds     App. Total   Left    Thru Right Peds App. Total Left Thru Right Peds   App. Total   Left Thru Right Peds    App. Total   Int. Total
 04:00 PM       0     0    0     0            0       0        0    0     0        0     1     0    0     0          1       0     0    1     0           1           2
 04:15 PM       0     0    0     0            0       0        0    3     0        3     3     0    0     0          3       0     0    1     0           1           7
 04:30 PM       0     0    0     0            0       0        0    1     0        1     2     0    0     0          2       0     0    0     0           0           3
 04:45 PM       0     0    0     0            0       0        0    3     0        3     1     0    0     0          1       0     0    0     0           0           4
     Total      0     0    0     0            0       0        0    7     0        7     7     0    0     0          7       0     0    2     0           2          16

 05:00 PM       0     0    0       0          0       0       0     3     0       3    3     0     0     0          3        0     0    0      0          0           6
 05:15 PM       0     0    0       0          0       0       0     1     0       1    2     0     0     0          2        0     0    2      1          3           6
 05:30 PM       0     0    0       0          0       0       0     0     0       0    2     0     0     0          2        0     0    1      0          1           3
 05:45 PM       0     0    0       0          0       0       0     1     0       1    3     0     0     1          4        0     0    0      0          0           5
     Total      0     0    0       0          0       0       0     5     0       5   10     0     0     1         11        0     0    3      1          4          20

Grand Total     0     0    0       0          0       0       0  12       0     12    17     0     0      1        18        0     0    5    1            6          36
 Apprch %       0     0    0       0                  0       0 100       0         94.4     0     0    5.6                  0     0 83.3 16.7
  Total %       0     0    0       0          0       0       0 33.3      0    33.3 47.2     0     0    2.8        50        0     0 13.9  2.8       16.7
