        APPENDIX A

 NOP, SCOPING LETTERS, AND
SUMMARY OF SCOPING SESSION
                                    NOTICE OF PREPARATION (NOP) OF AN
                                     ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT
                                  FOR THE LARKSPUR SMART STATION AREA PLAN



To:     State Clearinghouse                               From: Neal Toft, Director of Planning and Building
        Marin County Clerk                                      City of Larkspur
        Responsible Agencies                                    400 Magnolia Avenue
        Interested Individuals and Organizations                Larkspur, CA 94939

The City of Larkspur will be the Lead Agency and will prepare an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the
Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan. The City is requesting comments from responsible agencies regarding the
scope and content of the environmental document. The public is also invited to submit comments regarding
the scope of the EIR.

Project Location: The Larkspur SMART Station would be located in the SMART right-of-way east of Highway
101, north of Sir Francis Drake Boulevard, near the terminus of the Cal Park Hill Tunnel bike path. The station
lies above and just west of Larkspur Landing, a mixed use area that includes residential, office and retail uses.
As shown in Figure 1, the 405-acre study area is defined by an approximately ½ mile radius circle around that
station, with the addition of an area to the south known as the Redwood Highway area (see Plan Map below)

Project Description: The City of Larkspur is preparing the Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan. The SMART
(Sonoma-Marin Area Rail Transit) is a passenger train and multi-use pathway project planned to extend 70
miles from Cloverdale in Sonoma County to Larkspur in Marin County. The Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan
will identify potential land use and regulatory changes that are intended to support transit oriented
development in the area surrounding the planned SMART station. More information on the SMART Station
Area Plan can be found on the City of Larkspur website at:
http://www.larkspurcityhall.org/index.aspx?nid=157.

Potential Environmental Effects: It has been determined that an EIR will be necessary to analyze potential
environmental impacts associated with the proposed project. Specific areas of analysis will include, but will not
be limited to the following topics: Land Use and Planning Policy; Transportation and Circulation; Air Quality;
Greenhouse Gas Emissions; Noise/Vibration; Biological Resources; Hydrology and Water Quality; Geology;
Hazards and Hazardous Materials; Utilities and Pubic Services; and Cultural Resources.

Due to the time limits mandated by State law, your response to this NOP must be submitted by Friday,
February 15, 2013. Please address your written comments to: Neal Toft, Director of Planning and Building, City
of Larkspur, 400 Magnolia Avenue, Larkspur, CA 94939 or ntoft@cityoflarkspur.org

A scoping session for the preparation of the EIR will be held at 7:30 p.m. on January 22, 2013 at Larkspur City
Hall, City Council Chambers, 400 Magnolia Avenue, Larkspur. The public and public agencies are invited to
attend the scoping session to provide comments regarding the scope and content of the EIR.



                                                                                   1/4/2013
Neal Toft, Director of Planning and Building, City of Larkspur                     Date
                                                                                                                                                          LARKSPUR                                                                        SAN                          COUNTY OF MARIN
             Windsor                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RAFAEL
              116                Santa Rosa                  128                   505                                                                                                                                                                                                                    101
         Sebastopol
                LEGEND                             29
                               101         12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          u
                                           STUDY AREA
                                                   NapaBOUNDARY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ro
                                        Sonoma                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ike
                                           CITY BOUNDARY                         Fairfield   COUNTY OF MARIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SAN RAFAEL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lB
                         Petaluma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ne
                                                   29

                             sNovato
                                           116




                                                                                                                                                    R.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                   LOS C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Tu
                                                                                                                                                AD
                                           SMART STATION
                                                       680LOCATION




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ill
                                                                                                                                               TR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           kH
                                                 Vallejo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RE
                                                                                                                                               ES
                                                                                                                         ER R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ar
                                           LARKSPUR FERRY TERMINAL                                                          OS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MB
                                                                                                                                           CU
                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      lP
                                          101                                                                                    DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CU
                                                                                                                                      .




                                                                                                                                          LA
                             San Rafael                                                  4
                                                        80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA
                              Larkspur                                           Concord                                                             BR
                                                                                                                                                         ETA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VIA
       PROJECT                                                        24                                                                                        NO WAY                                                                                                                                         LA
           SITE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RK


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s
                                                              Berkeley
                                                              Berkeley                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      UR
                                                                 Oakland
                              San Francisco                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LA
                                                                                  680        LARKSPUR                                           SIR                                                                                                                                                                          N
        Pa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                      FRA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N
         ci




                                                                                                                                                           NC                                                                                                                                                                        G
             fic




                                                            S an
                                                                           580




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                                                 IS
                                                                                                                                                                        DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISE
                                                        F ranci sco
                                                                                                                                                                          AK
               O




                                                            B ay
                                                                                                                                                                              EB




                                                                                                                                                                                                               EL
                   ce




                                                    101                                                                                                                         LVD
                    an




                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                             REGIONAL LOCATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                 AY
                                                                                             S. EL                                                                                              W                                                                101
                                                                                                  ISEO                                                                                      Y
                                                                                                                   DR                                                                     RR
                                                                                                                        .                                                               BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NCIS D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R A K E B LV D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RO
                                                                                                                                                     RO
                                                                                                                                                          UT
                                                                                                                                                               E2
                                                                                                                                                Co                  0
                                                                                                                                                    rte
                                                                                                                                                          Ma
                                                                                                                                                                der
                                                                                                  Larkspur Creek




                                                                                                                                                                        aC
                                                                                                                                                                             ree
                                                                                                                                                                                k
                                                                                                                                                           RIV
                                                                                                                                                                 IER
                                                                                                                                                                        AC                                                                                                                                   ALK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                             IRC
                                                                                                                                                                                   LE                                                                                                        GREENBRAE BOARDW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CORTE MADERA                                                                                    MARIN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WAY
                                                                                                                                  VIA LA BRIS
                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     al




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HIGH
                                                                                                                                                                                                an
                                                                                                                                                                                          hC
                                                                                                                                                                                    Hig                     IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                          DR                                 101




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OOD
                                     Plan Area Boundary                                      DOHERTY DRIVE                                                                                          Y                    FIFER
                                                                                                                                                                                                  CK                              AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                LU
                    s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  REDW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Francisco Bay
                                     SMART Station Location
                    CITY OF LARKSPUR
                          Larkspur Ferry Terminal
                    SMART STATION AREA PLAN
                                     City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TAMAL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RIV
                    0          300        600             1200’                                                                                                                                                                         MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RNU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VISTA B




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WO
                                                                                                                                                    rker Trail
                                                                                                                                          Sandra Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LVD.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FIGURE 1

0            600               1200
feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan NOP
SOURCES: CALIF. GOVERNOR’S OES; CITY OF LARKSPUR, 2011;
BMS DESIGN GROUP; LSA ASSOCIATES, INC., 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Project Location and Regional Vicinity Map
I:\BMD1201 Larkspur SMART\figures\NOP\Fig_1.ai (1/2/13)
                            Notes- SAP EIR Scoping Session 1/22

Cindy Winter, Greenbrae
   - She favors higher density in Larkspur Landing and if it is done right it can be a model of
      land use planning to be proud of
   - She is worried most new residents will bring cars with them into a geographically
      confined area
   - Without excellent multi-modal facilities there will be gridlock and more GHG emissions
   - One way to reduce congestion in Larkspur Landing is to encourage people who live
      outside it to walk and bicycle into it
   - The bike/pedestrian overpass over 101 will be demolished and not replaced as part of
      the Highway 101 project contrary to the wishes of many
   - She worked out an alternative overcrossing design and discussed it with Bill Whitney
      and Neal Toft. An independent engineer says he believes it works
   - The next steps is a conference with Caltrans engineers
   - The Caltrans proposed route through Wornum and along Redwood Highway will
      discourage biking and walking
   - She is an experienced cyclist and the sections are disagreeable at best and at worst
      dangerous
   - Not all walkers and riders will find it possible to go north of CM Creek to avoid these
      inconveniences and will jump in their car instead
   - Station Area planners need to consider these issues because in Sub-area 1a
      connectivity to the station is critical
   - There is no use for a CMFC if it is separated from the popular and beautiful Sandra
      Marker Trail by the freeway.
   - Not sure whether the SMART station planners can take a position as a group and ask
      TAM to reconsider some of their designs but at least you can reflect on it

Sandy Guldman, Larkspur
   - As an individual who bikes, she strongly supports retaining the overpass over 101
   - As president of Friends of Corte Madera Creek Watershed, she is concerned about
      proximity of development at ferry terminal to a hotbed of clapper rails in the tidal marsh
      south of the terminal
   - Very environmentally sensitive area and any development there will be constrained by
      the need to protect that habitat

Alisha O’Loughlin, Planning Director of Marin County Bicycle Coalition
    - Preferred plan supports moderate to higher density residential development, new retail
       and employment and acknowledges the area’s older demographic; all of these support
       the need for alternative transportation options
    - The report calls for improving connections between Redwood Highway North, Larkspur
       downtown and Larkspur Landing
    - The report notes congestion is already an issue and will likely be exacerbated with build
       out in the Preferred Plan; with additional higher density development comes more traffic
    - Plan supports mode shift measures and identifies improvements to bike/pedestrian
       connections
    - Simultaneously TAM and Caltrans are developing the Hwy 101 GB improvement project
       that calls for demolition of overpass and no replacement
    - Removal will undoubtedly affect bike and pedestrian connectivity safety and perceived
       safety within and adjacent to the SAP planning area
    - Imperative the SAP EIR take into account the removal of the overpass on bike and


DRAFT                                                                                   1/28/2013
        pedestrian circulation in the Station Area
   -    Will Caltrans improvements adequately provide for future development intensity and
        pedestrian and bike goals and objectives identified in SAP?
   -    Imperative that SAP EIR evaluates what future pedestrian and bike conditions will be
        once TAM project is built with current design rather than evaluate conditions as are
        currently on the ground
   -    TAM project includes bike and pedestrian enhancements to Wornum drive but they will
        not substitute for the safety of the existing separated from traffic overcrossing
   -    Too much to ask for timid, young, or less-abled walkers and bikers
   -    Existing overcrossing is used by locals and is the primary north-south greenway from
        Golden Gate Bridge to Novato
   -    County has goal for 20% of all trips to be made by biking and walking by 2020 and we
        need safe separate facilities to achieve that
   -    Removal of overcrossing will divide community
   -    Proposed TAM project is inconsistent with General Plans of Larkspur, Corte Madera,
        and the County with regards to fostering connectivity within and between communities
        and policies encouraging an increase in bike and pedestrian modes
   -    SAP EIR should evaluate future bike/pedestrian needs and impacts as relate to TAM
        project given current design

Mike Hooper, Larkspur
   - Member of SAP CAC
   - Project description on NOP is not adequate; needs to be succinct, but needs to provide
      the community with a reasonable chance of understanding what this project is
   - Project is not just the preferred alternative but the range of mitigation measures being
      proposed
   - Those measures include reduced parking at ferry terminal and paid parking at the
      terminal, shuttle buses and trolleys to get to the ferry terminal, and other traffic mitigation
      measures
   - Need clear examples of mitigation measures
   - Numbers are not enough; examples that we can be comfortable with are required
   - The SAP EIR needs to provide for a range of densities
   - When the Plan comes to PC in future with specific projects, he hates to think PC and
      Council will get stuck with approving a particular project for a particular density
   - SAP EIR should provide for a range of alternatives, in between “no project” and the
      preferred plan
   - SMART station needs to come to the terminal and shouldn’t come to Larkspur at all
      unless it goes to terminal; SAP EIR needs to analyze that
   - SAP EIR should include a growth control plan; analyze the time these developments
      should occur and allow development to move forward only if the mitigation measures are
      brought to bear
   - Told at last CAC meeting this was a long-range plan, not to worry about it because it
      won’t happen in his lifetime or the consultant’s lifetime. He does worry, he has kids
   - Project is $600,000 and it needs to be a worthwhile $600,000 and needs to consider a
      wide range of alternatives
   - “Transferable development rights” allow one property owner to purchase from another
      property owner development rights; a degree of flexibility
   - Frequently developers find that projects don’t work in the context they’re given
   - Transferable development rights accomplish many things- e.g. if excess capacity on
      ferry site, owner could sell the development rights to the apartment owners on the hill
      and they could double their density


DRAFT                                                                                      1/28/2013
   -    He thinks the densities are too high
   -    Traffic mitigation won’t work without extraordinary effort
   -    Perception will be 40 du/ac on some locations is just too much

Don Graff, Greenbrae
   - SAP CAC member
   - Should create transportation hub in this area- ferry, Airporter, SMART, and buses in a
      single location which would enhance usage of SMART and ferry
   - Would cause changes to preferred plan in terms of uses at ferry terminal that may have
      to be decreased in size or moved up to where the SMART station is proposed currently
   - Would be a good process for the SAP EIR to include as a part of an alternative

Jean Severinghaus, Greenbrae Boardwalk
   - Involved with GP and Station Area Plan process for several years
   - Excited about increased development and density near transit
   - Lives across creek to the south and can walk to the Airporter or ferry
   - Can ride a bike to west Marin or north Marin in a short time
   - She hasn’t seen very much planning of circulation for multi-modal circulation around the
      station itself
   - Major environmental problem is the congestion of Highway 101that the SMART train is
      trying to address
   - Sonoma residents will be most likely users going south to jobs in Marin
   - County Bike and Pedestrian Plan from 2008 notes a major opportunity to get people
      going 15 minutes or less in car to switch mode to walking or biking by improving
      connections
   - Need to improve the “last mile” after getting off transit
   - In regards to the Highway 101 improvement project, the community is being offered
      what’s expedient to accommodate a freeway expansion, not been looked at by local
      groups
   - Need to ask for at least 2.5 miles of looking at bike and pedestrian trails and connections
   - Removal the overcrossing: if you go by the north route under the creek and loop around
      to get to Lucky drive it’s ¾ mile- across overpass it’s ½ mile. Increase for walkers of 5
      minutes; that's the time it takes to drive from Tamalpais highway on-ramp to Terra Linda
      in a car. It will impact people's choices
   - EIR should look at impacts of 1.5-6 in of Sea level rise in Redwood Highway north
      particularly to analyze impacts on circulation in area


                              Planning Commissioner Comments

Commissioner Jeff Stahl
   -    Surprised the two existing apartment in Larkspur Landing weren’t identified as
        opportunity sites given their low density
   -    That’s an area that could tolerate more height without visual impacts
   -    Lost opportunity to consider re-densification there- not just about vacant parking lots
   -    Analysis of challenges to the area neglects to mention the geographic isolation of
        Larkspur Landing area from the rest of the city, including public services.
   -    Mike Hooper’s comments about a range of densities were worthwhile
   -    Seems to be a a good idea to apply an aggregate density to the entire area and then
        allow for flexibility in distributing that density across different sites



DRAFT                                                                                     1/28/2013
   -    Ferry terminal parking lot is a ripe opportunity for increasing parking; adding housing
        with its own parking requirement would be a monster building
   -    Should be designed to transfer density from one opportunity site to another within an
        aggregate limit
   -    The SAP EIR should look at what proposed mix of uses and densities it will achieve will
        support in terms of retail; not what Marin Country Mart is becoming
   -    Need grocery services in the area; restaurants; how support?
   -    Marin Country Mart is not becoming a neighborhood supporting venue
   -    Isolated character of the area is counterintuitive to hosting a senior demographic
   -    Walking and biking is great for active and able people, but seniors need assistance with
        access; shuttles would help, or wordsmith language about supporting an older
        demographic
   -    Geographic hazards should be analyzed; the ferry site is probably on fill
   -    Climate change impacts should be analyzed; seems important especially regarding sea
        level rise
   -    Notion of a parking district makes sense; look at allowing parking along Larkspur
        Landing Circle
   -    Supports serious consideration of potential of creating an alternative in the EIR that
        considers the SMART station at the ferry terminal

Commissioner Monte Deignan
   -    SMART station location makes no sense
   -    If we are going to study TOD, why leave the Airporter and SMART train in a tiny
        landlocked section of the Larkspur Landing area?
   -    The SAP EIR should study how to move the station over to ferry terminal as a transit hub
   -    Can SMART’s hand be forced in this?
   -    As a long-range plan, will it look at potential impacts of San Quentin’s closure? The end
        of the peninsula would be ideal transit hub; does that enter into the study?
   -    Would like to see bike connections improved; crossing the highway at Larkspur Landing
        is a disaster

Planning Director Toft
   -    Relocating the SMART station has been raised by the CAC and public
   -    The SMART train was planned and voted on in its configuration and the extension from
        San Rafael phase 2 is not funded at this time
   -    SMART, one of partner agencies, has indicated they don’t have funding right now to
        study an alternative
   -    Identifying a desire to consolidate transportation options and such a policy will be in the
        Plan
   -    SMART has indicated that station itself is a simple platform and should in the future it be
        relocated it wouldn’t be substantially costly to relocate

Commissioner Mark Sandoval
   -    Agrees with commissioners about possible loss of opportunities
   -    To have a transportation hub at the ferry is common sense and we are skirting the issue
        with planning efforts that could be focusing on that.

Commissioner Kevin Haroff
   -    Impressed with quality of public comments tonight


DRAFT                                                                                     1/28/2013
   -    Shares a lot of concerns from public and commissioners
   -    There is a consensus among the community to encourage the transportation hub as a
        preferred alternative
   -    Do the funding constraints and decisions of other agencies truly constrain what the
        preferred alternative would be for CEQA purposes?
   -    Can we present a preferred alternative that is more of what the community wants, while
        it may not be the alternative that moves forward?
   -    For planning purposes a preferred alternative should incorporate those concepts at the
        outset and to the extent necessary back away if they are not feasible; at least set up in
        preferred alternative sends a message to the partner agencies
   -    Significant mixed use and residential development proposed in Plan for current ferry
        terminal parking lot
   -    Current parking needs of terminal need to be addressed. Structured parking there is
        financially infeasible
   -    Worries that planning assumes actions that aren’t feasible
   -    It would be helpful if the other agencies that will play an important role in funding are
        involved as early as possible; commitments and assurances will be important to success
        of this plan
   -    Does CEQA analyze the economic feasibility of the different planning elements
        proposed going to be taken into account

Planning Director Toft
   -    Next planning phase will analyze infrastructure and funding needs and will inform us on
        what funding opportunities are available and how additional parking needs from new
        development could be balanced
   -    Will identify impacts and issues in conjunction with refining the plan
   -    Opportunity for funding will come with supportive densities and uses

Planning Commission Chair Richard Young
   -    Heard tonight concerns about loss of overpass and that connectivity particularly for
        residents on Redwood Highway area
   -    Station should be relocated
   -    Isolation of Larkspur Landing area should be considered
   -    Parking needs should be analyzed and integrated parking is essential
   -    Should be a diversity of densities, a range
   -    Growth control of development




DRAFT                                                                                   1/28/2013
February 15, 2013

Neal Toft
Director of Planning and Building
City of Larkspur                                                                    Protecting Marin Since 1934
400 Magnolia Avenue
Larkspur CA 94939

Re: Scoping Comments for the Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan

Dear Mr. Toft:

We are assuming that all of the concerns conveyed by members of the Citizens Advisory Com-
mittee and summarized in the Plan will be evaluated in the DEIR. If they are not already be-
ing included in the scoping comments, we ask that they be analyzed in the DEIR that is being
prepared for the Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan. The Plan has the potential for substantial
environmental impacts that need to be carefully analyzed and considered.

SEA LEVEL RISE
Some of the development contemplated by the Plan is located in areas that will be subject to
sea level rise associated with global warming. The DEIR should fully address the impacts of sea
level rise over the decades long life of any projects, and should bar development and/or impose
mitigation measures to deal with it.

BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
The area south of the ferry terminal, particularly the Heerdt Marsh, which is part of the Corte
Madera Ecological Reserve and home to the endangered Clapper Rail, is an environmentally
sensitive area that is likely to suffer adverse impacts if the proposed high-density development
plan is implemented. The nature and extent of these impacts needs to be analyzed and mitiga-
tion measures should be included in the DEIR.

TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION (1)
The proposed high-density development will certainly contribute to congestion on Sir Francis
Drake, which will add to greenhouse gas emissions and adversely impact air quality. The DEIR
needs to fully analyze these impacts and go beyond suggesting that it will be necessary for
major improvements and capacity increases to be made to Sir Francis Drake Boulevard in order
to accommodate the development proposed in the Plan. The plan should state specifically that
any density increase in the area shall be conditional on at least maintaining the LOS on Sir Fran-
cis Drake(SFD) and the EIR should reflect that approach. As the LOS is currently at F in this area
during peak hours, the DEIR should preferably stipulate a mitigation requirement that improve-
ments to SFD must be in place prior to any increases in density in the area, so as to bring the
LOS to an acceptable level. Likewise, the Plan assumes the construction of a SMART station, but
it is not clear when or even if such a station will be built. Implementation of the plan should be
contingent the confirmed presence of a SMART station, and if not, then the DEIR should analyze



  phone:   	 415.485.6257         email:   	 mcl@marinconservationleague.org        address:   	 175 N. Redwood Dr., Ste. 135
    fax:    	 415.485.6259         web:     	 marinconservationleague.org           	            San Rafael, CA 94903-1977


Marin Conservation League was founded in 1934 to preserve, protect and enhance the natural assets of Marin County.
Marin Conservation League                                                                             2
Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan Scoping Comments/Feb. 15, 2013


the impacts of the Plan if the station is not built and all of the new residents, instead, are lim-
ited to presently available transportation systems.

TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION (2)
Although the project areas designated for both the Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan and the
Highway 101 Greenbrae/Twin Cities Corridor Improvement Plan proposed by the Transportation
Authority of Marin are overlapping, there is barely any acknowledgment of that fact by either
sponsoring entity in their own project’s documentation. What are the impacts of TAM’s pro-
posed plan for a massive highway construction project within the same project area? What im-
pacts will it have on the Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan? What impacts will Plan implemen-
tation have on 101 traffic? Does highway 101 have capacity to accommodate the large increase
in population in an already congested freeway corridor? Again, the answers to these questions
address the possibility that a SMART station will not be built.

TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION (3)
Despite uncertainties about whether the proposed Highway 101 Greenbrae/Twin Cities Corridor
Improvement Project will ever be constructed, removal of the pedestrian-bicycle highway over-
pass between Lucky Drive and Industrial Way would have a significant impact on pedestrian and
bicycle circulation routes in the Plan area. What are the ramifications of the overpass removal
on the Plan’s anticipated benefits of multi-modal options for pedestrians and bicyclists?

TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION (4)
As there are no similarly situated, comparable, transit-oriented developments of this scale
in the Bay Area, the DEIR should provide reliable data that documents the assumption that a
combination of bicycle, transit, and ferry options available will actually result in a significantly
demonstrable decrease in the residents’ use of automobiles. The DEIR should provide data
demonstrating that (1) most residents of the 948 new housing units will work in the City and
take the ferry to work each day, (2) that bus service will be available to take them to wherever
else in the County they work, shop, go to school, socialize, exercise, and/or play sports, (3) that
many jobs in the immediate Plan area will be held by residents of the immediate Plan area, who
will walk or bicycle to work. Will the plan include any controls that insure that residents rely on
public transit, biking or walking?

TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION (5)
It is obvious that the large number of new residents will not use public transit/biking/walk-
ing 100% of the time, and, therefore, there will be some increase in vehicular traffic. What is
the expected increase in vehicular traffic and what are the impacts? The DEIR should provide
reliable, relevant data to show that the net increase in vehicle miles traveled (VMT) as a result
of this high-density project would not have a demonstrable adverse impact on air quality and
greenhouse gas emissions.

TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION (6)
A high-density development of this scale involves parking issues that should be fully examined
in the DEIR, with mitigations proposed. Will it be necessary to construct a double-deck parking



ADV_LUT_LarkspurSAPScoping_2013.02.15
Marin Conservation League                                                                           3
Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan Scoping Comments/Feb. 15, 2013


structure at the ferry terminal parking lot? Will it be necessary to create a parking district that
would construct parking in other parts of the development? Is there some other means of pro-
viding sufficient parking? The preferred alternative should include recommendations for resolv-
ing the parking problem as part of the DEIR.

TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION (7)
The issue of transit scattering versus a transit hub warrants examination in the DEIR, as many
concerns have been expressed about the SMART station being located so far from the ferry
terminal. Although the proposed extension of SMART has no funding and is not included in the
current phase of SMART construction, the feasibility of relocating the station should be exam-
ined in the DEIR as part of the preferred alternative.

TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION (8)
An older demographic will likely require some sort of shuttle service to meet the needs of resi-
dents who require services not available in the immediate area and are unable to reach such
services by walking or bicycling. Is it feasible to require a shuttle service as part of a develop-
ment plan? What are the costs such a service and where will the funding come from? If private
developers are required to provide this service, what measures will be imposed to insure com-
pliance?

TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION (9)
The Plan correctly assumes that older people don’t drive as much, but they do require most
support and care workers who will need parking close to residences. Also, older retired people
who can still drive are more likely to make multiple mid-day trips. How is this being addressed
in the Plan?

TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION (10)
If new residents are expected to use the Larkspur Ferry, what will be the impact of the Plan on
ferry service, which is currently operating at or near capacity during commute hours? Will it
be necessary to add new ferries to provide added capacity? If so, what will it cost, and is there
funding available?

HYDROLOGY/DRAINAGE
Although the proposed areas for development all appear to be above elevations that currently
flood, all access roads in the Plan area are shown to be below the level of 100-year floods,
which seem to occur every few years, even without considering sea-level rise. It is now gener-
ally recognized that one result of global warming is to produce storm events of greater intensity
and severity. How often will access to newly developed areas be impeded due to flooding? The
DEIR should explain how to mitigate the lack of ingress and egress for residents and workers,
as well as its impact on the ability of police, firefighters, and paramedics to respond in case of
medical emergencies and disasters of various kinds that occur when access is unavailable due to
flooding.




ADV_LUT_LarkspurSAPScoping_2013.02.15
Marin Conservation League                                                                          4
Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan Scoping Comments/Feb. 15, 2013


LAND USE CONSISTENCY AND COMPATIBILITY (1)
The project description needs to provide the community with a better understanding of what
the project actually includes, and what kinds of mitigation measures are being proposed. Be-
cause it is being made an integral part of the Larkspur General Plan Update we understand that
no additional DEIR will be required at the time one or more developers come forward to imple-
ment the approved plan. Therefore, it is very important to describe and analyze each compo-
nent of the Plan in the DEIR so that appropriate mitigations can be required at this time, before
the Plan is approved.

LAND USE CONSISTENCY AND COMPATIBILITY (2)
The Plan indicates that housing in the Plan area will likely be affordable only to households
earning less than 120 percent of AMI, and that Federal, state, and local financing sources will be
needed to develop housing that is affordable to households with lower incomes. It goes on to
state that the gap between subsidies provided by low-income housing tax credits, bond financ-
ing, and other typical sources and construction costs will probably be in excess of $100,000 per
unit. That gap would have to be filled by local financing sources, housing trust funds (which are
not currently available) and in-lieu fees. The Plan states that the Local Housing Subsidy needed
would range between $41,972,519 and $57,448,800. The DEIR should explain how this deficit,
which would likely make implementation of the proposed Plan impossible, would be mitigated.
Where will these funds come from and is it realistic to assume that such funding will be avail-
able? What will happen if no funding is available?

LAND USE CONSISTENCY AND COMPATIBILITY (3)
The growth projections indicated in various parts of the Plan are based on the Bay Area Jobs-
Housing Connection Strategy estimates issued in May 2012 by ABAG and MTC that are inconsis-
tent with the recent projections published by the California Department of Finance, which state
that growth in Marin County will be essentially stagnant between now and 2050. That should
be taken into account in evaluating the alternatives studied in the DEIR, particularly regarding
the market for retail and employment in the area.

LAND USE CONSISTENCY AND COMPATIBILITY (4)
Neighborhood-supporting retail is a significant need in an area separated from the rest of the
community by a major freeway, and the DEIR should examine the economic viability of locating
businesses such as a grocery store there. The Larkspur “Country Mart” has attempted, without
success, to provide grocery services. Is it realistic to assume that groceries and other day-to-day
retail services will be provided? What level of population is needed to support these services?
If they are not provided, will residents use automobiles to travel for basic necessities?

LAND USE CONSISTENCY AND COMPATIBILITY (5)
In an area where high-density development is so tightly focused on use of multi-modal tran-
sit such as the ferry terminal, the ramifications of liquefaction in event of a major earthquake
should be studied and discussed in the DEIR.




ADV_LUT_LarkspurSAPScoping_2013.02.15
Marin Conservation League                                                                            5
Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan Scoping Comments/Feb. 15, 2013


PUBLIC SERVICES (1)
The Marin Municipal Water District has a longstanding deficit in its ability to provide all of the
water needed within its jurisdiction on a long-term basis that is likely to include drought years.
The DEIR should explain the how the proposed high-density development would obtain the
water it requires without impacting existing water users.

PUBLIC SERVICES (2)
As the majority of housing units in the Plan area lie within the San Rafael School District, the
DEIR should discuss the impacts of transporting students to elementary, middle, and high school
locations that are a considerable distance from the Plan area. How will students get to and from
schools? Will public transit, such as school buses, be provided? If so, what will it cost and how
will it be funded? If not, how many students will be driven to and from school, and what will be
the impacts of the additional traffic?

COMMUNITY COHESIVENESS
Geographic isolation of the Larkspur Landing area from other parts of the Larkspur community
is a factor that should be evaluated, with mitigation and adaptation strategies identified in the
DEIR.

Respectfully submitted,



Susan Stompe, President
Marin Conservation League




ADV_LUT_LarkspurSAPScoping_2013.02.15
                                  February 15, 2013

                                  Neal Toft
                                  Director of Planning and Building
                                  City of Larkspur
                                  400 Magnolia Avenue
                                  Larkspur, CA 94939

                                  Subject: Larkspur Station Area Plan/General Plan Update
                                  Environmental Assessment Scoping Comments

                                  Dear Mr. Toft:
  Board of Directors
Maureen Gaffney, President        On behalf of the Marin County Bicycle Coalition (MCBC), we
Mark Comin, Vice President        would like to take this opportunity to provide scoping
 Don Magdanz, Secretary
   Ian Roth, Treasurer            comments on Larkspur Station Area Plan environmental
        Phil Brewer               assessment.
       Chris Hobbs
      Jennifer Kaplan
         Fred Morfit              MCBC has been active in advocacy for 15 years in Marin
     Scott Penzarella             County and has the primary goal of making the roads safer
        John Vipiana
                                  for cyclists and pedestrians. We achieve this end by working
         Advisors
               the
                                  to ensure that any and all road or road-related projects
       Mark Birnbaum              consider the needs of cyclist and pedestrian safety as a top
          Joe Breeze
           Tom Hale               priority. It is within this context that MCBC submits the
       Deb Hubsmith               following comments.
        Jim Jacobsen
       Patrick Seidler
         Julia Violich            Local and Regional Connectivity
            Staff
                                  The SAP encourages higher-density residential and transit
        Kim Baenisch
                                  oriented development, new retail and additional employment.
      Executive Director          This higher-density development in combination with public
          Tom Boss                transit and key transportation facilities in the area necessitates
     Membership Director
                                  the need for safe and interconnected active transportation
          Bob Trigg
         Administrator            facilities that will successfully provide for, as well as
        April Spooner             encourage, an increase in biking, walking and use of public
    Volunteer and Activities
         Coordinator
                                  transit within and through the Station Area.
          Andy Peri
      Advocacy Director           East Sir Francis Drake Boulevard: Highway 101 to East
      Alisha Oloughlin            Francisco
       Planning Director
        Erik Schmidt
                                  The Station Area Plan calls for improving connections between
      Off-Road Director           Redwood Highway North, Larkspur Downtown and Larkspur
        Wendi Kallins             Landing, yet it fails to address much needed non-motorized
Safe Routes to Schools Director
                                  transportation improvements between Larkspur Landing and
         Laura Kelly
 Safe Routes Volunteer Liaison    areas to the east. This area was identified as a key gap in the
         Peggy Clark              San Francisco Bay Trail Gap Analysis Study and is also one of
Safe Routes Project Coordinator
Share the Road Program Manager
                                  the top priority projects in the county as described in the 2008
         Gwen Froh                Marin County Unincorporated Area Bicycle and Pedestrian
 Safe Routes Teen Coordinator     Master Plan.
        James Sievert
 Safe Routes Teen Coordinator
         and Instructor           Opportunities to maximize bicycle and pedestrian travel for
                                  areas to the east of Larkspur Landing include: (1) both the
                                  east and west directions on the north and south sides of
Interstate 580, (2) the connection of the existing Shoreline Bay Trail in San Rafael to
both the new viewing area near the Richmond/San Rafael Bridge and Remillard Park in
Larkspur, (3) from the south side of the I-580 on-ramp at Main Street to the intersection
of Andersen Drive with Sir Francis Drake Boulevard, (4) the Andersen Drive/Sir Francis
Drake Boulevard intersection itself to determine the feasibility of improvements that
would enable cyclists and pedestrians to safely cross the intersection, (5) access from
the I-580 on-ramp to the San Quentin Prison entrance through San Quentin Village, (6)
access/egress to/from existing bus stops that provide service across the bridge (which is
closed to bicycles and pedestrians), (7) Main Street under I-580, and (8) the connection
from the I-580 onramp to East Francisco Boulevard.

The intersection of Sir Francis Drake Boulevard and Andersen Drive presently proves
challenging for motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians alike. This area is also physically
bisected by I-580, which runs along the northern edge of the study area. Bike access is
permitted on the shoulder of I-580 from the Sir Francis Drake Boulevard onramp to Main
Street. There is a partially paved, rustic pathway connecting the I-580 flyover to East
Francisco Boulevard. This pathway serves several office buildings, residences and
recreational destinations located off of East Francisco Boulevard. At this time, bikes are
not permitted on the Richmond/San Rafael Bridge, but regional transit buses equipped
with bike racks make the connection to the East Bay. The San Francisco Bay Trail is
improved on the northern and southern edges of the study area, thus it represents a key
gap in the continuity of the regional trail system. San Quentin prison visitor use and
employees also generate pedestrian traffic along Main Street.

The area includes several medium- to large-sized office buildings, a State penitentiary, a
private recreational club, public recreational facilities and residential housing. In close
proximity are several residential neighborhoods, large neighborhood shopping centers,
hotels, the Larkspur Ferry Terminal, the future SMART Station, future high-density
development at Larkspur Landing, Marin County Mart, Sanitary District #1 and the Ferry
Terminal, and several schools. The MCBC strongly recommends that the SAP
environmental assessment includes a thorough assessment of existing
bicycle/pedestrian connectivity and safety issues and needs between the SMART
Station and destinations to the east via Sir Francis Drake Boulevard East,
including the I-580 flyover, Anderson Drive, Main Street and East Francisco
Boulevard.

West Sir Francis Drake Boulevard: Highway 101 to Wolf Grade
Under the Preferred Plan Alternative, the western extent of the Station Planning Area is
currently near Eliseo Drive/Barry Way. By limiting the focus of bicycle/pedestrian
improvements and connectivity to the defined Planning Area, the Plan fails to capture a
significant portion of western Marin’s cyclist and pedestrian community. Many cyclists
that reside or work west of Eliseo Drive/Barry Way will be commuting to the SMART
Station, the Ferry Terminal, Cal Park Tunnel, the Central Marin Ferry Connection, local
commercial areas and businesses, and beyond. Furthermore, upon build-out of Larkspur
Landing, Marin Country Mart, Sanitary District #1, the Ferry Terminal and Drakes
Landing, there will be a significantly higher demand for safe bicycle facilities between the
Planning Area and the commercial, business and recreational destinations to the west.
Additionally, numerous cyclists already utilize Wolf Grade to access these destinations
from the north and this number will only increase upon arrival of SMART and build-out of
the Station Area. Furthermore, the Bon Air Road/Sir Francis Drake Boulevard
intersection receives a significant amount of traffic and the provision of safe bicycle
facilities between the SMART Station and Bon Air Road could play a significant role in
helping to entice commuters to bike/walk to their destinations instead of driving, thereby
reducing traffic congestion at this intersection and beyond.

The Marin County Unincorporated Area Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan identifies Sir
Francis Drake Boulevard, between Highway 101 and the Town of Ross, as a special
Bikeway Study Area. This 2.1 mile segment is proposed in the Master Plan for Class II
bicycle lanes.

Therefore, the MCBC strongly requests the SAP environmental assessment
include an analysis of traffic operations and bicycle/pedestrian connectivity from
the SMART Station to at minimum, Wolf Grade to the west, in order to provide for
the current and anticipated growth of non-motorized demand to/from the Station,
businesses and commercial centers, public transit facilities, residential areas and
popular recreational destinations to the west.

Bay Trail Alignment
It has long been a MCBC intention to complete the North-South Greenway adjacent to
the eastern edge of the Station Planning Area along the current SMART Right of Way
(over Corte Madera Creek and to the south to Wornum Drive) for both transportation and
recreation purposes. MCBC has long supported a separated bridge over Corte Madera
Creek and a north/south pathway on the SMART right-of-way from Corte Madera Creek
to Wornum Drive. Because of the opportunities that became available with the design of
the Greenbrae Corridor Improvement Project, MCBC also supports the construction of a
12-foot wide bicycle/pedestrian pathway using the “bent caps” on the Northbound Sir
Francis Drake Boulevard exit ramp that is planned as part of the Greenbrae Corridor
Improvement Project.

MCBC supports the Central Marin Ferry Connection Project study Alternative 1C
(Attachment A).This alternative provides a separated bike/pedestrian facility over Corte
Madera Creek using the bent caps and continuing through the (first) mobile home park
after touching down onto Redwood Highway (when heading south). The route then
continues along the SMART railroad corridor heading south to Wornum at Redwood
Highway. The MCBC recommends that the SAP environmental assessment
includes a feasibility assessment of the Central Marin Ferry Connection Project
study Alternative 1C as an alternative for a bicycle/pedestrian crossing of Corte
Madera Creek.

Corte Madera Creek Crossings
Please see comments on “Bay Trail Alignment” above. The current crossings of Corte
Madera Creek along both sides of Highway 101 are too narrow to safely accommodate
current and future bicycle and pedestrian volumes. The MCBC recommends that the
SAP environmental assessment includes a discussion of alternatives for non-
motorized crossings of the west and east sides of Corte Madera Creek.


Redwood Highway North: Wornum Drive to Corte Madera Creek
The MCBC supports much needed bicycle and pedestrian improvements to Redwood
Highway North between Wornum Drive and Corte Madera Creek. Currently, this area
lacks continuous bicycle lanes and sidewalks and is of great hazard to cyclists and
pedestrians. This corridor serves as a key connector for those wishing to access the
SMART Station, Ferry Terminal, Central Marin Ferry Connection, Cal Park Tunnel, Marin
Airporter and commercial and business centers to the north from Larkspur and Corte
Madera, as well as from locations further to the south and west. This corridor also serves
as Marin’s North-South Greenway, a mostly car-free north-south bikeway extending from
Sausalito through Novato. The corridor receives a high level of existing non-motorized
commuter and recreational traffic; and upon operation of SMART and development
within and adjacent to the Station Planning Area, this corridor will be of increasing
importance to non-motorized users. Therefore, a safe and interconnected
bicycle/pedestrian network to serve current and future non-motorized needs is vitally
important throughout this corridor. The MCBC recommends that the SAP
environmental assessment includes an analysis of bicycle/pedestrian connectivity
and safety deficiencies along Redwood Highway North between Wornum Drive
and Corte Madera Creek, and provides an evaluation of alternatives to alleviate the
deficiencies identified.

West Side of Highway 101: Wornum Drive to Corte Madera Creek
The MCBC supports bicycle and pedestrian improvements to the west side of Highway
101 between Wornum Drive and Corte Madera Creek. This corridor serves as a key
connector for those wishing to access the SMART Station, Ferry Terminal, Central Marin
Ferry Connection, Cal Park Tunnel, Marin Airporter and commercial and business
centers to the north from Larkspur and Corte Madera, as well as from locations further to
the south and west. In addition, the corridor provides a direct connection to the Corte
Madera Creek Pathway for those wishing to travel westbound, including travel to the Bon
Air Shopping Center, Marin General Hospital and College of Marin. The corridor receives
a high level of existing non-motorized commuter and recreational traffic; and upon
operation of SMART and development within and adjacent to the Station Planning Area,
this corridor will be of increasing importance to non-motorized users. Therefore, a safe
and interconnected bicycle/pedestrian network to serve current and future non-motorized
needs is vitally important throughout this corridor. The MCBC recommends that the
SAP environmental assessment includes an analysis of alternatives for provision
of a Class I multi-use pathway along the west side of Highway 101 between
Wornum Drive and Corte Madera Creek.

Separated from Traffic Crossing of Highway 101/SAP’s Relation to Greenbrae
Corridor Improvement Project
At the same time that this Plan is being developed, the Transportation Authority of Marin,
in partnership with and Caltrans, has been developing the design plans and
environmental assessment for the Twin Cities Greenbrae Corridor Improvement Project
(GCIP), which calls for the removal of the bicycle/pedestrian overcrossing of Hwy 101 at
Lucky Drive, without plans for replacement. Under the current design, the GCIP will
reroute bicycle/pedestrian traffic needing to cross Highway 101 under the freeway via
Wornum Drive. Cyclists and pedestrians using Wornum will be forced to navigate
numerous lanes of heavy traffic, including multiple on/off-ramps. The planned Wornum
Drive route will include crossing multiple right turn lanes, and in some cases double right
turn lanes, which are notoriously dangerous for cyclists and pedestrians. The removal of
this existing bike/ped overcrossing will undoubtedly affect bicycle/pedestrian
connectivity, safety, and perceived safety within and adjacent to the SMART Station
Planning Area. Therefore, it’s imperative that the environmental assessment for the
SMART Station Area Plan takes into account the impacts that the removal of the
overcrossing and the subsequent rerouting of bicycle/pedestrian traffic onto the
dangerous and highly congested Wornum Drive will have on bike/pedestrian circulation
within and adjacent to the Station Plan Area.

The removal of the overcrossing will result in the division of the local community without
providing a friendly and "attractive" crossing point. This project is inconsistent with
policies from the General Plans of Larkspur, Corte Madera and the County of Marin with
regards to fostering connectivity within and between communities and between the east
and west sides of the freeway. It also conflicts with policies and goals that encourage an
increase in bicycle/pedestrian mode shift, including the Marin Countywide Plan’s goal of
20 percent of all trips in Marin to be made by walking or biking by 2020. The existing
overcrossing is heavily used by many local residents and it is also an important part of
Marin’s North-South Greenway, a mostly car-free north-south bikeway extending from
Sausalito through Novato. The MCBC strongly requests that the SAP environmental
assessment includes an evaluation of not only the current bicycle/pedestrian
transportation conditions, but also an evaluation of future bike/pedestrian
transportation needs and impacts that will result from construction of the GCIP,
given the project’s current design.

Application of a Pedestrian Environmental Quality Index
We urge the City of Larkspur to consider the application of a Pedestrian Environmental
Quality Index (PEQI) when evaluating solutions for getting people safely across Highway
101 and through the Station Planning Area. Many of the intersections within the Planning
Area represent typical routes pedestrians and bicyclists use to access nearby public
transit, parks, schools, essential goods, and surrounding neighborhoods. Overall,
existing conditions at the project area suggest substantial traffic hazards for pedestrians
and bicyclists, both for area residents walking and bicycling to adjacent neighborhood
amenities and for people coming to the project area via non-motorized means.
Application of a PEQI, originally developed by the San Francisco Department of Public
Health (SFDPH) in 2008 and now used nationwide, should be included as part of the
study of intersection operating conditions.

The environmental assessment should evaluate existing conditions for pedestrian and
bicycle safety and the cumulative effects on pedestrian and bicycle hazards and collision
frequencies in the project area. The PEQI should quantify street and intersection factors
empirically known to affect people's travel behaviors and be organized into the typical
five categories: intersection safety, traffic, street design, land use and perceived safety.
Within these categories should be 31 indicators that reflect the quality of the built
environment for pedestrians which should comprise the survey used for data collection.
SFDPH has aggregated these indicators to create a weighted summary index, which can
be reported as an overall index. Table 1 indicates how the indicators fit into the broader
domains of pedestrian comfort and security.
                                  Table 1: PEQI 2.0 Indicators by Domain
  Intersection Safety           Traffic        Street Design         Land Use            Perceived
                               Volume                                                       Safety
  • Crosswalks             •   Number of     • Continuous         • Public seating   •   Pedestrian
  • High visibility            vehicle           sidewalk         • Public art/           scale lighting
    crosswalk                  lanes         • Width of             historic sites   •   Illegal graffiti
  • Intersection           •   Posted            sidewalk         • Retail use and   •   Litter
    lighting                   speed limit   • Width of             public places    •   Empty
  • Traffic control        •   Traffic           throughway                              spaces
  • Pedestrian/                volume        • Large
    Countdown signal       •   Street            sidewalk
  • Wait time                  traffic           obstructions
  • Crossing speed             calming       • Sidewalk
  • Pedestrian refuge          features          impediments
    island                                   • Trees
  • Curb ramps                               • Driveway cuts
  • Intersection traffic                     • Presence of a
    calming features                             buffer
  • Pedestrian                               • Planters/
    engineering                                  gardens
    countermeasures


The discussion of baseline conditions should include data on pedestrian-vehicle
collisions in the project area. In addition to assessing where new resident
populations will be introduced and their potential pedestrian routes, providing a
map of the location of pedestrian-vehicle collisions in the project area over the
past 10 years would be helpful in identifying high hazard locations that could
benefit from focused pedestrian design efforts. The environmental assessment
should also consider how improvements in the pedestrian environment in the
area may be feasible and provide appropriate mitigations.

The MCBC requests that the SAP environmental assessment includes the
application of a Pedestrian Environmental Quality Index based on the
alternatives presented in order to ensure a safe, inviting and user-friendly
bicycle/pedestrian environment within the Planning Area.

Thank you for your careful consideration of our comments.

Sincerely,



Alisha Oloughlin, Planning Director
Marin County Bicycle Coalition
                                         Attachment A




                                                       I
                                                       I              All variations of Option One start at Old Redwood Highway
                                                                      and Wornum Drive. Each follow the NWP ROW to the
                                                       I
                                                                      north towards the existing trestle over Corte Madera Creek.
                               Rich Street              I
                          :=:::::::::::::==~[= ~                            New drawbridge and overcrossing of Sir Francis
                                                                            Drake Boulevard on alignment of existing trestle
                           Industrial Way                                   with ramp connection to SFDB paths.
                         :=======~==·
                                                            I               New fixed bridge with channel clearance to allow


                                                ~~
                                                  §I
                                            .:;.'lj,
                                                       "''                  vessels free passage beneath and overcrossing of
                                                                            Sir Francis Drake Boulevard on alignment of existing
                                                                            trestle with ramp connection to SFDB paths.

                                      ,o,~,                                 Path d iverges from NWP ROW between mobile
                                  ~o~;                                      home park and Greenbrae Boardwalk to new path
                               cP~ ;                                        alongside US 101/SFDB off-ramp, leading to an
                               ,;                                           overcrossing of Sir Francis Drake Boulevard.
                           ;




Larkspur Trestle Bike Path                                                                                                   10/02


Option I



Central Marin Ferry Connection Feasibility Study                vii                                                  April 2004
Alta Planning + Design
                                                                 February L4,20L3
Neal Toft
Director of Planning and Building
City of Larkspur
nto ft@ ci tvo fl arks p u r' o r g

From: Cindy Winter, cinhiver@)yaho o.com

Re:     Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan
        Response to Notice of Preparation INOP] of EIR

My response concerns transportation and circulation only. Until the chalJenges
raised ty traffiC transit, anilnon-motorized transporters have been resolved" no
other isiues, including the design and placement of buildings, can be addressed
satisfactorily.

The area of the Larkspur SMART Station plan is tightly constrained - by steep hills,
by waterfront, and by u.s. 101 and sir Francis Drake Boulevard.

Given these constraints, the only way to achieve higher-density is to construct
                                                                                taller
buildings. Higher density means more people will be living  working    and shopping
at Larkipur Landing. Most of them will have cars. However, as time passes, and as
additional higher-denslty construction occurs beyond Larkspur Landing, but near iL
there wiil not be enough-space to accommodate all these additional vehicles on the
roadways and in parking lots. The inevitable outcome will be massive gridlock.

See   list of new developments [actual, planned, discussedJ attached as Exhibit "A'"

SUGGESTED SOLUTIONS:

I find it discouragtng to hear so much analysis of parking lot capacity, when we
should be concentruring on the relief of traffic congestion on East Sir Francis Drake'
Parking availability will only encourage driving into the area' We need to move
beyonjour l-950'i-era focus on cars and turn our thoughts to the future, guided by
SB 375 and worries about the effects of climate change'




As  with the new residences, offices and shops, the only way to accommodate
increased transportation volumes will be to build up. Heavy traffic, i'e' motor
vehicles, should continue to use existing roadways, but light-weight transporters,
i.e. cyclists, pedestrians and the disabled, mustbe encouraged in this mode
                                                                             of travel
by tleir own network of elevated pathways, Here, they will be able to move safely
und .onuuniently, without fear of being hit by trucks or cars and without having to
compete with traffic for road space, Nor will they delay traffic by frequent use of
traffic signals at road intersections.
The Central Marin Ferry Connector Project is a good first step. I also propose:

i1)  A bike/ped overcrossing IPOC] from the SMART station across Larkspur
l"naing Cirlle and the parking lots on either side, and connecting with the ferry,
The "dJg leg" on the noith side of East SirFrancis Drake could remain, but iipoints
in the *iong direction for efficient ferry-train connection and some remediation
would be needed.

(Z)   ApOC at the southeast end of Larkspur Landing Circle, at the signalized
inlersection with East Sir Francis Drake. The multi-use path along the water is a
pleasant place to walk, and while pedestrians may access it from the CMFCP, if
walking ir to bu encouraged there should be equal access near its eastern end.
Many r-esidents in the area, and in the Bon Air Center/South Eliseo area, are older
p.opl. who often stroll along Corte Madera Creek. Larkspur Landing should have
its own recreational walkway by the water.

                                                                 could be improved
[3J Free flow of motor vehicle traffic on West Sir Francis Drake
by a POC connecting Eliseo Drive and Barry Way.

                                                        designed and built across
[4J At some time in the distant future, a POC should be
Highway L01, joining the Greenbrae Hills and the SMART station.

I envision this network of overcrossings as an extremely useful and potentially
beautiful "spider web,"

yes, these POC's would be costly to build. However, remarkably small expenditures
on active transportation ["small" compared to road buildingJ can allow key
roadways to operate the same for automobiles today as they did 20 years ago,
despiteincreased traffic demand - which Larkspur Landing will have, inevitably'
See Gellel Roger, Bicycle Coordinator, City of Portland , "Build It and They Will
Come," 1ALL;two pafes of graphs from this report are attached as Exhibit"B'"




The Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan includes U.S. 101from Wornum Drive north
to Corte Gd.ru Creek. GCIP's proposed abolishment of the POC is (aJ contrary to
23 CFR 552, [bJ blatantly contrary to Policy {, Larkspur's General Plan, and
(cj broadly dltiimental to bike/ped circulation. My responses to the GCIP DED are
tengttry, thus not attached. Please advise if you would like a copy of this document'

Regarding traffic congestion at Larkspur Landing it is critical that the many walkers
anI rychsts who live and work outside the Landing be persuaded to leave their cars
at home and walk and rycle into it. It is not sufficient to concentrate on traffic
solutions only within the Landing.
                                                   it is highly likely that on
Regarding the sMART station and train ridership,
                                                  and southern Marin county will set
weekends numerous cyclists from san Francisco
                                                     A POC over 101 will provide
out for Larkspur Landing to catch the train north'                             Redwood
convenient and safe  u..i, to the station [the GCIP plan; for Wornum and
                                              children, the elderly, the disabled)'
Highway are dangerous for ryclists, walkers,

                                         population density along 101wiil increase'
Higher-density development means that
                                             ana accessing the Landing by using a
More people will be desirous of crossing iOi
poc. That is why the Fehr & Peers tu*.y "Memorandum" fails' It is merely a
                                               future needs for a PoC, it is
snapshot in time, as of March20L2. Regarding
irrelevant.
                                                planning process fully support the
It is imperative that the Larkspur Station Area
                                               Avenue to Industrial way' It is also
inclusion in GCIP of a Poc, roughly from Fifer
                                                            be proposed in areas
i1nfurutiu. that should additionafbike/ped infrastructure
outside Larkspur Landing and within ty.tittg
                                               and/or walking distance to it' that the
                                                 well'
Larkspur Station planners fully support that as



                                                  this term means would aid in
 I believe that a more precise definition of what
 planning.
                                                  qualify as public transit.
 We have a ferry, and there will be a train. Both

                                                    on, more thought needs to be given
 However, to the extent bus transit is to be relied
                                                    to leave their cars at home' they
 to the details. If buses are to persuade residents
                                                   and inexpensive' I have been
 must be efficient, safe, convenient, comfortable
                                                               the bus stop
 It int ing about bus transit in connection with GCIP, where
 arrangements have been poorly designed, in my
                                                    view as a former long-time bus
 commuter.

                                              slows      their progress' and as long as
 Buses must stop to pick up passengers, which
 buses must share tanes *itf, t        their speed will be further curtailed if traffic is
                                 "ffiC
 slow. Logically, this means that buses siroula have
                                                       their own dedicated lanes that
                                                  and buses should be given free-flow
 cannot be used uv u"v other kinds of vehicles,
                                                                 of freeway for buses
 priority at intersections. That concept means taking a lane
                                                                 the concept needs full
 only, which would no doubt be controversial' Nonetheless,
 and frank discussion'

                                              popular, thgn what??? we have no
 If bus transit cannot be made efficient and
                                                   Greenbrae/Larkspur Landing /carte
 reasonable space to widen our roadways in the
                                                  built, but nobody wants thal and
 Madera area. Double-deck roadways cluld be
                                                            to raise two levels of traffic
 given sea level rise, it would be prohibitiveiy expensive
 iun.t above the waters as they rose'
                                                                                  the
               is occurring. That  more  will  occur is guaranteed, even though
sea level rise                                                                    in the
precise extent.un*iU."predicted.
                                        S.t it't soberiig Figure 2-22 contained
                                                                                   system
             To  prepare foi this "sure uncertainty," we need a transportation
GCIp DED,                                                                     extremely
                                           of concrete that are difficult and
that does not reiy on massive amounts
                                  as time passes'
costty to raise and reconfigure
                                       an old-fashioned eievated rail
                                                                      system' we
As a possible  solution,let's consider
                                 to eveniually build a-causeway, from
                                                                       wornum Drive
know we,re faced with having                                                traffic
to the hills north oirfr" creekl
                                 rn. .uuru*ly would be needed to elevate time passes'
above floods that will become
                                 longer-lasting and then permanent, as
                                                                         easily to
             lightweight raise-d rail structure could be adapted fairly
A relatively                                                             not heavy like
                                      on the rail tracks would be small'
changing conditionsl ift. vehicles                                          pods that
                                        be simple and-inexpensive people
the SMART cars; instead they would
would run in a never'ending stream, "i
                                           ini*"ts of only a few minutes' Ideally'
users would PaY no fares'

 Theroute:lproposethattheroutefollow,rough}y,theoutlinesofthestationarea     local
 plan, thougt omittirrgihe Greenbra.
                                     friff,"Theilwated tramway would serve
                                                           easily' without driving'
                                   by enabling them to travel
 residents, workers, and shoppers,                                     on to Trader
                                      Bon Air-Shopping Center and then
 from, say, the vrarin Country Martto
 }oe,sandhomeagain.Ingenious.ngin."'ing*outaberequired,butweneedto
 lxplore this oPtion seriouslY'


                                                                       the use of
                                     somewhat diminished' by requiring
  This traffic mightbe tolied, hence
  ffansponders,similartoFasTrack,atkeypointsalongtheroute.Wouldthisbe
  technlcallY feasibie? Legal?

  IFJ Meanwhile:

  Assoonaspossible,let,sbuildtheverybestbike/ped'spiderweb"thatcanbe
                                                   good multi-use pathways should
  designed. Based on the Portland."pJri"n.",                                    to plan
                                            of trafic, thus buying us some time
  significantly restrict the rate of growth
  for 2050 and beYond'

  Resp e ctfullY submitte d,

     (l"irXL),,,fu
   Cindy Winter
   cinhiver@Yahoo.com

   Ms. CindY M. Winter
   336 Bon-Air Ctr # 108                        4
                                   7
   Gieenbrae, CA 94904-30      1
                                                                    |anuary 22,2AL3




                                                                  Wincup site, Wornum and
*l''tl{D   1. MacFarlane Partners, 185 new units + mixed use, old
           Tamal Vista.

                                        as Rose Garden), Doherty Drive, Larkspur, 35+6 =
                                                                                           91new
ttIND      2. Rose Lane [also known
           units, The New Home ComPanY'
                                                                                are being
           3. Larkspur Library Doherty Drive. Many amenities-and activities                       it
                                                                           the crow flies) that
           planned. ffre new iiUrary will be so close to East Larkspur [as
           would seem a shame if patrons couldn't walk safely to it
                                                                    on a nice day'


           4. Fifer Avenue:        property owner is reported to be considering
                              A large
           redevelopment similar to the MacFarlane project'
                                                                          discusst-9lf:t
           5, Higher-density development is under serious and on-going
           iuffinr Landing, in connection with SMART station    planning. The GCIP freeway
                                                             --   residential units' and Drake's
           Mitigated Negative Declaration iists Drake's Way 24
                                                                See page 1-21of the.MND'
tI{I\TD    Cove -- 126 residential units + hotel and mixed use,
  2 only   However, since this portion of the MND was prepared,
                                                                  the Larkspur Landlng
                                                                         sites and other
           discussions have expanded to inciude a number of additional
           changes.

           5. Higher-density development has been suggested for      Bon   Air Shopping Center'

                                                                       Landing'
           7. Higher-density development has been suggested for Drakes

           8. College of Marin is under reconstruction, to atrract more students'

           9.   SMART   train station and Central Marin Ferry Conneclor Project'
                                                                      and evolving attitudes
           10. AIto Tunnel will open some day; geography, population,
           make it inevitable.

                                                             probably use Tamalpais Drive'
           Many drivers attracted to Nos, 11, L}and 13 would
                                                                             of Trader ]oe's
           but some [an unknovrn numberJ would be atLracted in the direction
           and Wornum:

                                                                    school San Clemente
            11, Larkspur-Corte Madera School Disfict, new elemenhry
            Drive.

                                                               Continued..'
*See MND, page I-2I.
                                             EXIIIBIT rrArr (Page 1 of        2)
                                               and the shopping center parking
tZ. TheViilage: Nordstrom's is under renovation,
witl be renovated to accommodate more vehicles more easily.

13. MaderaVistaApartments, off Paradise Drive in Corte Madera 726vacantuniB
to be renovated fbuilding permit has been issued)'

AND FTNALLY:

14. \Mhat would traffic be like were San Quentin moved from Marin?




Prepared by Cindy Winter
cinhiver@yahoo.com
[Resident of Greenbrae]




                           EXHIBIT rtArr (page 2 of 2)
                                                                                                              will come"
                                                                                                                       "Build it and                 theY
                                                 Portland's experience with modest investrnent in bicycle transportation




                 Increase in daity commute trips City of Portland 1990'2008
                                                       Bicycle, transit and automobiles
                                   Number of Commute TriPs
                                                   in Daily Poriand Commute Trips
                                           1990-2008




                                                                                      fFr5lt                                          lilobt Vchldc

                                                                                     Mode
            br": iere 6in6beri r$srdn awuntf/ srveJ

         Figure 11. Change in daily commute trips by node 1990-2008



                                   Change in Mode Split relative to 1996
                         Percentage
             3009i)
                                       Alone            sncalPool
             273%            t6;Public Transportation   tBicycle
             250%

             2?f%
             20096

             17s96

             r50a6

             r   ris6

             100%

                 7i%
                 50%

                 25%

                  o.6                                                                          :j.i(!;ili:::i1i;:!f:-:l1t:::i:i i!-:lsra!Ii:rtrdiij:i!:j::i;:+r+t?ti;!:t*it:-i::):d
             -259r

             -50%
                        19S        tgg-/      1998       ',19!9     ?000   3S0J ?oP ?cc'3 ?ooq                                    3065           1A6             ?007           :s08
                        ACS        ACS        ACS        ACS        Csus   Acs ACS ACS ACS                                        ACS            ACS             ACS             ACS


                                                                                     Year
            wE          US   Dcpalmd  ot Colffir€ Amexcan
            Coftsrtv Sn€I         and US CeNE                                       Source
            DBta dis9la/ed as    lBad tunF




        X'igure 12. Change in mode split relative to 1996 (Trend Line)

                                                                                                                                                                                             I
Lllts                                                                EXHIBTT           '8" (Page 1 of                                            2)
                                                                                                                                                                               April   201
                                                                                                                   "Build it and theY will come"
                                                           Portland's experience with modest investment in bicycle transportafion




                Cumulative regional expenditures 1995-2010
                                               Active transportation, transit and roadway
                       $5,000 million
                                                     E Cumulative Regioml Expendihres
                                                         1995-2010
                                                                                                                          $4,227 million

                       54,000 million




                       91000 million


                                                                                           $2"12o:million
                       g2,000 million




                       51,000 million


                                                            $153 million
                                 $0 million                                        r                                   n@duf ltlfFydett
                                                          Adrr! fnFPorbtiil                     TEEk

             ss?.: of NFh6i H.so trrerJrut+i                                                    MOde                     'Adne T!ffilonds rmlldes both
                                                    a"rc'!ed tsr M'a. c':(tr. ime
                                        e


             i:;;;;;;;;;;.6;JliJ.oe **.o sdr "*,,e
                                             rs150t c. lffil.gns tnt€: nti nct irlffC.d'
                                                                                                                         beycts rrnd ped6tEitr i$Prdem€rss
             is-#jl   'rCirri:
                                 r*at irtEfig ffit..s;

      Figure 13. Cumulative regional capitol expenditurcs in transportation 1995-2010



                     Traffic on PorHand's Four Principal Bicycle-Friendly Bridges
                                                                                       1991-2008
                                 Bridge Traffic
                140.000


                                      rTotal      # of Vehicles
                135,000
                                            (including bicycles)
                                      gAutomobiles
                130;o0O
                                                                                            a
                                                                                                            *u   u**
                125,000

                                                              onl:*
                                                                    {t/; dll"vrF*ff                                          aa
                                               *r,ds."
                120.000                                                       it
                                                                     I

                                                         Grotrrthin auto trafiic esr"ntiatiy nat
                1',r5,000
                                                                                                                 {offi
                110.000



                105.000



                100.090
                                  rqsrrgg?:99319*199519E6199i''908',19993000loot:001!m3:m42005:006]ffifr'8
               Tl€sp brdl?s 3Ie      ll* tlo3dr'6t Slei ef,f,sce     aod   Hn'lttFr*         Ygaf


          Figure 14. Increased demand for mobility largely met by bicycles on four principal Portland bridges


121   u                                                          EXHIBIT "8" (Page 2 of 2)                                                                   April   201   I
From:             Neal Toft
To:               Julia Capasso
Subject:          FW: EIR scoping questions for SMART SAP
Date:             Friday, February 15, 2013 4:11:59 PM




Julia,

Please add to NOP Comments

Neal 

-----Original Message-----
From: Jean [mailto:jsever117@gmail.com]
Sent: Friday, February 15, 2013 3:45 PM
To: Neal Toft
Subject: EIR scoping questions for SMART SAP

Re NOP for EIR Scope, Larkspur SMART Station Area Plan(SAP)

Neal,
Please include these questions in the EIR for the SMART SAP.
Thank you!

1) Circulation SAP
This is the hub of the regional network. Within the narrow scope of the plan area, including Redwood
Highway North, how can the plan make sure to accommodate all users accessing that area and that
station by bike? On foot? By bus? What routes provide the conflict-free and fast connectivity within the
area connecting to downtown Larkspur? To all major employment centers and likely destinations for the
60% of arriving users who are going to jobs, shopping and business in Central Marin? To the minority
40% going on to San Francisco by bus or ferry per the ridership studies?
Where will users coming to employment in Marin store their bicycles near the station overnight? Many
may choose to store a car overnight near the station and take SMART rather than drive and sit in the
demoralizing traffic jam coming south from Sonoma County that occurs every single morning. How can
they best be encouraged to store a bike overnight instead of a car to reduce traffic capacity?  Could a
locked roofed secure bike parking shelter for 300 bikes be built near the corner of Larkspur Landing
Circle on 4 spaces of Airporter Land central to ferry and train and Airporter? What will be the impact of
not providing ample secure overnight bike parking?
Where will train users coming south store their cars overnight near the station? What will be the impact
of that?
The fastest route to downtown Larkspur by bike and on foot is via the Pedestrian Overcrossing (POC) at
Lucky drive: what can the SAP do to ensure that this fastest route remains accessible to SMART users,
and is made ADA compliant? The route crossing under 101 north of the creek to the westside bridge is
3/4 miles from the RR ROW at SFD to Lucky Dr versus 1/2 mile from the RR ROW/SFD to Lucky Dr via
Redwood Hwy and the Lucky POC.
Can SMART ask the GCIP/CALTRANS and TAM to meet SMART's needs for connectivity since the POC is
within the Plan area and is critical for reducing traffic congestion by cars within the station area.
Can Larkspur ask the GCIP the same?
What changes can be made to code so that all new residential structures will build bicycle parking and
pathway access and sidewalks to encourage reduced car use? Likewise code changes to require bicycle
parking for all new businesses and hotels?
Can code be changed to offer housing with only 1 or some units with no car parking space at a reduced
rate?
What kind of bicycle map could be provided to SAP users showing times by bike at 10mph speed and by
foot at 3mph speed on each of the regional multi use paths(MUP) connecting to the station area to
destinations within 15 minutes, 20 minutes and 30 minutes to educate and encourage area users to
walk or bike rather than driving cars out of or into the station area, since traffic is already at or near
capacity much of the day? At 10mph where could a user get from the station by bike on the MUP in
going to work in 15 minutes? Where a walker? I think the Sonoma County train riders will be super
motivated to get to their destinations by any means because of the misery of the drive they will be
avoiding. Can we ask them if they will walk or ride a bike at this terminus and how much time they
would be willing to spend getting the distance from the train to their employment or other destinations?
Where are their jobs in Central Marin? Are they close enough to get to in a 15 minute bike ride? A 15
minute walking trip? What can be done to make those trips better? What can be done to maximize the
distance train riders are able to travel in that 15 minute time amount?
What impact would reducing cars by 300 and bike/walking trips have on capacity? Would it allow for
more TOD housing units? The area is very attractive and will likely be desired by large numbers of
seniors downsizing from big Marin houses; under supply will likely be a problem.
What aspects of the planned bicycle and pedestrian paths will be under FEMA's new 9' 100 year flood
line? What will happen to the circulation during more frequent  times of increased flooding with climate
change?
Where does BCDC's 16" increase by 2050 flood line fall in the station area and connecting to the
MUPaths users will be accessing on bike or foot from the train? From the ferry? In Redwood Highway
area?
What would be the flooded condition advantage for SAP circulation of continuing the CMFC elevated
above flooding across Corte Madera Creek and south on the SMART RR ROW?
How will fire-trucks and safety services circulate during high water conditions?
What can be done to make the Larkspur Landing area less isolated? The Redwood Highway area less
isolated?  Can Larkspur support building a recreational trail on the levees behind Redwood Highway
North?
Station to ferry bike/ped access is currently planned via parking lots which provide numerous conflict
points and are unsafe. What is the time to arrive from station platform to ferry entrance via this
planned route? Would it be better and financially possible to make a dedicated stairs and path separate
from cars between the Airporter and back of the Cinema building to the street from near the end of the
top of the "U" ramp of the Cal Park path directly down to Larkspur Landing Circle(LLC), then continue
on the street to the corner at the south corner of the Airporter, and a new crosswalk across LLC, then
to the SFD pedestrian signal and on to the ferry?  I walked this route and found it took 5.5 minutes.
The planned route is circuitous via the shopping center and took 7.5 minutes; it is longer. Walkers tend
to take the shortest path; what would it cost to build this route for walkers? What impacts would a
faster walking path from station platform to ferry have on the SAP, and could it make shuttles or special
bridges or moving the station to the ferry less attractive in cost/benefit ratio?
The SMART plan is a pathway as well as train. Once the pathway segments to the north are connected
by SMART, do we know how many more bicyclists will come and go via the SAP area? What will be the
impact if many recreational riders and tourists come by bike and ferry from San Francisco to go north
on the train and path?  Do the planned routes adequately serve numerous tourists coming north or
Ballpark bound fans heading south from the Airporter/SMART parking lots?
What would be the impact on car traffic on East SFD, and can Larkspur work with GCIP/Caltrans to
request this, to rename all "Richmond Bridge" signs on 101 NB as "East Sir Francis Drake?" Sausalito
did similarly a number of years ago with "Alexander Ave" and successfully cut congestion on Bridgeway.
Can housing density figures be tied to traffic capacity such that incentives are built in to pay for non-car
features and thus make room for desired densities?
With good advance planning for circulation for all modes of users besides cars, we have a chance to
fulfill the dream of walkable neighborhoods, attractive transit oriented high density housing, and
regional travelers. Without careful attention to connectivity for multimodal users we will have traffic at
capacity, reduced air quality, increased greenhouse gas emissions and increasing contributions to
climate change.
Respectfully submitted by
Jean Severinghaus
2/15/13
Greenbrae Boardwalk Designated Representative to the Larkspur SMART SAP CAC Executive Board
Member, Greenbrae Boardwalk
117 Greenbrae Boardwalk
Greenbrae, CA 94904
415-577-3227
Jsever117@gmail.com

--
Sent from my mobile device
    APPENDIX B

TRANSPORTATION DATA
 APPENDIX A

TRAFFIC COUNTS
                  APPENDIX A-1

COMPARISON OF TRAFFIC COUNTS ON SIR FRANCIS DRAKE
  BOULEVARD AT LARKSPUR LANDING (2006 TO 2011)
                                    Summary of Traffic Volumes along Sir Francis Drake Boulevard at Larkspur Landing

                                                                 1                                 2                                           Percentage Change Traffic
                                           2006 Traffic Volumes              2011 Traffic Volumes           Net Change Traffic Volumes
                                                                                                                                                       Volumes
                                            AM               PM               AM               PM                AM               PM               AM                 PM
In/Out Larkspur Landing West                620              870              641             1,066               21             196                3%                23%
In/Out Larkspur Landing East                308              701              248              437               -60             -264             -19%               -38%
Sub-Total                                   928             1,571             889             1,503              -39             -68               -4%                -4%
In/Out Larkspur Ferry Terminal              690              570              771              632                81              62               12%                11%
                                 Total     1,618            2,141            1,660            2,135               42              -6                3%                 0%
Eastbound Through Trips                    1,126            1,074             906             1,250             -220             176              -20%                16%
Westbound through Trips                    1,348             988             1,188             874              -160             -114             -12%               -12%
                                 Total     2,474            2,062            2,094            2,124             -380              62              -15%                 3%
Notes:
1. From Greenbrae Corridor Improvement Project,. Fehr & Peers, 2011.
2. From Task 2A: Draft Existing Conditions Analysis, MTC Program for Arterial System Synchronization for Marin County, City of Larkspur, and Caltrans. TJKM, 2011.

Source: Fehr & Peers, 2012
              APPENDIX A-2

2006 INTERSECTION TURNING MOVEMENT COUNTS
                                                               Traffic Data Service
                                                               1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                    Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                      tdsbay@cs.com                                              File Name        : 2AMFINAL
                                                                                                                                 Site Code        : 00000002
                                                                                                                                 Start Date       : 9/12/2006
                                                                                                                                 Page No          :1


                                                                     Groups Printed- Vehicles
                       WOLFE GRADE                    SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                   DRIVEWAY                    SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                         Southbound                            Westbound                      Northbound                            Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds    App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds    App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                    1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                      1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 07:00 AM       27        1  54     1       83          21 126      0    0   147         0     0    1    0          1         1 227      5    0   233         464
 07:15 AM       37        1  90     0      128          23 180      2    1   206         3     0    1    2          6         3 290     12    0   305         645
 07:30 AM       49        4 113     0      166          45 243    13     0   301         0     0    2    3          5         1 322     14    0   337         809
 07:45 AM       68        8 143     0      219          33 268    22    24   347        10     0    6    9         25        17 294     30    0   341         932
       Total   181      14 400      1      596        122 817     37    25 1001         13     0   10   14         37        22 1133    61    0 1216         2850

 08:00 AM       69       7    61    1      138         33   268     63    41     405    57     6   22   41      126         56   263     31     0    350     1019
 08:15 AM       70      10    74    1      155         44   247     17    19     327    37     5   18   19       79         12   405     56     0    473     1034
 08:30 AM       52       4    78    0      134         34   210      8    10     262     6     0    2    4       12          2   264     30     0    296      704
 08:45 AM       74       3    93    0      170         38   252      4     2     296     4     4    2    1       11          7   297     50     0    354      831
     Total     265      24   306    2      597        149   977     92    72    1290   104    15   44   65      228         77   1229   167     0   1473     3588

 Grand Total 446       38 706        3   1193         271   1794   129    97    2291   117    15   54   79      265        99 2362      228     0   2689     6438
 Apprch % 37.4         3.2 59.2    0.3         11.8 78.3            5.6   4.2          44.2   5.7 20.4 29.8                3.7 87.8      8.5    0
   Total % 6.9         0.6  11       0    18.5 4.2 27.9               2   1.5   35.6    1.8   0.2 0.8 1.2        4.1       1.5 36.7      3.5    0    41.8




                    WOLFE GRADE                SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                DRIVEWAY                              SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                                      Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds              App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 07:00 AM to 08:45 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:30 AM
 07:30 AM      49      4 113       0    166     45 243    13    0  301         0     0    2    3                  5          1 322       14     0    337      809
 07:45 AM      68      8 143       0    219     33 268    22  24   347        10     0    6    9                 25        17 294        30     0    341      932
 08:00 AM      69      7    61     1    138     33 268    63  41   405        57     6   22   41                126        56 263        31     0    350     1019
 08:15 AM      70    10     74     1    155     44 247    17  19   327        37     5   18   19                 79        12 405        56     0    473     1034
 Total Volume 256    29 391        2    678 155 1026 115      84 1380 104          11    48   72                235        86 1284      131     0   1501     3794
 % App. Total 37.8  4.3 57.7 0.3              11.2 74.3  8.3 6.1            44.3   4.7 20.4 30.6                           5.7 85.5      8.7    0
        PHF .914 .725 .684 .500 .774 .861 .957 .456 .512 .852 .456 .458 .545 .439                              .466 .384 .793 .585 .000              .793      .917
                                                                Traffic Data Service
                                                                1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                     Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                       tdsbay@cs.com                                            File Name        : 2PMFINAL
                                                                                                                                Site Code        : 00000002
                                                                                                                                Start Date       : 9/12/2006
                                                                                                                                Page No          :1


                                                                     Groups Printed- Vehicles
                       WOLFE GRADE                    SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                  DRIVEAWAY                   SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                         Southbound                            Westbound                      Northbound                           Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds    App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                    1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 04:00 PM       33        0  56     0       89        142 277       1    0   420         2     1   0     0         3         4 299     94    0   397         909
 04:15 PM       27        1  56     0       84        146 297       0    0   443         3     3   6     2        14         1 267     75    0   343         884
 04:30 PM       43        0  42     0       85        155 309       2    1   467         5     5   1     0        11         2 248     67    0   317         880
 04:45 PM       36        0  56     0       92        125 274       4    0   403         2     0   1     0         3         6 271     62    0   339         837
       Total   139        1 210     0      350        568 1157      7    1 1733         12     9   8     2        31        13 1085 298      0 1396         3510

 05:00 PM       40       1    48    0       89        133    291     5     1     430    1    3    1     0          5        7   263     92     0    362      886
 05:15 PM       23       0    70    0       93        132    315     9     0     456    4    0   14     1         19       12   286     59     0    357      925
 05:30 PM       54       0    80    1      135        140    345     1     0     486    7    0    4     0         11        2   274     51     0    327      959
 05:45 PM       75       0    62    0      137        112    339     2     1     454    3    1    3     2          9        0   240     45     0    285      885
     Total     192       1   260    1      454        517    1290   17     2    1826   15    4   22     3         44       21   1063   247     0   1331     3655

 Grand Total 331         2 470       1     804        1085   2447   24      3   3559   27  13    30      5        75      34 2148      545     0   2727     7165
 Apprch % 41.2         0.2 58.5    0.1         30.5 68.8            0.7   0.1          36 17.3   40    6.7                1.2 78.8      20     0
   Total % 4.6           0 6.6       0    11.2 15.1 34.2            0.3     0   49.7   0.4 0.2   0.4   0.1          1     0.5  30       7.6    0    38.1




                    WOLFE GRADE                SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD               DRIVEAWAY                             SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                                     Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds             App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 04:00 PM to 05:45 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 05:00 PM
 05:00 PM      40      1    48     0      89 133 291       5    1  430         1     3   1     0                   5        7 263   92         0    362      886
 05:15 PM      23      0    70     0      93 132 315       9    0  456         4     0  14     1                  19      12 286    59         0    357      925
 05:30 PM      54      0    80     1    135 140 345        1    0  486         7     0   4     0                  11        2 274   51         0    327      959
 05:45 PM      75      0    62     0    137 112 339        2    1  454         3     1   3     2                   9        0 240   45         0    285      885
 Total Volume 192      1 260       1    454 517 1290      17    2 1826        15     4  22     3                  44      21 1063 247          0   1331     3655
 % App. Total 42.3  0.2 57.3 0.2              28.3 70.6  0.9 0.1            34.1   9.1  50 6.8                            1.6 79.9 18.6        0
        PHF .640 .250 .813 .250 .828 .923 .935 .472 .500 .939 .536 .333 .393 .375                             .579 .438 .929 .671 .000              .919      .953
                                                             Traffic Data Service
                                                              1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                   Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                     tdsbay@cs.com                                             File Name           : 3AMFINAL
                                                                                                                               Site Code           : 00000003
                                                                                                                               Start Date          : 9/13/2006
                                                                                                                               Page No             :1


                                                                    Groups Printed- Vehicles
                                                     SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                  BON AIR RD                  SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                         Southbound                           Westbound                      Northbound                           Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total    Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                   1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 07:00 AM         0       0   0     0          0        0 120    90     0   210        54     0  27     0      81          41 289      0    0   330          621
 07:15 AM         0       0   0     0          0        0 180    98     3   281        78     0  25     1     104          53 293      0    0   346          731
 07:30 AM         0       0   0     0          0        0 207 149       2   358 131           0  49     0     180        144 311       0    0   455          993
 07:45 AM         0       0   0     0          0        0 226 237      10   473 150           0  81     2     233        149 285       0    0   434         1140
       Total      0       0   0     0          0        0 733 574      15 1322 413            0 182     3     598        387 1178      0    0 1565          3485

 08:00 AM         0      0    0    0           0       0   218   212    8     438   123     0    71    0      194        115   274      0     0      389    1021
 08:15 AM         0      0    0    0           0       0   196   195    5     396    79     0    66    3      148        130   299      0     0      429     973
 08:30 AM         0      0    0    0           0       0   169   139    0     308   128     0    52    4      184         94   238      0     0      332     824
 08:45 AM         0      0    0    0           0       0   144   202    0     346   107     0    61    1      169         85   265      0     1      351     866
     Total        0      0    0    0           0       0   727   748   13    1488   437     0   250    8      695        424   1076     0     1     1501    3684

 Grand Total      0      0    0    0           0       0 1460 1322     28    2810   850     0 432     11    1293 811           2254     0     1     3066    7169
 Apprch %         0      0    0    0                   0   52   47       1        65.7      0 33.4    0.9           26.5       73.5     0     0
   Total %        0      0    0    0           0       0 20.4 18.4     0.4   39.2 11.9      0    6    0.2        18 11.3       31.4     0     0      42.8




                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD               BON AIR RD                           SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                                    Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds            App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total    Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 07:00 AM to 08:45 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:30 AM
 07:30 AM      0       0     0     0       0     0 207 149      2  358 131           0  49     0              180        144   311      0     0      455     993
 07:45 AM      0       0     0     0       0     0 226 237    10   473 150           0  81     2              233        149   285      0     0      434    1140
 08:00 AM      0       0     0     0       0     0 218 212      8  438 123           0  71     0              194        115   274      0     0      389    1021
 08:15 AM      0       0     0     0       0     0 196 195      5  396        79     0  66     3              148        130   299      0     0      429     973
 Total Volume  0       0     0     0       0     0 847 793    25 1665 483            0 267     5              755        538   1169     0     0     1707    4127
 % App. Total  0       0     0     0             0 50.9 47.6 1.5              64     0 35.4 0.7                   31.5         68.5     0     0
        PHF .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .937 .836 .625 .880 .805 .000 .824 .417                            .810 .903         .940 .000    .000     .938     .905
                                                              Traffic Data Service
                                                              1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                   Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                     tdsbay@cs.com                                              File Name          : 3PMFINAL
                                                                                                                                Site Code          : 00000003
                                                                                                                                Start Date         : 9/13/2006
                                                                                                                                Page No            :1


                                                                    Groups Printed- Vehicles
                                                     SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                  BON AIR RD                  SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                         Southbound                           Westbound                      Northbound                           Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total    Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                   1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 04:00 PM         0       0   0     0          0        0 296 115       2   413 178           0  93     0    271           71 269      0    0   340         1024
 04:15 PM         0       0   0     0          0        0 317 101       5   423 148           0 111     4    263           19 182      0    0   201          887
 04:30 PM         0       0   0     0          0        0 314 118       3   435 136           0 104     0    240           51 276      0    0   327         1002
 04:45 PM         0       0   0     0          0        0 274 114       2   390 117           0 124     1    242           51 178      0    0   229          861
       Total      0       0   0     0          0        0 1201 448     12 1661 579            0 432     5   1016         192 905       0    0 1097          3774

 05:00 PM         0      0    0    0           0       0   281    133    6     420   122    0   126    0      248         56    245     0     0      301     969
 05:15 PM         0      0    0    0           0       0   315    123    1     439   125    0   108    0      233         34    235     0     0      269     941
 05:30 PM         0      0    0    0           0       0   295    130    2     427   106    0   120    0      226         57    297     0     0      354    1007
 05:45 PM         0      0    0    0           0       0   332    111    0     443   140    0    94    0      234         62    297     0     0      359    1036
     Total        0      0    0    0           0       0   1223   497    9    1729   493    0   448    0      941        209    1074    0     0     1283    3953

 Grand Total      0      0    0    0           0       0 2424 945       21    3390   1072   0 880       5   1957 401            1979    0     0     2380    7727
 Apprch %         0      0    0    0                   0 71.5 27.9      0.6        54.8     0  45     0.3                16.8 83.2      0     0
   Total %        0      0    0    0           0       0 31.4 12.2      0.3   43.9 13.9     0 11.4    0.1    25.3         5.2 25.6      0     0      30.8




                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD               BON AIR RD                           SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                                    Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds            App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total    Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 04:00 PM to 05:45 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 05:00 PM
 05:00 PM      0       0     0     0       0     0 281 133      6  420 122           0 126     0              248         56    245     0     0      301     969
 05:15 PM      0       0     0     0       0     0 315 123      1  439 125           0 108     0              233         34    235     0     0      269     941
 05:30 PM      0       0     0     0       0     0 295 130      2  427 106           0 120     0              226         57    297     0     0      354    1007
 05:45 PM      0       0     0     0       0     0 332 111      0  443 140           0  94     0              234         62    297     0     0      359    1036
 Total Volume  0       0     0     0       0     0 1223 497     9 1729 493           0 448     0              941        209    1074    0     0     1283    3953
 % App. Total  0       0     0     0             0 70.7 28.7 0.5            52.4     0 47.6    0                  16.3          83.7    0     0
        PHF .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .921 .934 .375 .976 .880 .000 .889 .000                            .949 .843          .904 .000   .000     .893     .954
                                                               Traffic Data Service
                                                               1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                    Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                      tdsbay@cs.com                                               File Name        : 4AMFINAL
                                                                                                                                  Site Code        : 00000004
                                                                                                                                  Start Date       : 9/13/2006
                                                                                                                                  Page No          :1


                                                                     Groups Printed- Vehicles
                          ELISEO DR                   SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                   BARRY WY                     SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                         Southbound                            Westbound                      Northbound                             Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds    App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds     App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                    1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                       1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 07:00 AM         2     10    28    1       41           4 279    42     1   326        33     4   6     2        45           2 323      0    3   328         740
 07:15 AM       12      12    39    0       63           2 297 114       0   413        51     6   9     0        66           5 411      0    2   418         960
 07:30 AM       16        7   65    0       88           6 445 108       1   560        70     7  20     2        99           3 499      2    3   507        1254
 07:45 AM       50      13    80    1      144          19 468 110       0   597 117           6  11     2       136           7 485      3    8   503        1380
       Total    80      42 212      2      336          31 1489 374      2 1896 271          23   46     6       346          17 1718     5   16 1756         4334

 08:00 AM       70      21    52    0      143         13   459    116    0     588   137     9     5     0      151         14   480      6     1    501     1383
 08:15 AM        3      10    30    2       45         13   363    123    2     501   125     1     8     3      137         16   475     30     2    523     1206
 08:30 AM       11      15    20    2       48          8   378    132    3     521   111     4     8     4      127         22   395     17     6    440     1136
 08:45 AM       16      13    30    2       61         12   426    128    2     568    80     2     5     2       89          8   396      6     6    416     1134
     Total     100      59   132    6      297         46   1626   499    7    2178   453    16    26     9      504         60   1746    59    15   1880     4859

 Grand Total 180       101 344       8     633        77 3115 873          9   4074   724    39    72    15      850        77 3464      64    31    3636     9193
 Apprch % 28.4          16 54.3    1.3                1.9 76.5 21.4      0.2          85.2   4.6   8.5   1.8                2.1 95.3     1.8   0.9
   Total %     2        1.1 3.7    0.1      6.9       0.8 33.9 9.5       0.1   44.3    7.9   0.4   0.8   0.2      9.2       0.8 37.7     0.7   0.3    39.6




                       ELISEO DR               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                BARRY WY                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                       Westbound                    Northbound                                       Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds               App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 07:00 AM to 08:45 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:30 AM
 07:30 AM      16      7    65     0      88      6 445 108      1  560       70     7  20     2                  99          3 499        2     3    507     1254
 07:45 AM      50    13     80     1    144     19 468 110       0  597 117          6  11     2                 136          7 485        3     8    503     1380
 08:00 AM      70    21     52     0    143     13 459 116       0  588 137          9   5     0                 151         14 480        6     1    501     1383
 08:15 AM        3   10     30     2      45    13 363 123       2  501 125          1   8     3                 137         16 475       30     2    523     1206
 Total Volume 139    51 227        3    420     51 1735 457      3 2246 449        23   44     7                 523         40 1939      41   14    2034     5223
 % App. Total 33.1 12.1     54 0.7              2.3 77.2 20.3 0.1           85.9   4.4 8.4 1.3                                2 95.3       2   0.7
        PHF .496 .607 .709 .375 .729 .671 .927 .929 .375 .941 .819 .639 .550 .583                               .866 .625 .971 .342 .438              .972      .944
                                                              Traffic Data Service
                                                              1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                   Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                     tdsbay@cs.com                                              File Name        : 4PMFINAL
                                                                                                                                Site Code        : 00000004
                                                                                                                                Start Date       : 9/13/2006
                                                                                                                                Page No          :1


                                                                    Groups Printed- Vehicles
                          ELISEO DR                  SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                   BARRY WY                    SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                         Southbound                           Westbound                      Northbound                            Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds    App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                   1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                      1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 04:00 PM       15      11    20    0      46          36 396 100       0   532 100           6  29     1      136          12 420     28    1   461        1175
 04:15 PM       27      38    46    0     111          22 392 121       0   535        63   13   36     0      112          20 407     34    0   461        1219
 04:30 PM       24      18    33    0      75          23 429 106       0   558        61   22   35     0      118          18 413     25    0   456        1207
 04:45 PM         9     18    34    2      63          23 399 141       1   564        64     6  33     2      105           8 370     17    2   397        1129
       Total    75      85 133      2     295        104 1616 468       1 2189 288          47 133      3      471          58 1610 104      3 1775         4730

 05:00 PM       12      10   20    0       42         10   391    131    0    532    69     15    15    0       99         14   368     18     0     400    1073
 05:15 PM       20      13   31    0       64         18   478    115    0    611    57     13    17    0       87          9   400     20     0     429    1191
 05:30 PM       14       9   21    0       44         39   497    100    0    636    53     10    24    1       88         10   395     13     4     422    1190
 05:45 PM       11      11   19    3       44         34   496    120    0    650    77     15    18    4      114         14   371     15     6     406    1214
     Total      57      43   91    3      194        101   1862   466    0   2429   256     53    74    5      388         47   1534    66    10    1657    4668

 Grand Total   132 128 224          5     489        205 3478 934        1   4618   544    100   207     8     859        105 3144     170    13    3432    9398
 Apprch %       27 26.2 45.8        1                 4.4 75.3 20.2      0          63.3   11.6 24.1   0.9                 3.1 91.6       5   0.4
   Total %      1.4 1.4 2.4       0.1      5.2        2.2  37 9.9        0   49.1    5.8   1.1   2.2   0.1      9.1        1.1 33.5     1.8   0.1   36.5




                       ELISEO DR               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                BARRY WY                             SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                       Westbound                    Northbound                                     Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds             App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 04:00 PM to 05:45 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 04:00 PM
 04:00 PM      15    11     20      0     46    36 396 100       0  532 100          6  29     1               136        12 420        28      1    461    1175
 04:15 PM      27    38     46      0   111     22 392 121       0  535       63   13   36     0               112        20 407        34      0    461    1219
 04:30 PM      24    18     33      0     75    23 429 106       0  558       61   22   35     0               118        18 413        25      0    456    1207
 04:45 PM        9   18     34      2     63    23 399 141       1  564       64     6  33     2               105          8 370       17      2    397    1129
 Total Volume  75    85 133         2   295 104 1616 468         1 2189 288        47 133      3               471        58 1610      104      3   1775    4730
 % App. Total 25.4 28.8 45.1      0.7           4.8 73.8 21.4    0          61.1   10 28.2 0.6                            3.3 90.7      5.9   0.2
        PHF .694 .559 .723 .250 .664 .722 .942 .830 .250 .970 .720 .534 .924 .375                             .866 .725 .958 .765 .375              .963      .970
                                                        Traffic Data Service
                                                         1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                              Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                tdsbay@cs.com                                         File Name          : 5AMFINAL
                                                                                                                      Site Code          : 00000005
                                                                                                                      Start Date         : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                      Page No            :1


                                                              Groups Printed- Vehicles
                  US-101 SB OFF-RAMP           SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD             US-101 NB OFF-RAMP           SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                       Southbound                       Westbound                      Northbound                       Eastbound
 Start Time    Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total    Int. Total
     Factor     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 06:30 AM      149      0   0     0   149         0   82     0    0      82       0     0  97     2      99 128 103          0    0   231          561
 06:45 AM      147      0   0     0   147         0 100      0    0   100         0     0  84     3      87 198 180          0    0   378          712
       Total   296      0   0     0   296         0 182      0    0   182         0     0 181     5   186 326 283            0    0   609         1273

 07:00 AM      142     0      0     0    142      0   105     0     0    105      0     0   110     2    112    239   144     0      0     383     742
 07:15 AM      177     0      0     0    177      0   105     0     0    105      0     0   159     8    167    271   178     0      0     449     898
 07:30 AM      206     0      0     0    206      0   144     0     0    144      0     0   269     3    272    346   230     0      0     576    1198
 07:45 AM      203     0      0     0    203      0   117     0     0    117      0     0   283     5    288    325   223     0      0     548    1156
     Total     728     0      0     0    728      0   471     0     0    471      0     0   821    18    839   1181   775     0      0    1956    3994

 08:00 AM      132     0      0     0    132      0    91     0     0     91      0     0   241     2    243    287   272     0      0     559    1025
 08:15 AM      182     0      0     0    182      0   103     0     0    103      0     0   227     3    230    292   227     0      0     519    1034
 08:30 AM      195     0      0     0    195      0    99     0     0     99      0     0   229     2    231    264   263     0      0     527    1052
 08:45 AM      199     0      0     0    199      0   104     0     0    104      0     0   247     3    250    258   266     0      0     524    1077
     Total     708     0      0     0    708      0   397     0     0    397      0     0   944    10    954   1101   1028    0      0    2129    4188

 09:00 AM      208     0      0     0    208      0   96      0     0     96      0     0 216       4    220 228      229     0      1     458   982
 09:15 AM      235     0      0     0    235      0 103       0     0    103      0     0 219       5    224 256      237     0      0     493 1055
 Grand Total   2175    0      0     0   2175      0 1249      0     0   1249      0     0 2381    42    2423 3092     2552    0      1    5645 11492
 Apprch % 100          0      0     0             0 100       0     0             0     0 98.3    1.7         54.8    45.2    0      0
   Total % 18.9        0      0     0   18.9      0 10.9      0     0    10.9     0     0 20.7    0.4    21.1 26.9    22.2    0      0     49.1




                US-101 SB OFF-RAMP             SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD          US-101 NB OFF-RAMP              SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                          Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total    Right Thru Left Peds App. Total    Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 06:30 AM to 09:15 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:30 AM
 07:30 AM 206          0     0     0    206      0 144     0    0  144         0     0 269     3   272          346   230     0      0     576    1198
 07:45 AM 203          0     0     0    203      0 117     0    0  117         0     0 283     5   288          325   223     0      0     548    1156
 08:00 AM 132          0     0     0    132      0   91    0    0     91       0     0 241     2   243          287   272     0      0     559    1025
 08:15 AM 182          0     0     0    182      0 103     0    0  103         0     0 227     3   230          292   227     0      0     519    1034
 Total Volume 723      0     0     0    723      0 455     0    0  455         0     0 1020   13 1033          1250   952     0      0    2202    4413
 % App. Total 100      0     0     0             0 100     0    0              0     0 98.7 1.3                56.8   43.2    0      0
        PHF .877 .000 .000 .000 .877 .000 .790 .000 .000 .790 .000 .000 .901 .650 .897                         .903   .875 .000   .000     .956     .921
                                                        Traffic Data Service
                                                         1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                              Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                tdsbay@cs.com                                          File Name          : 5PMFINAL
                                                                                                                       Site Code          : 00000005
                                                                                                                       Start Date         : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                       Page No            :1


                                                              Groups Printed- Vehicles
                  US-101 SB OFF-RAMP           SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD             US-101 NB OFF-RAMP           SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                       Southbound                       Westbound                      Northbound                       Eastbound
 Start Time    Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total     Int. Total
     Factor     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 03:30 PM      134      0   0     0   134         0 107      0    0   107         0     0 271     6   277 253 276            0    0   529          1047
 03:45 PM      145      0   0     0   145         0 129      0    0   129         0     0 280     6   286 262 262            0    0   524          1084
       Total   279      0   0     0   279         0 236      0    0   236         0     0 551    12   563 515 538            0    0 1053           2131

 04:00 PM      135     0      0     0    135      0   137     0     0    137      0     0   244     0     244   264    280     0     0      544    1060
 04:15 PM      128     0      0     0    128      0   141     0     0    141      0     0   263     1     264   237    251     0     0      488    1021
 04:30 PM      152     0      0     0    152      0   126     0     0    126      0     0   272     5     277   181    233     0     0      414     969
 04:45 PM      132     0      0     0    132      0   165     0     0    165      0     0   359     6     365   240    233     0     0      473    1135
     Total     547     0      0     0    547      0   569     0     0    569      0     0   1138   12    1150   922    997     0     0     1919    4185

 05:00 PM      138     0      0     0    138      0   168     0     0    168      0     0   401     8     409   257    260     0     0      517    1232
 05:15 PM      148     0      0     0    148      0   138     0     0    138      0     0   293     4     297   283    264     0     0      547    1130
 05:30 PM      153     0      0     0    153      0   194     0     0    194      0     0   394     1     395   250    246     0     0      496    1238
 05:45 PM      156     0      0     0    156      0   163     0     0    163      0     0   373     4     377   235    238     0     0      473    1169
     Total     595     0      0     0    595      0   663     0     0    663      0     0   1461   17    1478   1025   1008    0     0     2033    4769

 06:00 PM      189     0      0     0    189      0 102       0     0    102      0     0 336        4    340 267      278     0     0      545 1176
 06:15 PM      166     0      0     0    166      0 124       0     0    124      0     0 320        2    322 259      241     0     0      500 1112
 Grand Total   1776    0      0     0   1776      0 1694      0     0   1694      0     0 3806     47    3853 2988     3062    0     0     6050 13373
 Apprch % 100          0      0     0             0 100       0     0             0     0 98.8     1.2        49.4     50.6    0     0
   Total % 13.3        0      0     0   13.3      0 12.7      0     0    12.7     0     0 28.5     0.4   28.8 22.3     22.9    0     0      45.2




                US-101 SB OFF-RAMP             SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD          US-101 NB OFF-RAMP               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                           Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total     Right Thru Left Peds App. Total    Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 03:30 PM to 06:15 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 05:00 PM
 05:00 PM 138          0     0     0    138      0 168     0    0  168         0     0 401     8   409          257    260     0     0      517    1232
 05:15 PM 148          0     0     0    148      0 138     0    0  138         0     0 293     4   297          283    264     0     0      547    1130
 05:30 PM 153          0     0     0    153      0 194     0    0  194         0     0 394     1   395          250    246     0     0      496    1238
 05:45 PM 156          0     0     0    156      0 163     0    0  163         0     0 373     4   377          235    238     0     0      473    1169
 Total Volume 595      0     0     0    595      0 663     0    0  663         0     0 1461   17 1478           1025   1008    0     0     2033    4769
 % App. Total 100      0     0     0             0 100     0    0              0     0 98.8 1.2                 50.4   49.6    0     0
        PHF .954 .000 .000 .000 .954 .000 .854 .000 .000 .854 .000 .000 .911 .531 .903                          .905   .955 .000   .000     .929     .963
                                                          Traffic Data Service
                                                          1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                               Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                 tdsbay@cs.com                                              File Name        : 6AMFINAL
                                                                                                                            Site Code        : 00000006
                                                                                                                            Start Date       : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                            Page No          :1


                                                                 Groups Printed- Vehicles
                       US-101 SB RAMPS            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                          Southbound                       Westbound                      Northbound                         Eastbound
 Start Time    Right    Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total     Int. Total
     Factor     1.0      1.0 1.0 1.0               1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                   1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 06:30 AM         0        0  98     0     98        0   98 187      0   285         0     0   0     0          0      0 177      0    0   177           560
 06:45 AM         0        0 108     0   108         0 105 189       0   294         0     0   0     0          0      0 176      0    0   176           578
       Total      0        0 206     0   206         0 203 376       0   579         0     0   0     0          0      0 353      0    0   353          1138

 07:00 AM         0       0    90     0     90      0    98   191    0    289      0     0    0     0           0       0   148      0     0     148     527
 07:15 AM         1       0    93     0     94      0   103   258    0    361      0     0    0     0           0       0   175      0     0     175     630
 07:30 AM         1       0   137     0    138      0   123   244    0    367      0     0    0     0           0       0   251      0     0     251     756
 07:45 AM         0       0    97     0     97      0   106   289    0    395      0     0    0     0           0       0   239      0     0     239     731
     Total        2       0   417     0    419      0   430   982    0   1412      0     0    0     0           0       0   813      0     0     813    2644

 08:00 AM         1       0   159     0    160      0    80   262    0    342      0     0    0     0           0       0   272      0     0    272      774
 08:15 AM         1       0    92     0     93      0    83   271    0    354      0     0    0     0           0       0   281      0     0    281      728
 08:30 AM         0       0    82     0     82      0    57   248    0    305      0     0    0     0           0       0   313      0     0    313      700
 08:45 AM         0       0   114     0    114      0    96   235    0    331      0     0    0     0           0       0   247      0     0    247      692
     Total        2       0   447     0    449      0   316   1016   0   1332      0     0    0     0           0       0   1113     0     0   1113     2894

 09:00 AM         0       0 103       0    103      0   74 263       0    337      0     0    0     0           0       0   228      0     0    228      668
 09:15 AM         0       0   90      0     90      0   88 276       0    364      0     0    0     0           0       0   221      0     0    221      675
 Grand Total      4       0 1263      0   1267      0 1111 2913      0   4024      0     0    0     0           0       0   2728     0     0   2728     8019
 Apprch %       0.3       0 99.7      0             0 27.6 72.4      0             0     0    0     0                   0   100      0     0
   Total %        0       0 15.8      0    15.8     0 13.9 36.3      0    50.2     0     0    0     0           0       0    34      0     0      34




                  US-101 SB RAMPS              SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                                 SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                                 Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds         App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 06:30 AM to 09:00 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:30 AM
 07:30 AM       1      0 137       0    138      0 123 244      0  367         0     0   0     0                0       0   251      0     0    251      756
 07:45 AM       0      0    97     0      97     0 106 289      0  395         0     0   0     0                0       0   239      0     0    239      731
 08:00 AM       1      0 159       0    160      0   80 262     0  342         0     0   0     0                0       0   272      0     0    272      774
 08:15 AM       1      0    92     0      93     0   83 271     0  354         0     0   0     0                0       0   281      0     0    281      728
 Total Volume   3      0 485       0    488      0 392 1066     0 1458         0     0   0     0                0       0   1043     0     0   1043     2989
 % App. Total 0.6      0 99.4      0             0 26.9 73.1    0              0     0   0     0                     1000            0     0
        PHF .750 .000 .763 .000 .763 .000 .797 .922 .000 .923 .000 .000 .000 .000                         .000 .000 .928 .000 .000              .928      .965
                                                          Traffic Data Service
                                                          1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                               Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                 tdsbay@cs.com                                              File Name        : 6PMFINAL
                                                                                                                            Site Code        : 00000006
                                                                                                                            Start Date       : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                            Page No          :1


                                                                 Groups Printed- Vehicles
                       US-101 SB RAMPS            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                          Southbound                       Westbound                      Northbound                         Eastbound
 Start Time    Right    Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total     Int. Total
     Factor     1.0      1.0 1.0 1.0               1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                   1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 03:30 PM         1        0  46     0     47        0 102 191       0   293         0     0   0     0          0      0 284      0    0   284           624
 03:45 PM         0        0  45     0     45        0 105 190       0   295         0     0   0     0          0      0 245      0    0   245           585
       Total      1        0  91     0     92        0 207 381       0   588         0     0   0     0          0      0 529      0    0   529          1209

 04:00 PM         0       0    47     0     47      0   128   187    0    315      0     0    0     0           0       0   288      0     0     288     650
 04:15 PM         2       0    48     0     50      0   125   207    0    332      0     0    0     0           0       0   249      0     0     249     631
 04:30 PM         2       0    25     0     27      0   102   207    0    309      0     0    0     0           0       0   239      0     0     239     575
 04:45 PM         0       0    50     0     50      0   138   246    0    384      0     0    0     0           0       0   213      0     0     213     647
     Total        4       0   170     0    174      0   493   847    0   1340      0     0    0     0           0       0   989      0     0     989    2503

 05:00 PM         0       0    41     0     41      0   156   249    0    405      0     0    0     0           0       0   273      0     0    273      719
 05:15 PM         2       0    72     0     74      0   128   274    0    402      0     0    0     0           0       0   267      0     0    267      743
 05:30 PM         1       0    48     0     49      0   169   318    0    487      0     0    0     0           0       0   255      0     0    255      791
 05:45 PM         0       0    42     0     42      0   126   286    0    412      0     0    0     0           0       0   224      0     0    224      678
     Total        3       0   203     0    206      0   579   1127   0   1706      0     0    0     0           0       0   1019     0     0   1019     2931

 06:00 PM         1       0  47       0     48      0 109 266        0    375      0     0    0     0           0       0 277        0     0    277      700
 06:15 PM         0       0  59       0     59      0 133 252        0    385      0     0    0     0           0       0 254        0     0    254      698
 Grand Total      9       0 570       0    579      0 1521 2873      0   4394      0     0    0     0           0       0 3068       0     0   3068     8041
 Apprch %       1.6       0 98.4      0             0 34.6 65.4      0             0     0    0     0                   0 100        0     0
   Total %      0.1       0 7.1       0     7.2     0 18.9 35.7      0    54.6     0     0    0     0           0       0 38.2       0     0    38.2




                  US-101 SB RAMPS              SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                                 SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                                 Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds         App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 03:30 PM to 06:15 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 05:00 PM
 05:00 PM       0      0    41     0      41     0 156 249      0  405         0     0   0     0                0       0   273      0     0    273      719
 05:15 PM       2      0    72     0      74     0 128 274      0  402         0     0   0     0                0       0   267      0     0    267      743
 05:30 PM       1      0    48     0      49     0 169 318      0  487         0     0   0     0                0       0   255      0     0    255      791
 05:45 PM       0      0    42     0      42     0 126 286      0  412         0     0   0     0                0       0   224      0     0    224      678
 Total Volume   3      0 203       0    206      0 579 1127     0 1706         0     0   0     0                0       0   1019     0     0   1019     2931
 % App. Total 1.5      0 98.5      0             0 33.9 66.1    0              0     0   0     0                     1000            0     0
        PHF .375 .000 .705 .000 .696 .000 .857 .886 .000 .876 .000 .000 .000 .000                         .000 .000 .933 .000 .000              .933      .926
                                                        Traffic Data Service
                                                         1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                              Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                tdsbay@cs.com                                            File Name       : 7AMFINAL
                                                                                                                         Site Code       : 00000007
                                                                                                                         Start Date      : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                         Page No         :1


                                                                  Groups Printed- Vehicles
                                                   SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD               US-101 NB RAMPS            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                         Southbound                         Westbound                      Northbound                       Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds   App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 06:30 AM         0       0   0     0          0     23 257      0    0   280 191         35    3     0   229         0 204     59    0   263         772
 06:45 AM         0       0   0     0          0     21 309      0    0   330 189         33    2     0   224         0 221     55    0   276         830
       Total      0       0   0     0          0     44 566      0    0   610 380         68    5     0   453         0 425 114       0   539        1602

 07:00 AM         0      0    0    0       0    20   330       0     0    350    217    31      1      0    249      0   187     55     0    242      841
 07:15 AM         0      0    0    0       0    26   392       0     0    418    174    31      2      0    207      0   199     60     0    259      884
 07:30 AM         0      0    0    0       0    53   434       0     0    487    227    38     11      0    276      0   309     70     0    379     1142
 07:45 AM         0      0    0    0       0    40   419       0     0    459    280    56      1      0    337      0   235    106     0    341     1137
     Total        0      0    0    0       0   139   1575      0     0   1714    898   156     15      0   1069      0   930    291     0   1221     4004

 08:00 AM         0      0    0    0       0    46   320       0     0    366    253    69      1      0    323      0   299    129     0    428     1117
 08:15 AM         0      0    0    0       0    33   392       0     0    425    275    44      4      0    323      0   253    134     0    387     1135
 08:30 AM         0      0    0    0       0    42   393       0     0    435    271    46      0      0    317      0   254    158     0    412     1164
 08:45 AM         0      0    0    0       0    38   364       0     0    402    283    63      2      0    348      0   233    136     0    369     1119
     Total        0      0    0    0       0   159   1469      0     0   1628   1082   222      7      0   1311      0   1039   557     0   1596     4535

 09:00 AM         0      0    0    0       0    46 408         0     0    454    265    57      0      0    322      0 229      116     0    345 1121
 09:15 AM         0      0    0    0       0    50 396         0     0    446    298    72      5      0    375      0 199      130     0    329 1150
 Grand Total      0      0    0    0       0   438 4414        0     0   4852   2923   575    32       0   3530      0 2822     1208    0   4030 12412
 Apprch %         0      0    0    0              9  91        0     0         82.8    16.3   0.9      0             0   70      30     0
   Total %        0      0    0    0       0    3.5 35.6       0     0    39.1 23.5     4.6   0.3      0   28.4      0 22.7      9.7    0    32.5




                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD            US-101 NB RAMPS            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                       Westbound                    Northbound                       Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total          Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 06:30 AM to 09:00 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:45 AM
 07:45 AM      0       0     0     0       0    40 419      0    0  459 280        56    1     0   337         0 235 106       0   341               1137
 08:00 AM      0       0     0     0       0    46 320      0    0  366 253        69    1     0   323         0 299 129       0   428               1117
 08:15 AM      0       0     0     0       0    33 392      0    0  425 275        44    4     0   323         0 253 134       0   387               1135
 08:30 AM      0       0     0     0       0    42 393      0    0  435 271        46    0     0   317         0 254 158       0   412               1164
 Total Volume  0       0     0     0       0 161 1524       0    0 1685 1079 215         6     0 1300          0 1041 527      0 1568                4553
 % App. Total  0       0     0     0            9.6 90.4    0    0            83 16.5 0.5      0               0 66.4 33.6     0
        PHF .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .875 .909 .000 .000 .918 .963 .779 .375 .000 .964 .000 .870 .834 .000                        .916                 .978
                                                        Traffic Data Service
                                                         1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                              Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                tdsbay@cs.com                                            File Name       : 7PMFINAL
                                                                                                                         Site Code       : 00000007
                                                                                                                         Start Date      : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                         Page No         :1


                                                                  Groups Printed- Vehicles
                                                   SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD               US-101 NB RAMPS            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                         Southbound                         Westbound                      Northbound                       Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds   App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 03:30 PM         0       0   0     0          0 114 297         0    0   411 353 111           1     0   465         0 158 181       0   339        1215
 03:45 PM         0       0   0     0          0     80 251      0    0   331 344 125           3     0   472         0 118 168       0   286        1089
       Total      0       0   0     0          0 194 548         0    0   742 697 236           4     0   937         0 276 349       0   625        2304

 04:00 PM         0      0    0    0       0   103   386       0     0    489    247   124      0      0    371      0   157   158      0    315     1175
 04:15 PM         0      0    0    0       0    71   278       0     0    349    279   111      8      0    398      0   157   144      0    301     1048
 04:30 PM         0      0    0    0       0    55   343       0     0    398    303   140      1      0    444      0    98   173      0    271     1113
 04:45 PM         0      0    0    0       0   102   384       0     0    486    279   137      1      0    417      0   140   120      0    260     1163
     Total        0      0    0    0       0   331   1391      0     0   1722   1108   512     10      0   1630      0   552   595      0   1147     4499

 05:00 PM         0      0    0    0       0    85   376       0     0    461    252   114      7      0    373      0   203   114      0    317     1151
 05:15 PM         0      0    0    0       0    76   400       0     0    476    265   148      1      0    414      0   171   186      0    357     1247
 05:30 PM         0      0    0    0       0    58   478       0     0    536    234   136      0      0    370      0   125   160      0    285     1191
 05:45 PM         0      0    0    0       0    67   498       0     0    565    236   111      0      0    347      0   146   135      0    281     1193
     Total        0      0    0    0       0   286   1752      0     0   2038    987   509      8      0   1504      0   645   595      0   1240     4782

 06:00 PM         0      0    0    0       0    57   504       0     0    561    247   118      1      0    366      0 165 160          0    325 1252
 06:15 PM         5      8    0    0      13    57   458       0     0    515    157    91    11       0    259      0 196 123          0    319 1106
 Grand Total      5      8    0    0      13   925   4653      0     0   5578   3196   1466   34       0   4696      0 1834 1822        0   3656 13943
 Apprch % 38.5 61.5           0    0         16.6 83.4         0     0         68.1    31.2   0.7      0             0 50.2 49.8        0
   Total %   0 0.1            0    0     0.1 6.6 33.4          0     0      40 22.9    10.5   0.2      0   33.7      0 13.2 13.1        0    26.2




                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD            US-101 NB RAMPS            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                       Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total          Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 03:30 PM to 06:15 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 05:15 PM
 05:15 PM      0       0     0     0       0    76 400     0    0  476 265 148            1    0   414         0 171 186       0   357               1247
 05:30 PM      0       0     0     0       0    58 478     0    0  536 234 136            0    0   370         0 125 160       0   285               1191
 05:45 PM      0       0     0     0       0    67 498     0    0  565 236 111            0    0   347         0 146 135       0   281               1193
 06:00 PM      0       0     0     0       0    57 504     0    0  561 247 118            1    0   366         0 165 160       0   325               1252
 Total Volume  0       0     0     0       0 258 1880      0    0 2138 982 513            2    0 1497          0 607 641       0 1248                4883
 % App. Total  0       0     0     0          12.1 87.9    0    0           65.6 34.3   0.1    0               0 48.6 51.4     0
        PHF .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .849 .933 .000 .000 .946 .926 .867 .500 .000 .904 .000 .887 .862 .000                        .874                 .975
                                                       Traffic Data Service
                                                       1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                            Campbell, CA 95008
                                                              tdsbay@cs.com                                                File Name            : 8AMFINAL
                                                                                                                           Site Code            : 00000008
                                                                                                                           Start Date           : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                           Page No              :1


                                                              Groups Printed- Vehicles
                LARKSPUR LANDING CIR
                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                   DRIVEWAY                   SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                          WEST
                                                        Westbound                      Northbound                         Eastbound
                       Southbound
 Start Time    Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right   Thru   Left   Peds    App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                     1.0     1.0    1.0    1.0
 06:30 AM        28     4   0     0     32        3 243      0    0   246         0     0   13    0        13       82     226     59       0      367         658
 06:45 AM        35     0   0     0     35        2 265      0    0   267         0     0   17    0        17       93     213     67       0      373         692
       Total     63     4   0     0     67        5 508      0    0   513         0     0   30    0        30      175     439    126       0      740        1350

 07:00 AM       38     1     0     0     39     5   266     5     1     277     0    1    22     1         24      105     225     58      4      392          732
 07:15 AM       49     3     2     0     54     0   330     0     1     331     0    0    11     1         12       91     233     52      6      382          779
 07:30 AM       71     8     0     0     79     0   387     8     0     395     0    1    24     0         25      234     236     68      4      542         1041
 07:45 AM       72     4     2     0     78     1   338     4     0     343     0    0    13     0         13       97     322     78      4      501          935
     Total     230    16     4     0    250     6   1321   17     2    1346     0    2    70     2         74      527     1016   256     18     1817         3487

 08:00 AM       63     8     0     0     71     4   277     8     0     289     0    0    23     0         23 229          224     85     10      548          931
 08:15 AM       45     3     1     0     49     1   359     1     0     361     0    1     7     1          9  30          291    115      3      439          858
 08:30 AM       56     1     0     0     57     1   359     3     0     363     0    0     9     0          9  24          275    155      4      458          887
 08:45 AM       59     2     3     1     65     8   364     3     1     376     0    0     7     3         10  83          269    109      1      462          913
     Total     223    14     4     1    242    14   1359   15     1    1389     0    1    46     4         51 366          1059   464     18     1907         3589

 09:00 AM       52     2     2     3     59      3 305       3     0    311     0    1  22       7       30         81     262    136       3     482   882
 09:15 AM       55     0     2     0     57      7 312       3     0    322     0    0  12       7       19         29     270    121       0     420   818
 Grand Total   623   36    12      4    675    35 3805     38      3   3881     0    4 180     20       204        1178    3046   1103    39     5366 10126
 Apprch % 92.3       5.3   1.8   0.6           0.9  98       1   0.1            0    2 88.2    9.8                  22 56.8 20.6          0.7
   Total % 6.2       0.4   0.1     0     6.7   0.3 37.6    0.4     0   38.3     0    0 1.8     0.2           2 11.6 30.1 10.9             0.4         53




               LARKSPUR LANDING CIR
                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                DRIVEWAY                      SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                          WEST
                                                       Westbound                    Northbound                            Eastbound
                      Southbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds      App. Total   Right   Thru   Left   Peds    App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 06:30 AM to 08:45 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:30 AM
 07:30 AM      71      8     0     0      79      0 387     8    0  395        0     1   24    0           25      234 236         68      4      542         1041
 07:45 AM      72      4     2     0      78      1 338     4    0  343        0     0   13    0           13       97 322         78      4      501          935
 08:00 AM      63      8     0     0      71      4 277     8    0  289        0     0   23    0           23      229 224         85     10      548          931
 08:15 AM      45      3     1     0      49      1 359     1    0  361        0     1    7    1            9       30 291        115      3      439          858
 Total Volume 251    23      3     0    277       6 1361  21     0 1388        0     2   67    1           70      590 1073       346     21     2030         3765
 % App. Total 90.6  8.3 1.1        0            0.4 98.1 1.5     0             0 2.9 95.7 1.4                      29.1    52.9    17      1
        PHF .872 .719 .375 .000 .877 .375 .879 .656 .000 .878 .000 .500 .698 .250                      .700 .630 .833 .752 .525                   .926          .904
                                                       Traffic Data Service
                                                       1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                            Campbell, CA 95008
                                                              tdsbay@cs.com                                                File Name            : 8PMFINAL
                                                                                                                           Site Code            : 00000008
                                                                                                                           Start Date           : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                           Page No              :1


                                                              Groups Printed- Vehicles
                LARKSPUR LANDING CIR
                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                   DRIVEWAY                   SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                          WEST
                                                        Westbound                      Northbound                         Eastbound
                       Southbound
 Start Time    Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right   Thru   Left   Peds    App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                     1.0     1.0    1.0    1.0
 03:30 PM        85     1   3     0     89        4 233      2   12   251         0     0   92    9     101         18     389     77       0      484         925
 03:45 PM        95     0   1     0     96        5 249      3    1   258         0     1   11    4      16         14     362     79       0      455         825
       Total   180      1   4     0   185         9 482      5   13   509         0     1 103    13     117         32     751    156       0      939        1750

 04:00 PM      107     0     7     0     114    7   241     7    17     272     0    1   111    28      140         13     328     92      0      433          959
 04:15 PM      103     0     4     1     108    1   273     1     1     276     0    0     9     3       12         13     337    103      0      453          849
 04:30 PM       87     1     3     0      91    2   274     3     3     282     0    2    26    38       66         11     323     76      0      410          849
 04:45 PM      130     5     8     0     143    3   309     2     7     321     0    0    83    72      155         25     327     95      1      448         1067
     Total     427     6    22     1     456   13   1097   13    28    1151     0    3   229   141      373         62     1315   366      1     1744         3724

 05:00 PM       61     3    14     0      78    3   216     0     0     219     1    7   217    38      263         20     348     83      0      451         1011
 05:15 PM      146     3     8     0     157    0   327     2     0     329     0    1    50     2       53         21     338    129      0      488         1027
 05:30 PM      104     2     5     0     111    6   256     1     0     263     0    0   199     0      199         10     285     92      0      387          960
 05:45 PM      130     1     7     0     138    3   321     6     0     330     0    1    18     0       19         23     269    108      0      400          887
     Total     441     9    34     0     484   12   1120    9     0    1141     1    9   484    40      534         74     1240   412      0     1726         3885

 06:00 PM      110      2     0     1    113     3 239       4     1    247     0     0 130     1      131  13 308 104                      3     428   919
 06:15 PM      116      1     9     2    128     1 277       4     0    282     0     0 112     3      115  30 285 103                      3     421   946
 Grand Total   1274   19    69      4   1366   38 3215     35    42    3330     1   13 1058 198       1270 211 3899 1141                    7    5258 11224
 Apprch % 93.3        1.4   5.1   0.3          1.1 96.5    1.1   1.3          0.1     1 83.3 15.6             4 74.2 21.7                 0.1
   Total % 11.4       0.2   0.6     0   12.2   0.3 28.6    0.3   0.4   29.7     0   0.1 9.4 1.8        11.3 1.9 34.7 10.2                 0.1     46.8




               LARKSPUR LANDING CIR
                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                DRIVEWAY                      SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                          WEST
                                                       Westbound                    Northbound                            Eastbound
                      Southbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds      App. Total   Right   Thru   Left   Peds    App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 03:30 PM to 06:15 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 04:45 PM
 04:45 PM 130          5     8     0    143       3 309     2    7  321        0     0   83   72        155         25 327    95            1     448         1067
 05:00 PM      61      3    14     0      78      3 216     0    0  219        1     7 217    38        263         20 348    83            0     451         1011
 05:15 PM 146          3     8     0    157       0 327     2    0  329        0     1   50    2         53         21 338 129              0     488         1027
 05:30 PM 104          2     5     0    111       6 256     1    0  263        0     0 199     0        199         10 285    92            0     387          960
 Total Volume 441    13     35     0    489     12 1108     5    7 1132        1     8 549 112          670         76 1298 399             1    1774         4065
 % App. Total 90.2  2.7 7.2        0            1.1 97.9 0.4 0.6             0.1 1.2 81.9 16.7                      4.3 73.2 22.5         0.1
        PHF .755 .650 .625 .000 .779 .500 .847 .625 .250 .860 .250 .286 .632 .389                      .637 .760 .932 .773 .250                   .909          .952
                                                        Traffic Data Service
                                                        1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                             Campbell, CA 95008
                                                               tdsbay@cs.com                                               File Name            : 9AMFINAL
                                                                                                                           Site Code            : 00000009
                                                                                                                           Start Date           : 9/12/2006
                                                                                                                           Page No              :1


                                                              Groups Printed- Vehicles
                LARKSPUR LANDING CIR
                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                              SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                          EAST
                                                        Westbound                      Northbound                         Eastbound
                       Southbound
 Start Time    Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right   Thru   Left   Peds    App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                     1.0     1.0   1.0     1.0
 07:00 AM        13     0   4     2     19       11 318      0    1   330         0     0   0     0          0        0    236      6       1     243          592
 07:15 AM        24     0   2     1     27       14 406      0    0   420         0     0   0     0          0        0    225     12       1     238          685
 07:30 AM        16     0   7     0     23        8 374      0    2   384         0     0   0     0          0        0    250      9       0     259          666
 07:45 AM        12     0   9     3     24       15 412      0    4   431         0     0   0     0          0        0    304     11       0     315          770
       Total     65     0  22     6     93       48 1510     0    7 1565          0     0   0     0          0        0    1015    38       2    1055         2713

 08:00 AM       19     0    12     2     33     15   386    0     2    403      0    0     0     0           0        0    254     13      0      267          703
 08:15 AM       21     0    11     0     32      9   389    0     0    398      0    0     0     0           0        0    318     21      2      341          771
 08:30 AM       15     0    14     2     31     22   392    0     1    415      0    0     0     0           0        0    308     23      1      332          778
 08:45 AM       19     0     2     0     21     17   384    0     2    403      0    0     0     0           0        0    282     10      0      292          716
     Total      74     0    39     4    117     63   1551   0     5   1619      0    0     0     0           0        0    1162    67      3     1232         2968

 Grand Total 139       0   61    10     210    111 3061     0   12    3184      0    0     0     0           0        0 2177      105       5    2287         5681
 Apprch % 66.2         0   29    4.8            3.5 96.1    0   0.4             0    0     0     0                    0 95.2       4.6    0.2
   Total % 2.4         0   1.1   0.2     3.7      2 53.9    0   0.2     56      0    0     0     0           0        0 38.3       1.8    0.1     40.3




               LARKSPUR LANDING CIR
                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                              SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                          EAST
                                                       Westbound                    Northbound                            Eastbound
                      Southbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds      App. Total   Right   Thru   Left   Peds    App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 07:00 AM to 08:45 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:45 AM
 07:45 AM      12      0     9     3      24    15 412      0    4  431        0     0   0     0             0        0 304       11        0     315          770
 08:00 AM      19      0    12     2      33    15 386      0    2  403        0     0   0     0             0        0 254       13        0     267          703
 08:15 AM      21      0    11     0      32      9 389     0    0  398        0     0   0     0             0        0 318       21        2     341          771
 08:30 AM      15      0    14     2      31    22 392      0    1  415        0     0   0     0             0        0 308       23        1     332          778
 Total Volume  67      0    46     7    120     61 1579     0    7 1647        0     0   0     0             0        0 1184      68        3    1255         3022
 % App. Total 55.8     0 38.3 5.8               3.7 95.9    0 0.4              0     0   0     0                      0 94.3      5.4     0.2
        PHF .798 .000 .821 .583 .909 .693 .958 .000 .438 .955 .000 .000 .000 .000                      .000 .000 .931 .739 .375                   .920          .971
                                                       Traffic Data Service
                                                       1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                            Campbell, CA 95008
                                                              tdsbay@cs.com                                                File Name            : 9PMFINAL
                                                                                                                           Site Code            : 00000009
                                                                                                                           Start Date           : 9/12/2006
                                                                                                                           Page No              :1


                                                              Groups Printed- Vehicles
                LARKSPUR LANDING CIR
                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                              SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                          EAST
                                                        Westbound                      Northbound                         Eastbound
                       Southbound
 Start Time    Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right   Thru   Left   Peds    App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                     1.0     1.0    1.0    1.0
 04:00 PM        53     0  61     3   117        56 186      0    0   242         0     0   0     0          0        0    366     37       0     403          762
 04:15 PM        86     0  52     2   140        45 213      0    3   261         0     0   0     0          0        0    387     25       0     412          813
 04:30 PM        59     0  58     0   117        44 227      0    0   271         0     0   0     0          0        0    391     35       1     427          815
 04:45 PM        42     0  44     0     86       37 258      0    2   297         0     0   0     0          0        0    327     27       2     356          739
       Total   240      0 215     5   460 182 884            0    5 1071          0     0   0     0          0        0    1471   124       3    1598         3129

 05:00 PM       34     0    41     1     76    35   263     0     1    299      0    0     0     0           0        0    364     25      0      389          764
 05:15 PM       37     0    49     4     90    33   273     0     1    307      0    0     0     0           0        0    326     29      5      360          757
 05:30 PM       41     0    78     0    119    79   199     0     0    278      0    0     0     0           0        0    313     21      1      335          732
 05:45 PM       41     0    33     0     74    40   203     0     0    243      0    0     0     0           0        0    290     31      0      321          638
     Total     153     0   201     5    359   187   938     0     2   1127      0    0     0     0           0        0    1293   106      6     1405         2891

 Grand Total   393     0 416     10     819   369   1822    0     7   2198      0    0     0     0           0        0 2764      230       9    3003         6020
 Apprch %       48     0 50.8    1.2        16.8 82.9       0   0.3             0    0     0     0                    0   92       7.7    0.3
   Total %      6.5    0 6.9     0.2   13.6 6.1 30.3        0   0.1    36.5     0    0     0     0           0        0 45.9       3.8    0.1     49.9




               LARKSPUR LANDING CIR
                                               SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                              SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                          EAST
                                                      Westbound                     Northbound                            Eastbound
                      Southbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds      App. Total   Right   Thru   Left   Peds    App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 04:00 PM to 05:45 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 04:15 PM
 04:15 PM      86      0    52     2    140     45 213     0    3  261         0     0   0     0             0        0 387        25       0     412          813
 04:30 PM      59      0    58     0    117     44 227     0    0  271         0     0   0     0             0        0 391        35       1     427          815
 04:45 PM      42      0    44     0      86    37 258     0    2  297         0     0   0     0             0        0 327        27       2     356          739
 05:00 PM      34      0    41     1      76    35 263     0    1  299         0     0   0     0             0        0 364        25       0     389          764
 Total Volume 221      0 195       3    419 161 961        0    6 1128         0     0   0     0             0        0 1469      112       3    1584         3131
 % App. Total 52.7     0 46.5 0.7             14.3 85.2    0 0.5               0     0   0     0                      0 92.7       7.1    0.2
        PHF .642 .000 .841 .375 .748 .894 .913 .000 .500 .943 .000 .000 .000 .000                      .000 .000 .939 .800 .375                   .927          .960
                                                              Traffic Data Service
                                                              1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                   Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                     tdsbay@cs.com                                          File Name         : 10AMFINAL
                                                                                                                            Site Code         : 00000010
                                                                                                                            Start Date        : 9/12/2006
                                                                                                                            Page No           :1


                                                                    Groups Printed- Vehicles
                       ANDERSEN DR                   SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                              SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                         Southbound                           Westbound                      Northbound                           Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                   1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 07:00 AM       21        0   3     0      24          58 331      0    0   389         0     0   0     0          0        0 201     13    0   214         627
 07:15 AM       37        0   3     0      40          75 378      0    0   453         0     0   0     0          0        0 214     15    0   229         722
 07:30 AM       41        0   9     0      50        109 331       0    0   440         0     0   0     0          0        0 202     24    0   226         716
 07:45 AM       51        0  11     0      62        115 358       0    0   473         0     0   0     0          0        0 256     32    0   288         823
       Total   150        0  26     0     176        357 1398      0    0 1755          0     0   0     0          0        0 873     84    0   957        2888

 08:00 AM       61       0    8    0       69        103   320     0     0    423     0     0    0     0           0       0   244     35     0    279      771
 08:15 AM       36       0    2    0       38        119   319     0     0    438     0     0    0     0           0       0   269     51     0    320      796
 08:30 AM       38       0   10    0       48        111   340     0     0    451     0     0    0     0           0       0   266     29     0    295      794
 08:45 AM       38       0    3    0       41        110   305     0     0    415     0     0    0     0           0       0   277     34     0    311      767
     Total     173       0   23    0      196        443   1284    0     0   1727     0     0    0     0           0       0   1056   149     0   1205     3128

 Grand Total 323         0  49     0      372        800   2682    0     0   3482     0     0    0     0           0       0 1929 233         0   2162     6016
 Apprch % 86.8           0 13.2    0                  23    77     0     0            0     0    0     0                   0 89.2 10.8        0
   Total % 5.4           0 0.8     0       6.2 13.3 44.6           0     0   57.9     0     0    0     0           0       0 32.1 3.9         0    35.9




                    ANDERSEN DR                SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                                    SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                                    Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds            App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 07:00 AM to 08:45 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:45 AM
 07:45 AM      51      0    11     0      62 115 358       0    0  473         0     0   0     0                   0       0 256   32         0    288      823
 08:00 AM      61      0     8     0      69 103 320       0    0  423         0     0   0     0                   0       0 244   35         0    279      771
 08:15 AM      36      0     2     0      38 119 319       0    0  438         0     0   0     0                   0       0 269   51         0    320      796
 08:30 AM      38      0    10     0      48 111 340       0    0  451         0     0   0     0                   0       0 266   29         0    295      794
 Total Volume 186      0    31     0    217 448 1337       0    0 1785         0     0   0     0                   0       0 1035 147         0   1182     3184
 % App. Total 85.7     0 14.3      0          25.1 74.9    0    0              0     0   0     0                           0 87.6 12.4        0
        PHF .762 .000 .705 .000 .786 .941 .934 .000 .000 .943 .000 .000 .000 .000                            .000 .000 .962 .721 .000              .923      .967
                                                              Traffic Data Service
                                                              1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                   Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                     tdsbay@cs.com                                          File Name         : 10PMFINAL
                                                                                                                            Site Code         : 00000010
                                                                                                                            Start Date        : 9/12/2006
                                                                                                                            Page No           :1


                                                                    Groups Printed- Vehicles
                       ANDERSEN DR                   SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                              SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                         Southbound                           Westbound                      Northbound                           Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                   1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                     1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 04:00 PM       18        0  31     0      49          98 215      0    0   313         0     0   0     0          0        0 323     61    0   384         746
 04:15 PM       41        0  13     0      54          94 202      0    0   296         0     0   0     0          0        0 346     48    0   394         744
 04:30 PM       26        0  22     0      48          93 244      0    0   337         0     0   0     0          0        0 384     43    0   427         812
 04:45 PM       31        0   8     0      39        114 229       0    0   343         0     0   0     0          0        0 290     66    0   356         738
       Total   116        0  74     0     190        399 890       0    0 1289          0     0   0     0          0        0 1343 218      0 1561         3040

 05:00 PM       33       0   23    0       56        101   209     0     0    310     0     0    0     0           0       0   346     39     0    385      751
 05:15 PM       37       0   24    0       61        127   275     0     0    402     0     0    0     0           0       0   316     28     0    344      807
 05:30 PM       26       0   13    0       39        114   243     0     0    357     0     0    0     0           0       0   327     60     0    387      783
 05:45 PM       18       0   17    0       35        108   256     0     0    364     0     0    0     0           0       0   294     40     0    334      733
     Total     114       0   77    0      191        450   983     0     0   1433     0     0    0     0           0       0   1283   167     0   1450     3074

 Grand Total 230         0 151     0      381        849   1873    0     0   2722     0     0    0     0           0       0 2626 385         0   3011     6114
 Apprch % 60.4           0 39.6    0           31.2 68.8           0     0            0     0    0     0                   0 87.2 12.8        0
   Total % 3.8           0 2.5     0       6.2 13.9 30.6           0     0   44.5     0     0    0     0           0       0   43 6.3         0    49.2




                    ANDERSEN DR                SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD                                                    SIR FRANCIS DRAKE BLVD
                      Southbound                      Westbound                     Northbound                                    Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds            App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 04:00 PM to 05:45 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 04:30 PM
 04:30 PM      26      0    22     0      48    93 244     0    0  337         0     0   0     0                   0       0 384   43         0    427      812
 04:45 PM      31      0     8     0      39 114 229       0    0  343         0     0   0     0                   0       0 290   66         0    356      738
 05:00 PM      33      0    23     0      56 101 209       0    0  310         0     0   0     0                   0       0 346   39         0    385      751
 05:15 PM      37      0    24     0      61 127 275       0    0  402         0     0   0     0                   0       0 316   28         0    344      807
 Total Volume 127      0    77     0    204 435 957        0    0 1392         0     0   0     0                   0       0 1336 176         0   1512     3108
 % App. Total 62.3     0 37.7      0          31.2 68.8    0    0              0     0   0     0                           0 88.4 11.6        0
        PHF .858 .000 .802 .000 .836 .856 .870 .000 .000 .866 .000 .000 .000 .000                            .000 .000 .870 .667 .000              .885      .957
                                                                Traffic Data Service
                                                                1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                     Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                       tdsbay@cs.com                                               File Name         : 14AMFINAL
                                                                                                                                   Site Code         : 00000014
                                                                                                                                   Start Date        : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                                   Page No           :1


                                                                      Groups Printed- Vehicles
                          DRIVEWAY                              FIFER AVE                   TAMAL VISTA BLVD                              FIFER AVE
                         Southbound                             Westbound                      Northbound                                 Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right   Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total         Right   Thru Left Peds     App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                   1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0               1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                         1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0
 06:30 AM         4       2   0     1        7          1     20    45    0      66       7     1   6     0      14             21      16     0    0        37           124
 06:45 AM         2       5   3     1       11          0     37    53    0      90       6     0  30     1      37             34      31     0    0        65           203
       Total      6       7   3     2       18          1     57    98    0   156        13     1  36     1      51             55      47     0    0       102           327

 07:00 AM         3      5    4    0        12          1     50    45      1      97          6     5     50     1      62     37      34     0     0       71         242
 07:15 AM         0      1    3    0         4          0     57    50      2     109         14     0     77     0      91     51      45     1     0       97         301
 07:30 AM         1      7    2    0        10          2     82    36      6     126          7     2    155     6     170     99      78     1     1      179         485
 07:45 AM         0      2    5    1         8          0     69    64      1     134         10     7     80     3     100    123      53     0     0      176         418
     Total        4     15   14    1        34          3    258   195     10     466         37    14    362    10     423    310     210     2     1      523        1446

 08:00 AM         0      9    2    1        12          1     40    79      0     120         13     5     63     0      81     89      87     1     0      177         390
 08:15 AM         1      4    2    2         9          3     49    54      1     107         12     5     98     1     116     94      57     1     0      152         384
 08:30 AM         1      7    2    2        12          2     43    59      0     104         15     9     34     2      60     85      78     0     0      163         339
 08:45 AM         3      3    2    1         9          2     59    88      0     149          6     1     43     0      50     72      60     0     0      132         340
     Total        5     23    8    6        42          8    191   280      1     480         46    20    238     3     307    340     282     2     0      624        1453

 09:00 AM        0       7    4     2      13           1  37   82          0    120          14      2    45     1      62     57      46      0     0    103          298
 09:15 AM        1       6    6     0      13           1  40   66          0    107          18      2    46     0      66     65      40      1     1    107          293
 Grand Total    16      58   35   11      120         14 583 721          11    1329         128    39    727   15      909    827     625      5     2   1459         3817
 Apprch % 13.3 48.3 29.2          9.2                 1.1 43.9 54.3       0.8                14.1   4.3    80   1.7            56.7    42.8   0.3   0.1
   Total % 0.4 1.5 0.9            0.3      3.1        0.4 15.3 18.9       0.3    34.8         3.4     1    19   0.4    23.8 21.7 16.4         0.1   0.1    38.2




                       DRIVEWAY                        FIFER AVE                                  TAMAL VISTA BLVD                        FIFER AVE
                      Southbound                       Westbound                                     Northbound                           Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds                App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Right   Thru Left Peds     App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 06:30 AM to 09:15 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:30 AM
 07:30 AM       1      7     2     0      10      2  82    36    6                126          7      2 155       6     170     99      78      1     1     179         485
 07:45 AM       0      2     5     1       8      0  69    64    1                134         10      7  80       3     100    123      53      0     0     176         418
 08:00 AM       0      9     2     1      12      1  40    79    0                120         13      5  63       0      81     89      87      1     0     177         390
 08:15 AM       1      4     2     2       9      3  49    54    1                107         12      5  98       1     116     94      57      1     0     152         384
 Total Volume   2    22     11     4      39      6 240 233      8                487         42    19 396      10      467    405     275      3     1     684        1677
 % App. Total 5.1 56.4 28.2 10.3                1.2 49.3 47.8 1.6                              9    4.1 84.8    2.1            59.2    40.2   0.4   0.1
        PHF .500 .611 .550 .500 .813 .500 .732 .737 .333                         .909 .808 .679 .639 .417              .687 .823 .790 .750 .250            .955          .864
                                                                Traffic Data Service
                                                                1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                     Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                       tdsbay@cs.com                                               File Name         : 14PMFINAL
                                                                                                                                   Site Code         : 00000014
                                                                                                                                   Start Date        : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                                   Page No           :1


                                                                      Groups Printed- Vehicles
                          DRIVEWAY                              FIFER AVE                   TAMAL VISTA BLVD                              FIFER AVE
                         Southbound                             Westbound                      Northbound                                 Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds   App. Total   Right   Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total         Right   Thru Left Peds     App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                   1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0               1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                         1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0
 03:30 PM         4       5   4     0       13          2     62    77    0   141        18     4  92     0   114               86      41     1    1       129           397
 03:45 PM         3       6   2     0       11          3     67    85    0   155        16     3 127     3   149               91      40     0    0       131           446
       Total      7     11    6     0       24          5    129 162      0   296        34     7 219     3   263              177      81     1    1       260           843

 04:00 PM         1      6    3    2        12          0     55    89      1     145         16     2   103      1     122     85      31     2     1      119         398
 04:15 PM         3      8    6    0        17          0     51    84      0     135          9     8   100      0     117     69      40     0     1      110         379
 04:30 PM         3     16    1    0        20          1     54    69      0     124         12     2   114      0     128     61      34     1     0       96         368
 04:45 PM         2      7    2    2        13          0     59    74      0     133         12     9    96      0     117     72      41     1     0      114         377
     Total        9     37   12    4        62          1    219   316      1     537         49    21   413      1     484    287     146     4     2      439        1522

 05:00 PM        3       5    1    1        10          1     75    78      1     155         22     5   125      2     154     77      51     0     2      130         449
 05:15 PM        4       6    1    0        11          0     65    69      1     135         10     6   116      0     132     80      48     0     0      128         406
 05:30 PM        4       4    6    1        15          2     82    64      0     148         12     6   103      1     122     70      34     1     2      107         392
 05:45 PM        2       6    4    0        12          1     74    89      2     166         15     7   113      1     136     86      42     0     1      129         443
     Total      13      21   12    2        48          4    296   300      4     604         59    24   457      4     544    313     175     1     5      494        1690

 06:00 PM        4      10    6     0      20           0  96   67          1    164          11      4 149       0    164 124   43             1     0    168          516
 06:15 PM        1       6    5     1      13           2 101   68          0    171          12      0 181       3    196   75  42             0     0    117          497
 Grand Total    34      85   41     7     167         12 841 913            6   1772         165    56 1419     11    1651 976 487              7     8   1478         5068
 Apprch % 20.4 50.9 24.6          4.2                 0.7 47.5 51.5       0.3                 10    3.4 85.9    0.7          66 32.9          0.5   0.5
   Total % 0.7 1.7 0.8            0.1      3.3        0.2 16.6  18        0.1        35       3.3   1.1  28     0.2    32.6 19.3 9.6          0.1   0.2    29.2




                       DRIVEWAY                        FIFER AVE                                  TAMAL VISTA BLVD                        FIFER AVE
                      Southbound                       Westbound                                     Northbound                           Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds                App. Total   Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Right   Thru Left Peds     App. Total   Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 03:30 PM to 06:15 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 05:30 PM
 05:30 PM        4     4     6     1      15      2  82    64    0                148         12      6 103       1     122     70      34      1     2     107         392
 05:45 PM        2     6     4     0      12      1  74    89    2                166         15      7 113       1     136     86      42      0     1     129         443
 06:00 PM        4   10      6     0      20      0  96    67    1                164         11      4 149       0     164    124      43      1     0     168         516
 06:15 PM        1     6     5     1      13      2 101    68    0                171         12      0 181       3     196     75      42      0     0     117         497
 Total Volume  11    26     21     2      60      5 353 288      3                649         50    17 546        5     618    355     161      2     3     521        1848
 % App. Total 18.3 43.3     35 3.3              0.8 54.4 44.4 0.5                             8.1   2.8 88.3    0.8            68.1    30.9   0.4   0.6
        PHF .688 .650 .875 .500 .750 .625 .874 .809 .375                         .949 .833 .607 .754 .417              .788 .716 .936 .500 .375            .775          .895
                                                                 Traffic Data Service
                                                                 1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                      Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                        tdsbay@cs.com                                     File Name           : 16AMFINAL
                                                                                                                          Site Code           : 00000016
                                                                                                                          Start Date          : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                          Page No             :1


                                                                       Groups Printed- Vehicles
                       REDWOOD HWY                            INDUSTRIAL WY                   REDWOOD HWY                      US-101 NB RAMPS
                         Southbound                              Westbound                      Northbound                         Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds    App. Total   Right   Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds   App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                    1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0               1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                   1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 06:30 AM       29      19    1     0        49          2      10  11     0      23      12   24   29     0        65      41     2   16    0      59         196
 06:45 AM       17      29    0     2        48          0      13  15     0      28      11   36   23     0        70      21     0   19    2      42         188
       Total    46      48    1     2        97          2      23  26     0      51      23   60   52     0     135        62     2   35    2   101           384

 07:00 AM       22      23    1     1       47           0     10     5    0     15     9    15    60    0       84     33       1    21      0      55        201
 07:15 AM       12      19    0     0       31           1      5     7    1     14    14    16    57    0       87     29       0    38      0      67        199
 07:30 AM       12      14    0     3       29           2     11     5    0     18    15    16    93    0      124     98       0    16      0     114        285
 07:45 AM       15      18    0     0       33           0      8     5    1     14    18    11   118    0      147     33       1    17      1      52        246
     Total      61      74    1     4      140           3     34    22    2     61    56    58   328    0      442    193       2    92      1     288        931

 08:00 AM       23      12    0     2       37           4     15    13    0     32    18     9   106    0      133     34       0    19      0      53        255
 08:15 AM       18      22    0     0       40           3     16    14    2     35    14    18    98    0      130     23       0    14      0      37        242
 08:30 AM       49      30    1     4       84           1      6    12    0     19    10    21    88    0      119     34       0    15      0      49        271
 08:45 AM       28      15    0     0       43           1      4    12    0     17    18    14    84    0      116     36       0    15      0      51        227
     Total     118      79    1     6      204           9     41    51    2    103    60    62   376    0      498    127       0    63      0     190        995

 09:00 AM        0       8     0     0       8           4  11     7        0    22    22    9  81       0      112  17         1    3        0      21      163
 09:15 AM        5       3     0     0       8           2  11   16         1    30    23  17   84       0      124  25         0    8        3      36      198
 Grand Total   230     212     3   12      457         20 120 122           5   267   184 206 921        0     1311 424         5 201         6     636     2671
 Apprch % 50.3 46.4          0.7   2.6                 7.5 44.9 45.7      1.9          14 15.7 70.3      0            66.7    0.8 31.6      0.9
   Total % 8.6 7.9           0.1   0.4    17.1         0.7 4.5 4.6        0.2    10    6.9 7.7 34.5      0     49.1 15.9      0.2 7.5       0.2     23.8




                   REDWOOD HWY                      INDUSTRIAL WY                 REDWOOD HWY                    US-101 NB RAMPS
                      Southbound                       Westbound                    Northbound                       Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total                 Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 06:30 AM to 09:15 AM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 07:30 AM
 07:30 AM      12    14      0     3      29      2   11    5    0    18      15   16   93     0   124        98     0   16    0   114                       285
 07:45 AM      15    18      0     0      33      0    8    5    1    14      18   11 118      0   147        33     1   17    1      52                     246
 08:00 AM      23    12      0     2      37      4   15  13     0    32      18     9 106     0   133        34     0   19    0      53                     255
 08:15 AM      18    22      0     0      40      3   16  14     2    35      14   18   98     0   130        23     0   14    0      37                     242
 Total Volume  68    66      0     5    139       9   50  37     3    99      65   54 415      0   534 188           1   66    1   256                      1028
 % App. Total 48.9 47.5      0 3.6              9.1 50.5 37.4    3          12.2 10.1 77.7     0            73.4   0.4 25.8 0.4
        PHF .739 .750 .000 .417 .869 .563 .781 .661 .375 .707 .903 .750 .879 .000 .908 .480 .250 .868 .250                        .561                        .902
                                                                 Traffic Data Service
                                                                 1386 White Oaks Road, Suite 1
                                                                      Campbell, CA 95008
                                                                        tdsbay@cs.com                                      File Name           : 16PMFINAL
                                                                                                                           Site Code           : 00000016
                                                                                                                           Start Date          : 9/14/2006
                                                                                                                           Page No             :1


                                                                       Groups Printed- Vehicles
                       REDWOOD HWY                            INDUSTRIAL WY                   REDWOOD HWY                       US-101 NB RAMPS
                         Southbound                              Westbound                      Northbound                          Eastbound
 Start Time    Right   Thru Left Peds    App. Total   Right   Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds    App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total   Int. Total
     Factor     1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0                    1.0     1.0 1.0 1.0               1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0                    1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
 03:30 PM       15      14    0     0        29          0      11  10     0      21      19   36 260      1      316         8     0    6    3      17         383
 03:45 PM       21        0   0     0        21          2       9  12     0      23      13   26 279      0      318        14     0    6    0      20         382
       Total    36      14    0     0        50          2      20  22     0      44      32   62 539      1      634        22     0   12    3      37         765

 04:00 PM       21      18    0     0       39           0     25    19    0     44     18     25   239    0     282     18       0    18      0      36      401
 04:15 PM       14       3    0     0       17           1     12    14    0     27     17     35   236    0     288      7       0     4      2      13      345
 04:30 PM       19       1    2     0       22           0     20     6    0     26     11     22   264    0     297     28       0    18      0      46      391
 04:45 PM       10      23    1     2       36           1     20    18    1     40     16     23   235    2     276     17       0    14      3      34      386
     Total      64      45    3     2      114           2     77    57    1    137     62    105   974    2    1143     70       0    54      5     129     1523

 05:00 PM       18      15    3     0       36           1      8     9    1     19     10     30   246    1     287     16       0    11      0      27      369
 05:15 PM       20      10    0     2       32           0     18     4    8     30     16     20   196    0     232     12       1     3      9      25      319
 05:30 PM       29       9    1     3       42           0     17     8    0     25      3     30   243    1     277     22       0     2      0      24      368
 05:45 PM       14      13    4     0       31           0     13     5    8     26      9     22   232    0     263     16       0     5     13      34      354
     Total      81      47    8     5      141           1     56    26   17    100     38    102   917    2    1059     66       1    21     22     110     1410

 06:00 PM       11      14     0     0      25           3  11     7        4    25     15     23 288       9    335  22         0    9        1      32      417
 06:15 PM        8       6     0     0      14           0  10     4        0    14       5    20 196       0    221    5        0    2        4      11      260
 Grand Total   200     126   11      7     344           8 174 116        22    320    152    312 2914    14    3392 185         1  98       35      319     4375
 Apprch % 58.1 36.6          3.2     2                 2.5 54.4 36.2      6.9           4.5    9.2 85.9   0.4         58       0.3 30.7      11
   Total % 4.6 2.9           0.3   0.2      7.9        0.2    4 2.7       0.5    7.3    3.5    7.1 66.6   0.3    77.5 4.2        0 2.2       0.8      7.3




                   REDWOOD HWY                      INDUSTRIAL WY                 REDWOOD HWY                    US-101 NB RAMPS
                      Southbound                       Westbound                    Northbound                       Eastbound
 Start Time Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total Right Thru Left Peds App. Total                  Int. Total
Peak Hour Analysis From 03:30 PM to 06:15 PM - Peak 1 of 1
Peak Hour for Entire Intersection Begins at 04:00 PM
 04:00 PM      21    18      0     0      39      0   25  19     0    44      18   25 239      0   282        18     0   18    0      36                      401
 04:15 PM      14      3     0     0      17      1   12  14     0    27      17   35 236      0   288         7     0    4    2      13                      345
 04:30 PM      19      1     2     0      22      0   20    6    0    26      11   22 264      0   297        28     0   18    0      46                      391
 04:45 PM      10    23      1     2      36      1   20  18     1    40      16   23 235      2   276        17     0   14    3      34                      386
 Total Volume  64    45      3     2    114       2   77  57     1 137        62 105 974       2 1143         70     0   54    5   129                       1523
 % App. Total 56.1 39.5    2.6 1.8              1.5 56.2 41.6 0.7            5.4 9.2 85.2 0.2               54.3     0 41.9 3.9
        PHF .762 .489 .375 .250 .731 .500 .770 .750 .250 .778 .861 .750 .922 .250 .962 .625 .000 .750 .417                        .701                         .950
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Wolfe Grade -- Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                            QC JOB #: 10663521
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                      DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                       625 0.82 341                              Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM                               1.4        3.8

                       257 27 341
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 8:15 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                                                                                                             2.3 3.7 0.6

       1296    125                       210   1343
                                                                                                                4.4   4.0                       2.9      4.2
        0.91   1152            0.95      971   0.85
                                                                                                                      2.4                       5.0
       1331    54                        162   1628
                                                                                                                2.6   1.9                       0.6      1.8

                          56    18 116
                                                                                                                             3.6 11.1 0.0

                       224 0.49 190
                                                                                                                             1.3        2.1



                                7                                                                                             0    0    0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

               0                           0                                                                          3                          0

                                                                                                                      1                          0


                                2                                                                                             0    1    0




                                NA                                                                                                 NA




               NA                        NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                                NA                                                                                                 NA



15-Min Count                    Wolfe Grade                   Wolfe Grade         Sir Francis Drake Blvd     Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                      (Northbound)                  (Southbound)               (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                    Left        Thru Right      U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right        U                       Totals
   7:30 AM            3           1      5      0      98       1     48    0    25     329      3     0     6     234     36     8           797
   7:45 AM           13           3      7      0     111       9     64    0    30     279     23     2    34     274     49    11           909
   8:00 AM           23           8     68      0      78      14     98    0    25     226     18     4    67     190     41     0           860
   8:15 AM           17           6     36      0      54       3     47    0    33     318     10     6    36     273     84     0           923             3489
   8:30 AM            3           0      5      0      50       3     40    0    38     247     21     1     9     178     66     0           661             3353
   8:45 AM            7           2     19      0      72       2     59    0    35     240      7     1    11     184     48     0           687             3131
   9:00 AM            7           4     14      0      69       3     58    0    37     213      2     1    11     228     51     0           698             2969
   9:15 AM            1           1      9      0      48       0     57    0    23     263      1     1     8     282     50     0           744             2790




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                   Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates         Left       Thru Right     U       Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right     U      Left Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles       68         24    144     0       216     12   188     0    132 1272     40    24      144 1092   336     0                       3692
 Heavy Trucks         0          4      0               4      0     4            0   52      4              0   64     12                             144
  Pedestrians                    4                             0                       0                          0                                     4
   Bicycles           0          0      0               0      0     0            0    1      0              0    0      0                              1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Bon Air Rd -- Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                               QC JOB #: 10663515
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                        DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                          0   0.00    0                             Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM                              0.0        0.0

                          0    0      0
                                                                   Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

       1372   0                               0   1635
                                                                                                                  3.1   0.0                       0.0      3.2
       0.92   1113            0.85         1078   0.78
                                                                                                                        1.3                       3.4
       1585   472                           557   1480
                                                                                                                  1.1   0.6                       2.7      1.8

                      294      0     367
                                                                                                                               2.0 0.0 3.3

                     1029 0.90 661
                                                                                                                               1.7        2.7



                               0                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                        0                          0

              0                               1                                                                         2                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          0


                               1                                                                                                0    0    1




                               NA                                                                                                    NA




              NA                            NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                               NA                                                                                                    NA



15-Min Count                   Bon Air Rd                        Bon Air Rd         Sir Francis Drake Blvd     Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                     (Northbound)                      (Southbound)              (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                   Left        Thru Right          U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U                       Totals
   7:30 AM          55           0     98          0       0       0      0    0     0    304    103     0   121     274      0     0            955
   7:45 AM          88           0     97          0       0       0      0    0     0    296    133     0   169     354      0     0           1137
   8:00 AM          87           0     86          0       0       0      0    0     0    254    107     0   148     223      0     0            905
   8:15 AM          64           0     86          0       0       0      0    0     0    259    129     0   119     227      0     0            884            3881
   8:30 AM          64           0     95          0       0       0      0    0     0    174     97     0   133     186      0     0            749            3675
   8:45 AM          44           0     85          0       0       0      0    0     0    223    143     0   158     194      0     0            847            3385
   9:00 AM          48           0     78          0       0       0      0    0     0    226     94     0   127     252      0     0            825            3305
   9:15 AM          46           0     59          0       0       0      0    0     0    251     55     0   126     287      0     0            824            3245




 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                       Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates    Left           Thru Right     U           Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U      Left Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles 352              0    388     0             0      0     0     0      0 1184    532    0      676 1416      0    0                       4548
 Heavy Trucks    4              0      16                  0      0     0            0   16      8            12   20      0                             76
  Pedestrians                   4                                 0                       0                         0                                     4
   Bicycles      0              0       1                  0      0     0            0    0      0             0    0      0                              1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Elisio Dr -- Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                               QC JOB #: 10663506
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                       DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                       191 0.80 88                                Peak-Hour: 8:30 AM -- 9:30 AM                               1.6        3.4

                          45    27 119
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 9:00 AM -- 9:15 AM
                                                                                                                              0.0 3.7 1.7

       1543    16                          47   1884
                                                                                                                3.8   12.5                       2.1      3.5
        0.83   1276            0.89      1454   0.91
                                                                                                                      3.0                        3.9
       1304    12                         383   1647
                                                                                                                3.1   8.3                        2.1      3.0

                          44    24 189
                                                                                                                              4.5 0.0 4.8

                       358 0.92 257
                                                                                                                              2.8        4.3



                                0                                                                                              0    0    1


                                                                                                                      0                           0

               1                            0                                                                         0                           0

                                                                                                                      0                           0


                                0                                                                                              0    0    0




                                NA                                                                                                  NA




               NA                         NA                                                                          NA                         NA




                                NA                                                                                                  NA



15-Min Count                     Elisio Dr                      Elisio Dr         Sir Francis Drake Blvd     Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                      (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                    Left        Thru Right       U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U                        Totals
   7:30 AM           17           2     42       0      46       6      8    0     2    436      4     0    64     372     16    10            1025
   7:45 AM           12           2     43       0      55       7     20    0     2    345      5     0    47     446     17     8            1009
   8:00 AM            8           6     50       1      48       4     17    0     1    228      3     0    96     328     20     8             818
   8:15 AM           10           7     57       0      37       7      9    0     3    261      1     1    80     263     12     9             757            3609
   8:30 AM           10          10     53       0      33       6      9    0     6    249      3     0    70     293      7    10             759            3343
   8:45 AM            8           5     46       0      23       9     17    0     4    270      1     0    93     354     14    14             858            3192
   9:00 AM           12           4     44       0      32       8      8    0     1    386      5     0    79     395     20    23            1017            3391
   9:15 AM           14           5     46       0      30       4     11    1     5    371      3     0    77     412      6    17            1002            3636




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                    Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates         Left       Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U      Left Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles       48         16    176     0        128     32    32     0      4 1544     20    0      316 1580     80   92                        4068
 Heavy Trucks         8          0      4                4      0     0            0   40      0             4   60      4                              124
  Pedestrians                    0                              0                       0                         0                                      0
   Bicycles           0          0      0                0      0     0            0    0      0             0    0      0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 101 SB Ramps -- Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                         QC JOB #: 10663536
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                       DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                    1195 0.82     0                            Peak-Hour: 8:30 AM -- 9:30 AM                                  2.3        0.0

                    768    1     426
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 9:00 AM -- 9:15 AM
                                                                                                                              3.0 0.0 1.2

       1885   0                           0   1383
                                                                                                                 3.6   0.0                       0.0      4.6
       0.83   868         0.88          360   0.85
                                                                                                                       3.2                       5.0
       1799   931                      1023   1294
                                                                                                                 2.7   2.1                       4.4      2.6

                    757    0      0
                                                                                                                              3.4 0.0 0.0

                    1955 0.84 757
                                                                                                                              3.3        3.4



                           0                                                                                                   0    0    0


                                                                                                                       0                          0

              0                           0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                       0                          0


                           0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                        NA




              NA                        NA                                                                             NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                        NA



15-Min Count          US 101 SB Ramps                    US 101 SB Ramps        Sir Francis Drake Blvd      Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period               (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                  Left Thru Right              U     Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right        U                         Totals
   7:30 AM        124      0     0             0     134      0   233      0     0    263    289     0    279     105      0     0             1427
   7:45 AM        234      0     0             0     124      1   174      0     0    212    241     0    249     113      0     0             1348
   8:00 AM        205      0     0             0     127      1   162      0     0    198    217     0    223      82      0     0             1215
   8:15 AM        140      0     0             0     102      2   149      0     0    229    193     0    192      76      0     0             1083            5073
   8:30 AM        150      0     0             0      83      0   175      0     0    202    188     0    203      56      0     0             1057            4703
   8:45 AM        159      0     0             0     107      0   209      0     0    199    213     0    237     107      0     0             1231            4586
   9:00 AM        225      0     0             0     135      1   198      0     0    250    275     0    277      94      0     0             1455            4826
   9:15 AM        223      0     0             0     101      0   186      0     0    217    255     0    306     103      0     0             1391            5134




 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                       Southbound               Eastbound                     Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates    Left       Thru Right     U           Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U       Left    Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles 900          0      0     0           540      4   792     0      0 1000 1100      0      1108     376      0    0                      5820
 Heavy Trucks   28          0      0                   4      0    20            0   24     12             64      20      0                            172
  Pedestrians               0                                 0                       0                             0                                    0
   Bicycles      0          0      0                   0      0     0            0    0      0              0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 101 NB Ramps -- Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                           QC JOB #: 10663533
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                         DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                           0   0.00 735                            Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM                                0.0        5.0

                           0    0     0
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

       1326    417                          143   1461
                                                                                                                   5.7   2.6                       9.8      6.0
        0.86   972             0.91        1318   0.83
                                                                                                                         1.6                       5.6
       1389    0                              0   2047
                                                                                                                   1.9   0.0                       0.0      2.0

                           8   175 1075
                                                                                                                                12.5 6.9 2.3

                           0   0.94 1258
                                                                                                                                0.0        3.0



                                0                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                         0                          0

               0                              0                                                                          0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0


                                0                                                                                                0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                           NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                               NA                                                                                                     NA



15-Min Count            US 101 NB Ramps                      US 101 NB Ramps         Sir Francis Drake Blvd    Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                 (Northbound)                         (Southbound)                (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                    Left Thru Right                U     Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right       U                        Totals
   7:30 AM            0     40   258               0       0      0     0      0   108     294      0     0     0    397     31     0            1128
   7:45 AM            5     35   235               0       0      0     0      0   109     213      0     0     0    359     34     0             990
   8:00 AM            3     45   287               0       0      0     0      0    91     242      0     0     0    298     34     0            1000
   8:15 AM            0     55   295               0       0      0     0      0   109     223      0     0     0    264     44     0             990            4108
   8:30 AM            1     56   254               0       0      0     0      0   120     167      0     0     0    249     28     0             875            3855
   8:45 AM            1     63   256               0       0      0     0      0    98     202      0     0     0    325     19     0             964            3829
   9:00 AM            0     58   241               0       0      0     0      0   109     277      0     0     0    379     24     0            1088            3917
   9:15 AM            1     54   201               0       0      0     0      0   112     204      0     0     0    399     45     0            1016            3943




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                      Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates         Left       Thru Right     U          Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles        0        160 1032       0            0      0     0     0    432 1176      0    0         0 1588   124     0                       4512
 Heavy Trucks         0         16      28                 0      0     0           12   12      0              0   72      4                             144
  Pedestrians                    0                                0                       0                          0                                     0
   Bicycles           0          0       0                 0      0     0            0    0      0              0    0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: W Larkspur Landing -- E Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                      QC JOB #: 10663542
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                         DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                       304 0.93 358                               Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM                                 3.9        2.0

                       272 28         4
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 7:30 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                                                                                                                3.7 0.0 50.0

       1494    355                          10   1157
                                                                                                                   5.7   1.4                      10.0      6.6
        0.96   946             0.92       1129   0.85
                                                                                                                         3.3                       6.6
       1964    663                          18    959
                                                                                                                   1.9   0.2                       0.0      3.5

                          81    5     9
                                                                                                                                0.0 20.0 11.1

                       709 0.68 95
                                                                                                                                0.1        2.1



                                1                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                         0                          0

               0                             6                                                                           1                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0


                                7                                                                                                0    1    0




                               NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                          NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                               NA                                                                                                     NA



15-Min Count           W Larkspur Landing                  W Larkspur Landing      E Sir Francis Drake Blvd    E Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                 (Northbound)                        (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                    Left Thru Right       U             Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U    Left Thru Right        U                       Totals
   7:30 AM           15      2     1      0               3     13    68      0    59     216    235      2     4     335      1      0          954
   7:45 AM           20      0     4      0               1      4    66      0   105     225    120      3     4     298      1      0          851
   8:00 AM           16      2     0      0               0      8    63      0    76     228    196      2     7     284      4      0          886
   8:15 AM           30      1     4      0               0      3    75      0   103     277    112      5     3     212      4      0          829             3520
   8:30 AM            8      1     1      0               1      2    92      0   132     249     31      6     0     185      0      0          708             3274
   8:45 AM            4      3     1      0               2      4    84      0   126     218     56      4     5     242      1      0          750             3173
   9:00 AM           33      2     0      0               1      5    96      0   131     236    122      3     2     276      3      0          910             3197
   9:15 AM            8      1     0      0               4      0    90      0   146     234     12      2     2     332      5      0          836             3204




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates         Left       Thru Right     U         Left   Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right    U      Left Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles       60          8      4     0          12     52   272     0    236    864    940    8       16 1340      4    0                       3816
 Heavy Trucks         0          0      0                 8      0    12            0     32      0             0   72      4                             128
  Pedestrians                   20                               4                         0                        20                                    44
   Bicycles           0          0      0                 0      0     0            0      0      0             0    0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: E Larkspur Landing -- E Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                        QC JOB #: 10663539
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                           DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                          74 0.80 172                              Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM                                  5.4        2.3

                          18    0     56
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 8:15 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                                                                                                                  5.6 0.0 5.4

       1237    40                           134   1350
                                                                                                                    5.8   10.0                       0.0      5.3
        0.89   901             0.98        1216   0.95
                                                                                                                          3.4                        5.8
       941     0                              0    956
                                                                                                                    3.7   0.0                        0.0      3.6

                           0    0     0
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0

                           0   0.00   0
                                                                                                                                  0.0        0.0



                                2                                                                                                  0    0    0


                                                                                                                          0                           0

               1                              2                                                                           0                           0

                                                                                                                          0                           0


                                0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                       NA




               NA                           NA                                                                            NA                         NA




                               NA                                                                                                       NA



15-Min Count           E Larkspur Landing                   E Larkspur Landing      E Sir Francis Drake Blvd    E Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                 (Northbound)                         (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                       Total
                    Left Thru Right       U              Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U    Left Thru Right        U                        Totals
   7:30 AM            0      0      0     0               16      0      5     0     4     209      0      2     0     328     27      0           591
   7:45 AM            0      0      0     0               13      0      4     0    12     209      0      0     0     299     32      0           569
   8:00 AM            0      0      0     0               16      0      6     1     9     218      0      0     0     325     24      0           599
   8:15 AM            0      0      0     0               10      0      3     0    12     265      0      1     0     264     51      0           606             2365
   8:30 AM            0      0      0     0               15      0      5     0    13     244      0      0     0     165     47      0           489             2263
   8:45 AM            0      0      0     0               12      0      4     0    18     210      0      1     0     241     42      0           528             2222
   9:00 AM            0      0      0     0                7      0      6     0    17     209      0      2     0     275     68      0           584             2207
   9:15 AM            0      0      0     0                8      0      9     0    45     207      0      1     0     277     27      0           574             2175




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                      Southbound               Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                           Total
  Flowrates         Left       Thru Right     U          Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles        0          0      0     0           40      0    12     0     48 1060      0    4          0 1056   204     0                        2424
 Heavy Trucks         0          0      0                  0      0     0            0   24      0               0   80      0                              104
  Pedestrians                    0                                4                       0                           8                                     12
   Bicycles           0          0      0                  0      0     0            0    0      0               0    0      0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Wolfe Grade -- Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                                QC JOB #: 10663520
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                          DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                       372 0.76 569                                  Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                               0.3        0.2

                       179      7     186
                                                                    Peak 15-Min: 5:45 PM -- 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.6 0.0 0.0

       1562    200                           368   1758
                                                                                                                    0.1   0.5                       0.0      0.0
        0.84   975             0.97         1364   0.93
                                                                                                                          1.3                       0.0
       1188    13                             26   1180
                                                                                                                    1.2   0.0                       0.0      1.1

                          13    7     19
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                          46 0.78 39
                                                                                                                                 0.0        0.0



                                2                                                                                                 1    1    0


                                                                                                                          0                          0

               0                               0                                                                          1                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0


                                1                                                                                                 0    0    0




                                NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                            NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                                NA                                                                                                     NA



15-Min Count                    Wolfe Grade                       Wolfe Grade         Sir Francis Drake Blvd     Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                      (Northbound)                      (Southbound)               (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                      Total
                    Left        Thru Right          U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right        U                       Totals
   4:00 PM            7           2     11          0      39       3     41    0    75     286      2     0     5     303    103     0           877
   4:15 PM            4           4      9          0      57       0     31    0    49     241      3     2     7     232    101     0           740
   4:30 PM           10           1      7          0      43       1     21    0    49     245      8     3     5     281    103     0           777
   4:45 PM            2           1      4          0      60       0     35    0    44     204      2     0     2     264    100     0           718             3112
   5:00 PM            3           0      4          0      38       1     32    0    57     253      2     2     5     322     87     0           806             3041
   5:15 PM            1           2      7          0      50       3     35    0    43     274      1     2    11     326     94     0           849             3150
   5:30 PM            4           3      5          0      48       2     41    0    53     229      4     2     3     346     93     0           833             3206
   5:45 PM            5           2      3          0      50       1     71    0    41     219      6     0     7     370     94     0           869             3357




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                       Southbound                 Eastbound                Westbound
                                                                                                                                                          Total
  Flowrates         Left       Thru Right     U           Left   Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right    U     Left Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles       20          8      12    0           200      4   284     0    164    876     24    0      28 1480   376     0                       3476
 Heavy Trucks         0          0       0                  0      0     0            0     12      0            0    0      0                             12
  Pedestrians                    0                                 0                         0                        0                                     0
   Bicycles           0          0       0                  0      0     0            0      0      0            0    0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Bon Air Rd -- Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                              QC JOB #: 10663514
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                       DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                         0   0.00    0                             Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                              0.0        0.0

                         0    0      0
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

       1819   0                              0   1714
                                                                                                                 1.0   0.0                       0.0      1.1
       0.91   1017           0.96         1439   0.95
                                                                                                                       1.3                       0.9
       1219   202                          275   1500
                                                                                                                 1.1   0.5                       1.8      1.2

                     380      0     482
                                                                                                                              1.3 0.0 1.0

                     476 0.93 862
                                                                                                                              1.3        1.2



                              0                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                       0                          0

              0                              3                                                                         1                          1

                                                                                                                       0                          0


                              2                                                                                                0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                    NA




              NA                           NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                    NA



15-Min Count                  Bon Air Rd                        Bon Air Rd         Sir Francis Drake Blvd     Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                    (Northbound)                      (Southbound)              (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                  Left        Thru Right          U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U                       Totals
   4:00 PM         94           0   148           0       0       0      0    0     0    282     61     0    94     321      0     0           1000
   4:15 PM         92           0   115           0       0       0      0    0     0    232     48     0    89     236      0     0            812
   4:30 PM         85           0   128           0       0       0      0    0     0    238     51     0    90     329      0     0            921
   4:45 PM        109           0   125           0       0       0      0    0     0    225     41     0    90     289      0     2            881            3614
   5:00 PM         83           0   129           0       0       0      0    0     0    259     37     0    59     334      0     1            902            3516
   5:15 PM         90           0   129           0       0       0      0    0     0    273     62     0    76     357      0     0            987            3691
   5:30 PM        107           0   115           0       0       0      0    0     0    246     52     0    72     366      0     0            958            3728
   5:45 PM        100           0   109           0       0       0      0    0     0    239     51     0    67     382      0     0            948            3795




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                       Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates    Left          Thru Right     U           Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U      Left Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles 360             0    516     0             0      0     0     0      0 1092    248    0      304 1428      0    0                       3948
 Heavy Trucks   12             0      12                  0      0     0            0   16      4             4   12      0                             60
  Pedestrians                  8                                 0                       0                         0                                     8
   Bicycles      0             0       0                  0      0     0            0    1      0             0    0      0                              1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Elisio Dr -- Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10663505
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                         DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                       181 0.82 233                                 Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                               0.6        0.4

                          40    43    98
                                                                   Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 1.0

       1861    38                           152   2289
                                                                                                                   0.9   0.0                       0.7      0.9
        0.90   1519            0.97        1753   0.95
                                                                                                                         1.1                       0.9
       1582    25                           384   1858
                                                                                                                   1.0   0.0                       1.0      1.0

                          67    44 202
                                                                                                                                1.5 0.0 0.5

                       413 0.81 313
                                                                                                                                1.0        0.6



                                1                                                                                                0    1    1


                                                                                                                         0                          0

               19                             0                                                                          0                          1

                                                                                                                         0                          1


                                4                                                                                                0    0    0




                                NA                                                                                                    NA




               NA                           NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                                NA                                                                                                    NA



15-Min Count                     Elisio Dr                        Elisio Dr          Sir Francis Drake Blvd     Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                      (Northbound)                     (Southbound)               (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                    Left        Thru Right         U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right        U                       Totals
   4:00 PM           19          19     66         0      21       7      7    1     6     406      4     0    76     371     21    20           1044
   4:15 PM           16          11     52         0      17       6     10    0     3     463      4     0    80     370     24    14           1070
   4:30 PM           19          12     59         0      27      13     10    0     8     415      1     1    73     395     35     5           1073
   4:45 PM           20           9     36         0      16       2      9    0     7     361      6     1    81     362     37    13            960            4147
   5:00 PM           19           5     57         0      19      12     12    0     9     333      8     0    89     424     32    10           1029            4132
   5:15 PM           15          12     50         0      19      13     11    0     5     437      5     1    79     436     35     7           1125            4187
   5:30 PM           15          13     51         0      24       7      9    0    12     391      5     0    90     453     47    13           1130            4244
   5:45 PM           18          14     44         0      36      11      8    0    11     358      7     0    87     440     38     9           1081            4365




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                      Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates         Left       Thru Right     U          Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles       60         52    204     0           96     28    36     0     48 1564     20    0       360 1812   188    52                       4520
 Heavy Trucks         0          0      0                  0      0     0            0   16      0              4   16      0                             36
  Pedestrians                    0                                0                      16                          0                                    16
   Bicycles           0          0      0                  0      1     0            0    0      0              0    0      0                              1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 101 SB Ramps -- Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                           QC JOB #: 10663535
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                         DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                      845 0.90      0                            Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  1.2        0.0

                      587    0     258
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                                1.0 0.0 1.6

       2286    0                            0   1701
                                                                                                                   0.8   0.0                       0.0      0.9
        0.93   1012         0.96          558   0.89
                                                                                                                         1.3                       0.9
       1990    978                       1143   1270
                                                                                                                   1.2   1.1                       0.9      1.3

                      1141 0        0
                                                                                                                                0.6 0.0 0.0

                      2121 0.95 1141
                                                                                                                                1.0        0.6



                             0                                                                                                   0    0    0


                                                                                                                         0                          0

               0                            0                                                                            0                          1

                                                                                                                         0                          0


                             0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                        NA




               NA                         NA                                                                             NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                        NA



15-Min Count           US 101 SB Ramps                     US 101 SB Ramps        Sir Francis Drake Blvd      Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                   Left Thru Right               U     Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right        U                         Totals
   4:00 PM         254      0     0              0      52      0   138      0     0    308    251     0    227      96      0     0             1326
   4:15 PM         222      0     0              0      58      1   150      0     0    287    264     0    227     115      0     0             1324
   4:30 PM         283      0     0              0      74      1   135      0     0    282    231     0    234      89      0     0             1329
   4:45 PM         246      0     0              0      48      0   165      0     0    241    213     0    235      87      0     0             1235            5214
   5:00 PM         263      0     0              0      56      0   138      0     0    254    216     0    267     152      0     0             1346            5234
   5:15 PM         284      0     0              0      83      0   155      0     0    259    252     0    297     117      0     0             1447            5357
   5:30 PM         295      0     0              0      63      0   139      0     0    248    263     0    308     169      0     0             1485            5513
   5:45 PM         299      0     0              0      56      0   155      0     0    251    247     0    271     120      0     0             1399            5677




 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                       Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates     Left        Thru Right     U           Left   Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right    U     Left    Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles 1180           0      0     0           252      0   556     0      0    992 1052      0    1232     676      0    0                      5940
 Heavy Trucks     8           0      0                   0      0     4            0      0     16           12       8      0                            48
  Pedestrians                 0                                 0                         0                           0                                    0
   Bicycles       0           0      0                   0      0     0            0      0      0            0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 101 NB Ramps -- Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                           QC JOB #: 10663532
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                         DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                           0   0.00 1557                           Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                0.0        1.2

                           0    0     0
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

       1616    634                          541   2156
                                                                                                                   1.0   0.8                       0.7      0.9
        0.95   616             0.93        1615   0.84
                                                                                                                         1.8                       0.9
       1250    0                              0   1926
                                                                                                                   1.3   0.0                       0.0      2.0

                           1   382 1310
                                                                                                                                100.02.6 2.1

                           0   0.95 1693
                                                                                                                                0.0        2.3



                                0                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                         0                          0

               0                              0                                                                          0                          2

                                                                                                                         0                          0


                                0                                                                                                0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                           NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                               NA                                                                                                     NA



15-Min Count            US 101 NB Ramps                      US 101 NB Ramps         Sir Francis Drake Blvd    Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                 (Northbound)                         (Southbound)                (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                    Left Thru Right                U     Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right       U                        Totals
   4:00 PM            0     98   320               0       0      0     0      0   203     155      0     0     0    341     99     0            1216
   4:15 PM            0    115   324               0       0      0     0      0   182     179      0     0     0    341     69     0            1210
   4:30 PM            1     99   347               0       0      0     0      0   182     177      0     0     0    309     79     0            1194
   4:45 PM            1    106   361               0       0      0     0      0   164     125      0     0     0    324     76     0            1157            4777
   5:00 PM            0     90   326               0       0      0     0      0   164     155      0     0     0    420    209     0            1364            4925
   5:15 PM            0     98   308               0       0      0     0      0   154     175      0     0     0    392     84     0            1211            4926
   5:30 PM            0     88   315               0       0      0     0      0   152     161      0     0     0    479    172     0            1367            5099
   5:45 PM            0     90   305               0       0      0     0      0   171     130      0     0     0    361     73     0            1130            5072




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                      Southbound                 Eastbound                Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates         Left       Thru Right     U          Left   Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right    U     Left Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles        0        352 1260       0            0      0     0     0    608    644      0    0       0 1916   688     0                       5468
 Heavy Trucks         0         16      8                  0      0     0            0      4      0            0   16      0                             44
  Pedestrians                    0                                0                         0                        0                                     0
   Bicycles           0          0      0                  0      0     0            0      0      0            0    0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: W Larkspur Landing -- E Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                      QC JOB #: 10663541
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                         DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                      556 0.91 437                              Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                   0.9        0.7

                      526    3     27
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                                1.0 0.0 0.0

       2193   497                         16   1100
                                                                                                                   0.6   0.6                       0.0      0.8
       0.95   1385          0.90        1076   0.93
                                                                                                                         2.4                       0.8
       1972   90                           8   1441
                                                                                                                   1.8   0.0                       0.0      2.3

                      505 10       29
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                      101 0.55 544
                                                                                                                                0.0        0.0



                             8                                                                                                   1    2    0


                                                                                                                         0                          0

              1                           11                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0


                             11                                                                                                  0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                        NA




              NA                         NA                                                                              NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                        NA



15-Min Count          W Larkspur Landing                 W Larkspur Landing      E Sir Francis Drake Blvd    E Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                   Left Thru Right       U            Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U    Left Thru Right        U                         Totals
   4:00 PM         102      0     4      0              4      0    92      0    77     364     21    17      2     219      4      0             906
   4:15 PM          11      2     0      0              5      0   113      0   104     411      9    14      0     275      1      1             946
   4:30 PM          12      0     2      0              6      0   140      0   103     393     17      7     1     224      3      0             908
   4:45 PM          33      0     1      0              6      2   105      0    70     355     22      7     3     252      4      0             860            3620
   5:00 PM         234      4    15      0              8      1   128      0   113     364     20    30      4     230      3      0            1154            3868
   5:15 PM          53      1     3      0              3      2   148      0    90     343     32    20      1     293      3      0             992            3914
   5:30 PM         203      5     9      0              8      0   116      0   112     366     23    21      1     274      6      0            1144            4150
   5:45 PM          15      0     2      0              8      0   134      0    96     312     15    15      2     279      4      0             882            4172




 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                      Southbound               Eastbound                      Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates    Left         Thru Right     U          Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles 936           16      60    0           32      4   512     0    452 1456     80  120         16     920     12    0                      4616
 Heavy Trucks    0            0       0                 0      0     4            4   56      0               0      16      0                            80
  Pedestrians                 0                               12                       0                             20                                   32
   Bicycles      0            0       0                 0      0     0            0    0      0               0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: E Larkspur Landing -- E Sir Francis Drake Blvd                                                                         QC JOB #: 10663538
 CITY/STATE: Marin County/Larkspur, CA                                                                                            DATE: Thu, Oct 06 2011
                       224 0.71 206                                Peak-Hour: 4:15 PM -- 5:15 PM                                   0.0        2.4

                       103      0     121
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 4:15 PM -- 4:30 PM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0

       1009    135                           78    977
                                                                                                                      1.3   3.7                       0.0      1.3
        0.95   1448            0.97         898   0.89
                                                                                                                            2.6                       1.4
       1583    0                              1   1569
                                                                                                                      2.7   0.0                       0.0      2.4

                           0    0      0
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0

                           0   0.00    0
                                                                                                                                   0.0        0.0



                                1                                                                                                   0    0    0


                                                                                                                            0                          0

               0                              0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                            0                          0


                                0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                        NA




               NA                           NA                                                                              NA                        NA




                               NA                                                                                                        NA



15-Min Count           E Larkspur Landing                   E Larkspur Landing      E Sir Francis Drake Blvd    E Sir Francis Drake Blvd
   Period                 (Northbound)                         (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                        Total
                    Left Thru Right       U              Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U    Left Thru Right        U                         Totals
   4:00 PM            0      0      0     0               12      0     26     0    33     308      0      2     0     200     17      0            598
   4:15 PM            0      0      0     0               20      0     30     0    38     368      0      0     0     238     24      0            718
   4:30 PM            0      0      0     0               32      0     26     1    45     368      0      5     0     204     21      1            703
   4:45 PM            0      0      0     0               22      0     14     0    21     357      0      1     0     259     13      0            687             2706
   5:00 PM            0      0      0     0               46      0     33     0    23     355      0      2     0     197     20      0            676             2784
   5:15 PM            0      0      0     0               17      0     28     0    27     346      0      1     0     262     21      0            702             2768
   5:30 PM            0      0      0     0               16      0     39     0    36     336      0      1     0     253     13      0            694             2759
   5:45 PM            0      0      0     0               13      0     26     0    38     310      0      0     0     281     18      0            686             2758




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                      Southbound               Eastbound                      Westbound
                                                                                                                                                            Total
  Flowrates         Left       Thru Right     U          Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles        0          0      0     0           80      0   120     0    152 1472      0    0          0     952     96    0                      2872
 Heavy Trucks         0          0      0                  0      0     0            8   36      0               0       8      0                            52
  Pedestrians                    0                                0                       0                              0                                    0
   Bicycles           0          0      0                  0      0     0            0    0      0               0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/6/2011 3:07 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
