                   CITY OF HAPPY VALLEY
               PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING
                          AGENDA

                             May 14, 2013
                              7:00 p.m.


Roll Call


7:00 P.M. CALL TO ORDER


1.     CITIZEN COMMENT
       (Anyone wishing to address the Planning Commission concerning items not on
       the agenda may do so. When recognized by the Commission, please state your
       name and address for the record. Please direct all comments to the whole
       Commission. The Commission reserves the right to delay any action, if required,
       until such time when they are fully informed on the matter)


2.     CONSENT AGENDA ITEMS

       None


3.     CPA-04-13/LDC04-13 132nd & KING ROAD ZONE CHANGE
       A comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map Amendment for one vacant property
       totaling 4.29 acres in size. The proposed amendment would change the existing
       plan designation/zoning district on the subject property from Very Low Density
       Residential (R-20) to a combination of Low Density Residential (R-7) and
       Community Commercial Center (CCC)


4.     PUDA-02-13/ERP-01-13 BLACKSTONE TERRACE AMENDMENT
       Environmental Review Permit and Major Amendment to the previously approved
       Planned Unit Development (PUD) know as Blackstone Terrace


5.     COMMISSIONERS CONCERNS AND COMMENT



6.     ADJOURNMENT
        Mayor                                                                                             City Manager
Honorable Lori DeRemer                                                                                    Jason A. Tuck


                                         CITY OF HAPPY VALLEY

                   STAFF REPORT TO THE PLANNING COMMISSION

                                                     May 14, 2013

                     "132ND AVEUNE AND KING ROAD ZONE CHANGE"

       COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP/ZONING MAP AMENDMENT (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

  I.      GENERAL INFORMATION

  PROPOSAL:

  The applicant, T.A. Liesy Homes Northwest, is proposing to amend the City's Comprehensive
  Plan Map/Zoning Map ("one-map" system) to change the current plan designation/zoning district
  for the subject site from "Very Low Density Residential" (R-20) to a combination of "Low
  Density Residential" (R-7) and "Community Commercial Center" (CCC). The subject property
  is located at the northwest corner of the intersection of SE 132nd Avenue and SE King Road.
  Staff has determined that the applicant's proposal complies with the applicable requirements of
  the Statewide Planning Goals, Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR), and the City's
  Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code (LDC). Therefore, staff recommends the
  Planning Commission APPROVE the proposed application subject to the findings and
  conclusions in this report.

  APPLICANT:

  T. A. Liesy Homes Northwest, LLC
  12042 SE Sunnyside Road, Suite 475
  Clackamas, OR 97015

  PROPERTY OWNER:

  National Mortgage Company
  15862 SW 72nd Avenue, Suite 200
  Portland, OR 97224

  APPLICANT'S REPRESENTATIVE:

  3J Consulting, Inc.
  10445 SW Canyon Road, Suite 245
  Beaverton, OR 97005
                                           16000 SE Misty Drive
                                       Happy Valley, Oregon 97086
                                Telephone: (503) 783-3800 Fax: (503) 658-5174
                                    Website: www.ci.happy-valley.or.us

                         Preserving and enhancing the safety, livability and character of our community
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                         May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

EXHIBITS:

The applicant has submitted the following exhibits as part of the application
package:

Exhibit 1 (dated February, 2013)
Applicant's Narrative

Exhibit 2 (dated December, 2012)
Applicant's Conceptual Development Plan

Exhibit 3 (dated March 1, 2013)
Traffic Impact Analysis

Exhibit 4 (dated February 13, 2013)
Neighborhood Meeting Minutes

Exhibit 5 (undated)
Applicant's Rendering of the Conceptual Development Plan

Exhibit 6 (dated May 2, 2013)
Memo from Applicant Addressing Letters of Opposition

Staff has submitted the following exhibits as part of the Staff Report:

Staff Exhibit A Service Provider Comments and Conditions

1. City of Happy Valley Engineering Division
2. DKS Associates

Staff Exhibit B

1. Letters in Opposition of Application
       a. Ken and Joan Trapp (dated April 25, 2013)
       b. Phillip Patrick (undated)
       c. Daniel and Stephanie Bartlett (dated April 28, 2013)
       d. Charles and Sandy Dalich (dated April 28, 2013)
       e. Michelle and Warren McCandless (dated April 28, 2013)
       f. Leo, Patricia and Justin Krug (dated April 28, 2013)
       g. Larry and Ann Haugen (dated April 28, 2013)
       h. Jeff and Lisa Miller (dated April 28, 2013)
       i. Arlen and Kathy DeMars (dated April 28, 2013)
       j. Mark and Bonnie Scruggs (dated April 28, 2013)
       k. Sherri Stearns (dated April 28, 2013)\
       l. Ralf and Nancy Fear (dated April 29, 2013)
       m. John Morgan (dated April 29, 2013)



                                                                                          2
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                 May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

       n. Ronda Morgan (dated April 29, 2013)
       o. Sandra Coats (dated April 29, 2013)
       p. Mr. and Mrs. Wilson (dated April 30, 2013)
       q. Shirley and LeRoy Lockwood (dated April 30, 2013)
       r. Allen and Beverly Wylie (dated April 30, 2013)
       s. David A. and Norma J. Freitag (dated April 29, 2013)
2. Citizen Concern Forms
3. Letter in Support of Application - Ray Valone of Metro (dated April 30, 2013)

APPLICABLE CRITERIA:

·   Applicable Statewide Planning Goals; applicable sections of OAR Chapter 660, Division 12;
    applicable City of Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan Policies; and applicable sections of the
    City of Happy Valley Municipal Code; Title 16-Land Development Code, including Chapters
    16.22 (Residential Land Use Districts); 16.23 (Commercial and Employment Districts);
    16.41 (Access and Circulation); 16.50 (Public Facilities); 16.61 (Types of Review
    Procedures); and 16.67 (Comprehensive Plan Map, Specific Area Plans, Land Use District
    Map and Text Amendments).

SITE DESCRIPTION/ADJACENT LAND USE:

·   The subject site is an approximately 4.29-acre Lot of Record located at the northwest corner
    of the intersection of SE King Road (Minor Arterial) and SE 132nd Avenue (Collector). The
    subject site is vacant with gradually sloping terrain and less than 20 trees being present. The
    subject site is bordered to the west by an approximately two-acre property, zoned
    "Institutional and Public Use" (IPU), which contains the City's Community Policing Center.
    To the north of the subject site is a subdivision known as "Lucerne Valle", which consists of
    approximately 20,000 square-foot lots that contain single-family detached residences. To the
    east of the subject site is an undeveloped property that is approximately 2.83 acres in size and
    is zoned "Low Density Residential" (R-7). To the south of the subject site, across SE King
    Road, is the location of four Lots of Record ranging in size from 20,000-30,000 square feet,
    with single-family detached residences existing on three of the four lots.

BACKGROUND:

·   Until 2011, the subject site was located within a geographical area that was part of the Metro
    (Regional Government) "Town Center" designation for Happy Valley. This designation
    meant that the subject site would likely develop with extensive commercial components. In
    2011, the City worked with Metro to establish the area surrounding Sunnyside Road from
    approximately 157th Avenue to 172nd Avenue, including the existing retail/commercial
    development at SE 162nd Avenue and SE Sunnyside Road as the Happy Valley Town Center
    and removed this designation from the subject site and other adjacent properties. Thus,
    although the applicant proposes the small CCC zoned corner as part of the subject
    application, the total amount of potential density in the greater King Road corridor has
    decreased drastically from the densities allowed in a "Town Center" designation.




                                                                                                   3
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                 May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN/ZONING MAP AMENDMENT AND CONCEPTUAL
DEVELOPMENT PLAN:

·   The applicant has proposed to amend the City's Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map to
    change the subject site's existing plan designation/zoning district from "Very Low Density
    Residential" (R-20) to a combination of "Low Density Residential" (R-7) and "Community
    Commercial Center" (CCC). The applicant's proposed designation/zoning configuration is
    depicted on Page 8 of Exhibit 1 and works to increase the residential density for a majority of
    the subject site, while providing a small node of commercially zoned land (0.80 acres in size)
    proposed to be located in the southeastern corner of the subject site. The applicant has
    proposed a commercial component as part of the subject application due to the subject site
    "fronting" on a Minor Arterial roadway (SE King Road) and a Collector roadway (SE 132nd
    Avenue). The applicant has stated in their narrative (Exhibit 1) that the commercial node
    would provide neighborhood-scale retail and commercial services to the future residents of
    the proposed development and the surrounding area, which will work to provide
    opportunities to reduce the number of vehicular trips leaving this area of Happy Valley.

·   The applicant has supplied a conceptual development plan as part of this proposal, which is
    depicted within Exhibit 2 and described on Page 7 of the applicant's narrative. This plan
    illustrates how the subject site could potentially develop under the proposed R-7 and CCC
    zones. The applicant illustrates the area proposed as R-7 developing as single-family
    detached housing and the CCC zoned land developing as a mixed-use commercial/multi-
    family building. Given the development standards of the CCC zone, the applicant estimates
    that the mixed-use building could consist of 12-16 dwelling units and 7,000 square feet of
    commercial/retail space. To ensure that the proposed amendments do not allow for a
    scenario where the future development of the CCC zoned lands on the subject site are not
    compatible with the surrounding neighborhoods (which consist mostly of institutional and
    single-family detached residential uses), city staff has worked with the applicant to produce a
    condition of approval (Number 2) that recommends the prohibition several uses from
    occurring on the subject site that would otherwise be allowed in the CCC zone.

TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS/TRANSPORTATION PLANNING RULE
COMPLIANCE:

·   The applicant submitted a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) as part of their proposal that
    provides an evaluation of items such as trip generation and distribution, intersection/roadway
    safety, and capacity. Also within the TIA, the applicant's Traffic Engineer provided a trip
    generation comparative analysis that studied the vehicular traffic generated by the subject site
    developing under the current zoning versus the proposed zoning. This analysis provides a
    comparison between the subject site developing as a seven-lot subdivision versus developing
    under the proposed zoning as a "reasonable worst-case scenario" (from a traffic impact
    perspective). The TIA reports that this "reasonable worst-case scenario" is the subject site
    developing as 17 single-family detached residences, 16 multi-family units, a 5,500 square-
    foot convenience market and a 1,500 square-foot coffee shop (without a drive-through
    window).




                                                                                                  4
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                               May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

    The TIA states that the net increase from the subject site developing under the current zoning
    versus a "reasonable worst-case scenario" under the proposed zoning would be 185 a.m. peak
    hour trips and 155 p.m. peak hour trips (Exhibit 3, Page 24).

    The applicant's TIA states that the proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map
    Amendment will necessitate the construction of left turn lanes into the two entrances
    envisioned to subject site, from northbound SE 132nd Avenue and eastbound SE King Road.
    The TIA also correctly assumes the development of the subject site will "trigger" one-half
    street frontage improvements along the subject site's frontage with SE King Road and SE
    132nd Avenue.

·   It is required that a TIA submitted as part of an application for a Comprehensive Plan
    Map/Zoning Map amendment provide an analysis that addresses Oregon Administrative Rule
    (OAR) 660-012-0060, commonly referred to as the "Transportation Planning Rule" (TPR).
    Within this analysis, an applicant is required to determine if a proposed Comprehensive Plan
    Map/Zoning Map Amendment would "significantly" impact an existing transportation
    facility, and if so, propose mitigating measures. As discussed in the previous paragraph, the
    proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map Amendment could result in an estimated
    185 more a.m. and 155 more p.m. weekday peak hour trips than under the current zoning.

    When evaluating the applicant's proposal against the TPR, it was determined that the traffic
    impact from the proposed amendments would be considered "significant" (as defined in
    Section 16.67.060.A.1 of the LDC). This is due to the increased number of trips produced by
    the proposed amendment deteriorating the performance of an existing transportation facility
    (SE 129th and SE King Road intersection) that is otherwise projected to perform below the
    minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the City's TSP. As a result, the
    applicant's Traffic Engineer has proposed two mitigating measures to ensure compliance
    with the TPR.

    1. Make a payment to the City in an amount equaling 26 percent (the applicant's
       proportionate share) of the cost of improving the SE 129th Avenue/SE King Road
       intersection with a traffic signal or roundabout (Condition of Approval Number 4). The
       determination as to what the applicant's proportionate share would be for these
       improvements was based on the net increase in the number of trips that would result from
       the proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map Amendment (the reasonable worst
       case scenario described above); and

    2. Construct an asphaltic pedestrian path along the north side of SE King Road from the
       current terminus of the existing sidewalk, located approximately 175 feet west of SE
       Regina Court, to the SE 132nd Avenue/SE King Road intersection, a distance of 1,240
       feet (Condition of Approval Number 3). Currently this "stretch" of SE King Road has no
       sidewalks and the pathway would serve as a much needed connection from Happy Valley
       Middle/Elementary School to the adjacent neighborhoods to the west.




                                                                                                 5
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                 May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

    The City's Traffic Engineer (DKS Associates) has reviewed and concurred with the
    applicant's findings and proposed mitigation methods as outlined within the TIA. However,
    the City's Traffic Engineer did have one additional requirement of the applicant, that they
    install a westbound left turn lane at the SE King Road/SE 129th Avenue intersection. This
    left turn lane shall be provided as an interim improvement until the long term improvements
    (traffic signal or roundabout) can be constructed. The City's Traffic Engineer is
    recommending that the left turn lane provide 100 feet of storage and appropriate taper length.

PUBLIC COMMENTS:

·   The City's Planning Division received 19 letters and 15 "Citizen Concern Forms" from
    neighboring property owners or other interested parties in opposition to the applicant's
    proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map Amendment during the public comment
    period. These letters and forms have been included as Exhibits to this report (Staff Exhibit
    B-1 and B-2). Overall, the letters and forms submitted in opposition cite reasons of increased
    vehicular traffic congestion, degradation of property values, lack of parking, public safety
    concerns and incompatibility of the future uses of the subject site with the surrounding
    neighborhood. The City did receive one letter in support of the applicant's proposal from a
    representative of Metro, Ray Valone, Principal Regional Planner (Staff Exhibit B-3). Mr.
    Valone mentions in his letter that he supports the proposed zone change because it would
    produce a mixed-use development that would encourage walking and biking, ultimately
    reducing the number of vehicle miles traveled, which would work towards meeting the
    State's goals for our region.

APPLICANT'S RESPONSE TO LETTERS OF OPPOSITION:

·   Subsequent to the closure of the public comment period regarding this application, the
    applicant provided the City with a letter to the Planning Commission that addresses the
    concerns brought up by residents in the letters of opposition (Exhibit B-1). Within this letter,
    the applicant discusses the proposed measures to mitigate for the additional vehicular trips
    produced by the zone change, use restrictions on the CCC zoned land, the proposed
    pedestrian and safety improvements and parking. To address the concern of neighborhood
    compatibility, the applicant provided a rendering (Exhibit 5) of what the development of the
    subject site might look like should it develop similar what is shown on the conceptual
    development plan.




                                                                                                   6
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                  May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

II.    FINDINGS OF FACT

1.     The following Statewide Planning Goals are applicable to the subject request:

"Goal 1 (Citizen Involvement)
To develop a citizen involvement program that ensures the opportunity for citizens to be involved
in all phases of the planning process.

Staff Response:

The public notice and outreach requirements for a Type "III" quasi-judicial land use application,
such as that proposed by the applicant, have provided multiple opportunities for public
involvement, including published notice for the land use hearing before the Planning
Commission. In addition, the applicant held a voluntary neighborhood meeting, introducing the
proposed zone change to the surrounding community. Therefore, this criterion is satisfied by the
request and the public process followed by the City of Happy Valley.

Goal 2 (Land Use Planning)
To establish a land use planning process and policy framework as a basis for all decisions and
actions related to use of land and to ensure an adequate factual base for such decisions and
actions.

Staff Response:

Statewide Planning Goal 2, Land Use Planning, requires that local jurisdictions establish a land
use planning process and policy framework as a basis for all decisions and actions related to use
of land and to assure an adequate factual base for such decisions and actions. The proposed
Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map Amendment was evaluated using criteria found within
the City's LDC and policies found within the City's Comprehensive Plan. This evaluation is
augmented by the inclusion of comments and concerns submitted by neighboring residents.
Furthermore, the proposed amendments are subject to a public hearing before the Planning
Commission. Therefore, a well established planning process and policy framework exists within
the City. Therefore, this criterion is satisfied.

Goal 6 (Air, Water and Land Resources Quality)
To maintain and improve the quality of the air, water and land resources of the state.

Staff Response:

As stated above, the subject property is governed by the City's LDC and all applicable service
district, state, and federal regulations. Therefore, this criterion is satisfied by the proposed
amendment.

Goal 9 (Economic Development)
To provide adequate opportunities through the state for a variety of economic activities vital to
the health, welfare, and prosperity of Oregon's citizens.



                                                                                                    7
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                 May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)



Staff Response:

The applicant has proposed to amend the City's Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map to reflect
that a portion of the subject property will receive a plan designation/zoning district of CCC with
the approval of this application. Within CCC zone, uses such as office and neighborhood
commercial are permitted. The application of this zone would allow for the possibility of
commercial or retail development to occur on the subject property. This criterion has been
satisfied.

Goal 10 (Housing)
To provide for the housing needs of the citizens of the State.

Staff Response:

The proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map Amendment, if approved, creates the
potential for future development of the subject site to provide a variety of housing types (multi-
family and single-family detached and attached) within the City. Therefore, this criterion has
been satisfied.

Goal 11 (Public Facilities and Services)
To plan and develop a timely, orderly and efficient arrangement of public facilities and services
to serve as a framework for urban and rural development.

Staff Response:

As the City of Happy Valley is not a "full-service" municipality, providing all water, sewer,
streets, etc., public facilities and services plans exist in the form of Master Plans; rules and
regulations; implementing ordinances; and, Intergovernmental Agreements (IGA's) between the
City and its service providers. Therefore, this criterion has been satisfied.

Goal 12 (Transportation)
To provide and encourage a safe, convenient and economic transportation system."

Staff Response:

The intent of Goal 12 is "to provide and encourage a safe, convenient, and economic
transportation system." Findings addressing the TPR are located within the Staff Responses to
the City's own LDC section that addresses the TPR, below (see Section 4). Per those findings,
this criterion has been satisfied.




                                                                                                     8
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                  May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

2.     The following Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR) are applicable to the subject
       request:

"OAR Chapter 660, Division 12 (Transportation Planning)


660-012-0060
Plan and Land Use Regulation Amendments

(1) Where an amendment to a functional plan, an acknowledged comprehensive plan, or a land
use regulation would significantly affect an existing or planned transportation facility, the local
government shall put in place measures as provided in section (2) of this rule to assure that
allowed land uses are consistent with the identified function, capacity, and performance
standards (e.g. level of service, volume to capacity ratio, etc.) of the facility. A plan or land use
regulation amendment significantly affects a transportation facility if it would:
         (a) Change the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility
(exclusive of correction of map errors in an adopted plan);
         (b) Change standards implementing a functional classification system; or
         (c) As measured at the end of the planning period identified in the adopted transportation
system plan:
                 (A) Allow land uses or levels of development that would result in types or levels of
travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned
transportation facility;
                 (B) Reduce the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility
below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the TSP or comprehensive
plan; or
                 (C) Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that
is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard
identified in the TSP or comprehensive plan.
(2) Where a local government determines that there would be a significant effect, compliance
with section (1) shall be accomplished through one or a combination of the following:
         (a) Adopting measures that demonstrate allowed land uses are consistent with the
planned function, capacity, and performance standards of the transportation facility.
         (b) Amending the TSP or comprehensive plan to provide transportation facilities,
improvements or services adequate to support the proposed land uses consistent with the
requirements of this division; such amendments shall include a funding plan or mechanism
consistent with section (4) or include an amendment to the transportation finance plan so that
the facility, improvement, or service will be provided by the end of the planning period.
(c) Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for
automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes.
         (d) Amending the TSP to modify the planned function, capacity or performance standards
of the transportation facility.




                                                                                                    9
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

         (e) Providing other measures as a condition of development or through a development
agreement or similar funding method, including transportation system management measures,
demand management or minor transportation improvements. Local governments shall as part of
the amendment specify when measures or improvements provided pursuant to this subsection
will be provided.
(3) Notwithstanding sections (1) and (2) of this rule, a local government may approve an
amendment that would significantly affect an existing transportation facility without assuring
that the allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity and performance standards
of the facility where:
         (a) The facility is already performing below the minimum acceptable performance
standard identified in the TSP or comprehensive plan on the date the amendment application is
submitted;
         (b) In the absence of the amendment, planned transportation facilities, improvements and
services as set forth in section (4) of this rule would not be adequate to achieve consistency with
the identified function, capacity or performance standard for that facility by the end of the
planning period identified in the adopted TSP;
         (c) Development resulting from the amendment will, at a minimum, mitigate the impacts
of the amendment in a manner that avoids further degradation to the performance of the facility
by the time of the development through one or a combination of transportation improvements or
measures;
         (d) The amendment does not involve property located in an interchange area as defined
in paragraph (4)(d)(C); and
         (e) For affected state highways, ODOT provides a written statement that the proposed
funding and timing for the identified mitigation improvements or measures are, at a minimum,
sufficient to avoid further degradation to the performance of the affected state highway.
However, if a local government provides the appropriate ODOT regional office with written
notice of a proposed amendment in a manner that provides ODOT reasonable opportunity to
submit a written statement into the record of the local government proceeding, and ODOT does
not provide a written statement, then the local government may proceed with applying
subsections (a) through (d) of this section.
(4) Determinations under sections (1)-(3) of this rule shall be coordinated with affected
transportation facility and service providers and other affected local governments.
         (a) In determining whether an amendment has a significant effect on an existing or
planned transportation facility under subsection (1)(c) of this rule, local governments shall rely
on existing transportation facilities and services and on the planned transportation facilities,
improvements and services set forth in subsections (b) and (c) below.
         (b) Outside of interstate interchange areas, the following are considered planned
facilities, improvements and services:
                 (A) Transportation facilities, improvements or services that are funded for
construction or implementation in the Statewide Transportation Improvement Program or a
locally or regionally adopted transportation improvement program or capital improvement plan
or program of a transportation service provider.




                                                                                                 10
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

                 (B) Transportation facilities, improvements or services that are authorized in a
local transportation system plan and for which a funding plan or mechanism is in place or
approved. These include, but are not limited to, transportation facilities, improvements or
services for which: transportation systems development charge revenues are being collected; a
local improvement district or reimbursement district has been established or will be established
prior to development; a development agreement has been adopted; or conditions of approval to
fund the improvement have been adopted.
                 (C) Transportation facilities, improvements or services in a metropolitan
planning organization (MPO) area that are part of the area's federally-approved, financially
constrained regional transportation system plan.
                 (D) Improvements to state highways that are included as planned improvements
in a regional or local transportation system plan or comprehensive plan when ODOT provides a
written statement that the improvements are reasonably likely to be provided by the end of the
planning period.
                 (E) Improvements to regional and local roads, streets or other transportation
facilities or services that are included as planned improvements in a regional or local
transportation system plan or comprehensive plan when the local government(s) or
transportation service provider(s) responsible for the facility, improvement or service provides a
written statement that the facility, improvement or service is reasonably likely to be provided by
the end of the planning period.
         (c) Within interstate interchange areas, the improvements included in (b)(A)-(C) are
considered planned facilities, improvements and services, except where:
                 (A) ODOT provides a written statement that the proposed funding and timing of
mitigation measures are sufficient to avoid a significant adverse impact on the Interstate
Highway system, then local governments may also rely on the improvements identified in
paragraphs (b)(D) and (E) of this section; or
                 (B) There is an adopted interchange area management plan, then local
governments may also rely on the improvements identified in that plan and which are also
identified in paragraphs (b)(D) and (E) of this section.
         (d) As used in this section and section (3):
                 (A) Planned interchange means new interchanges and relocation of existing
interchanges that are authorized in an adopted transportation system plan or comprehensive
plan;
                 (B) Interstate highway means Interstates 5, 82, 84, 105, 205 and 405; and
                 (C) Interstate interchange area means:
                         (i) Property within one-half mile of an existing or planned interchange on
an Interstate Highway as measured from the center point of the interchange; or
                         (ii) The interchange area as defined in the Interchange Area Management
Plan adopted as an amendment to the Oregon Highway Plan.
         (e) For purposes of this section, a written statement provided pursuant to paragraphs
(b)(D), (b)(E) or (c)(A) provided by ODOT, a local government or transportation facility
provider, as appropriate, shall be conclusive in determining whether a transportation facility,
improvement or service is a planned transportation facility, improvement or service. In the
absence of a written statement, a local government can only rely upon planned transportation
facilities, improvements and services identified in paragraphs (b)(A)-(C) to determine whether
there is a significant effect that requires application of the remedies in section (2).



                                                                                                 11
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                 May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

(5) The presence of a transportation facility or improvement shall not be a basis for an exception
to allow residential, commercial, institutional or industrial development on rural lands under
this division or OAR 660-004-0022 and 660-004-0028.
(6) In determining whether proposed land uses would affect or be consistent with planned
transportation facilities as provided in 0060(1) and (2), local governments shall give full credit
for potential reduction in vehicle trips for uses located in mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly centers,
and neighborhoods as provided in (a)-(d) below;
        (a) Absent adopted local standards or detailed information about the vehicle trip
reduction benefits of mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly development, local governments shall
assume that uses located within a mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly center, or neighborhood, will
generate 10% fewer daily and peak hour trips than are specified in available published
estimates, such as those provided by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip
Generation Manual that do not specifically account for the effects of mixed-use, pedestrian-
friendly development. The 10% reduction allowed for by this section shall be available only if
uses which rely solely on auto trips, such as gas stations, car washes, storage facilities, and
motels are prohibited;
        (b) Local governments shall use detailed or local information about the trip reduction
benefits of mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly development where such information is available and
presented to the local government. Local governments may, based on such information, allow
reductions greater than the 10% reduction required in (a);
        (c) Where a local government assumes or estimates lower vehicle trip generation as
provided in (a) or (b) above, it shall assure through conditions of approval, site plans, or
approval standards that subsequent development approvals support the development of a mixed-
use, pedestrian-friendly center or neighborhood and provide for on-site bike and pedestrian
connectivity and access to transit as provided for in 0045(3) and (4). The provision of on-site
bike and pedestrian connectivity and access to transit may be accomplished through application
of acknowledged ordinance provisions which comply with 0045(3) and (4) or through conditions
of approval or findings adopted with the plan amendment that assure compliance with these rule
requirements at the time of development approval; and
        (d) The purpose of this section is to provide an incentive for the designation and
implementation of pedestrian-friendly, mixed-use centers and neighborhoods by lowering the
regulatory barriers to plan amendments which accomplish this type of development. The actual
trip reduction benefits of mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly development will vary from case to case
and may be somewhat higher or lower than presumed pursuant to (a) above. The Commission
concludes that this assumption is warranted given general information about the expected effects
of mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly development and its intent to encourage changes to plans and
development patterns. Nothing in this section is intended to affect the application of provisions in
local plans or ordinances which provide for the calculation or assessment of systems
development charges or in preparing conformity determinations required under the federal
Clean Air Act.




                                                                                                 12
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                               May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

(7) Amendments to acknowledged comprehensive plans and land use regulations which meet all
of the criteria listed in (a)-(c) below shall include an amendment to the comprehensive plan,
transportation system plan the adoption of a local street plan, access management plan, future
street plan or other binding local transportation plan to provide for on-site alignment of streets
or accessways with existing and planned arterial, collector, and local streets surrounding the
site as necessary to implement the requirements in Section 0020(2)(b) and Section 0045(3) of
this division:
        (a) The plan or land use regulation amendment results in designation of two or more
acres of land for commercial use;
        (b) The local government has not adopted a TSP or local street plan which complies with
Section 0020(2)(b) or, in the Portland Metropolitan Area, has not complied with Metro's
requirement for street connectivity as contained in Title 6, Section 3 of the Urban Growth
Management Functional Plan; and
        (c) The proposed amendment would significantly affect a transportation facility as
provided in 0060(1)."

Staff Response:

Section 16.67.060 (Transportation Planning Rule compliance) of the City's LDC addresses the
requirements of this administrative rule. Findings addressing the TPR are located within the
Staff Responses to the City's own LDC section that addresses the TPR, below (see Section 4).
Per those findings, this criterion has been satisfied.

3.      The following Policies from the City of Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan are
        applicable to this request:

Comprehensive Plan Policies

"[...]
Policy 4:      To insure orderly development in the City of Happy Valley through formulation of
               growth management policies and guidelines which will determine that
               development can occur only when adequate levels of services and facilities are or
               will be available.

Policy 5:      To encourage controlled development while maintaining and enhancing the
               physical resources which make Happy Valley a desirable place to live.
[...]




                                                                                                13
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                 May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

Staff Response:

The City of Happy Valley ensures that "orderly and controlled development" occurs through the
continuous and ongoing development of growth management policies and guidelines, primarily
through implementation of the City's Comprehensive Plan Policies and Development Code
regulations. The subject site is located in an "urbanized" area that is adequately served by public
facilities, such as sanitary sewer, water, roadways, etc. Furthermore, the City's LDC requires
that if the subject site contains any environmentally sensitive lands the applicant would need to
submit for an Environmental Review Permit with the City. These criteria have been satisfied.

Policy 42:      To increase the supply of housing to allow for population growth and to provide
                for the housing needs of a variety of citizens of Happy Valley.

Policy 43:       To develop housing in areas in areas that reinforce and facilitate orderly and
                compatible community development.

Policy 44:      To provide a variety of lot sizes, a diversity of housing types including single
                family attached (townhouses) duplexes, senior housing and multiple family and
                range of prices to attract a variety of household sizes and incomes to Happy
                Valley.
[...]
Policy 46:      The City shall provide a range of housing that includes land use districts that
                allow senior housing, assisted living and a range of multi-family housing
                products. This range improves housing choice for the elderly, young
                professionals, single households, families with children, and other household
                types.
[...]

Staff Report:

The proposed amendments, if approved, would apply both the R-7 and CCC plan
designations/zoning districts to the subject site. In combination, these zones allow for a variety
of housing types as permitted uses that would work to serve a diverse population. The permitted
types of residential development allowed in these zones include single-family detached, single-
family attached, multi-family and senior housing. Therefore, this criterion has been satisfied.

Policy 50:      To locate land uses so as to take advantage of existing systems and physical
                features, to minimize development cost and to achieve compatibility and to avoid
                conflicts between adjoining uses.
[...]
Policy 51B:     Low Density Residential Districts (R-10, R-8.5, R-7) ­ These districts provide for
                a variety of single family lot sizes and building types in neighborhood settings.
                They also allow attached housing as part of Planned Unit Developments. They
                provide transition between Low Density Residential Districts and High Density
                Districts.




                                                                                                   14
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                               May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

               These districts are applied throughout the City generally on slopes less than 15%.
               They should be located to promote compatibility and transition from higher to
               lower density within neighborhoods.
[...]
Policy 55B:    Community Commercial Center (CCC). Community Commercial Center is
               intended to provide locations or "nodes" for a range of small businesses and
               services adjacent to residential areas as a convenience to nearby residents. The
               Community Commercial Center district, as applied in East Happy Valley,
               corresponds to the Damascus/Boring Concept Plan's designation of Corner Store
               centers. These mixed use centers in East Happy Valley accommodate small scale
               retail and services that meet the convenience needs of neighborhood residents.
               Mixed use is allowed and encouraged. Access to these centers is provided by
               well-connected local streets and safe bicycle and pedestrian routes. Their design
               is intended to be highly pedestrian-oriented.
[...]

Staff Response:

The R-7 and CCC zoning districts, if applied to the project site, would work to provide the City
with vacant land that can be developed in accordance with the above policies. Many of the
surrounding properties are already provided with Level 1 services, including water and sewer,
and the proposed development will "tie into" and extend Level 1 services to the boundary of the
subject site to facilitate the future development of neighboring properties to the west. Further,
regulations in the proposed zoning districts including maximum building footprints and
residential densities, building height limits, minimum setbacks, and landscaping and screening
requirements will limit impacts of the project site on the surrounding area. Therefore, this
criterion has been satisfied.

Policy 55C.2: Community Commercial Center location and compatibility. New CCC districts
              are limited in size to not more than five acres of contiguous land. Building
              footprint size on any given site is limited to 30,000 sq. ft. per structure.
              Appropriate locations for CCC districts are generally at the intersection of the
              following types of streets as designated in the City's TSP:

               a) Major or minor arterial street and major or minor arterial street
               b) Major or minor arterial street and collector street
               c) Collector street and collector street

Policy 55C.3: Neighborhood Commercial location and compatibility. Neighborhood
              commercial uses within certain residential districts are appropriately located on
              lots at the intersection of the types of streets listed below, as designated in the
              City's Transportation System Plan. There is a corresponding maximum building
              area for each Neighborhood Commercial development:




                                                                                                 15
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                 May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

               a) Major or minor arterial street and collector street: 7,000 square feet per
                  building.
               b) Collector street and collector street: 5,000 square feet per building.
               c) Collector street and local street: 3,000 square feet per building.

Staff Response:

The applicant has proposed to locate the CCC zoned portion of the subject site at the corner of
SE King Road and SE 132nd Avenue, a Minor Arterial and Collector roadway, respectively. The
applicant has indicated on their conceptual development plan (Exhibit 2) that the commercial
space associated with the mixed-use structure will be 7,000 square feet and the building footprint
for this structure will be less than 30,000 square feet, indicating that it is possible for a future
development to meet the above standards. These criteria have been satisfied.

Policy 64:     To develop good transportation routes (vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, etc.)
               between residential areas (and major activity centers both inside and outside the
               City) with street interconnectivity and neighborhood livability issues being the
               paramount consideration.
[...]
Policy 70:     To encourage the development of bike paths and pedestrian walkways throughout
               the city in accordance with OAR and the implementation of the County bikeway
               route through the City.
[...]

Staff Response:

The applicant has provided as part of this submittal a TIA that has proposed mitigating measures
for the increased vehicular trips that the proposed zone change would require the surrounding
street system to absorb. One of these mitigating measures is for the applicant to construct a
pedestrian path along the north side of SE King Road, from the SE King Road/SE 132nd Avenue
intersection to the existing sidewalk located just to the west of SE Regina Court (Condition of
Approval Number 3). This pathway will work to provide a safe route for pedestrians from the
adjacent neighborhoods and schools to the future residential and commercial development within
the subject site. In addition, the comments and proposed conditions from the City's Engineering
Division and DKS (Staff Exhibit A) will provide for further mitigation of the potential vehicular
impacts caused by the subject request. These criteria have been satisfied.

Policy 102:    When, as the coordinator of land use activities and service provision to
               development areas, the City must make determinations regarding fulfillment of
               the Growth Management Policies and Procedures, the City shall consider
               recommendations provided by service providers and other affected agencies,
               including but not limited to the following:




                                                                                                  16
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

               · Clackamas County Service District No. 1 (CCSD#1)
               · Sunrise Water Authority
               · Clackamas Fire District No. 1 (CFD#1)
               · Clackamas County, Department of Transportation and Development (DTD)
               · North Clackamas School District No. 12 (NCSD#12)
               · North Clackamas Parks & Recreation District (NCPRD)
               · Tri-Met
               · City of Portland
               · City of Gresham
               · City of Damascus
               Any determination shall be within the parameters of the providers' or agency's
               own standards, criteria, requirements or plans. The service providers' decision
               shall be treated as a rebuttable presumption as to the ability of that provider to
               provide an acceptable level of service. However, the evidence that can rebut said
               decision must be compelling evidence based upon objective data and the
               agencies' standards-criteria-requirement or plans in order to controvert the
               determination of the service provided.

Staff Response:

Applicable service providers have been contacted and coordinated with by the City of Happy
Valley, and the requirements of these service providers are incorporated within the record. This
criterion has been satisfied.

Policy 103:    No development of any properties shall be permitted which will interfere or
               prevent the extension of any Level 1 facilities or services."

Staff Response:

It is not anticipated that the proposed development will interfere or prevent the extension of any
Level 1 facilities or services. In fact, the applicant's proposal will work to extend public
facilities through the subject site to facilitate the development of neighboring properties to the
west. This criterion has been satisfied.




                                                                                                 17
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                            May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

4.      The following sections from Title 16 of the City's Municipal Code (Land
        Development Code) are applicable to this request:

"CHAPTER 16.22-RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DISTRICTS

16.22.030        Low Density Residential Zones.
A.       Purpose.
         1.      Residential--Ten Thousand (10,000) Square Feet (R-10). This urban residential
district is a means by which the densities are increased to make efficient use of available
facilities and services in an environment of single-family dwellings. Variations in dwelling types
and lot sizes should provide for a necessary flexibility in the City which will prevent typical
appearances created by the traditional subdivision of land. Standards in this district are strictly
urban oriented and are designed to develop and perpetuate urban trends and patterns. The
numerical designation R-10 shall be interpreted to mean that the maximum density shall be one
primary dwelling unit per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area.
         2.      Residential--Eight Thousand Five Hundred (8,500) Square Feet (R-8.5). This
urban residential district responds to the continuing urbanization of the City. Single-family
detached dwellings are encouraged, but multifamily development is allowed in this district, as
part of a PUD, which seeks to maximize the development potential in hillside areas. This district
serves as a buffer between the R-10 and R-7 development districts. The numerical designation of
R-8.5 shall be interpreted to mean that the maximum density shall be one primary dwelling unit
per eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet.
         3.      Residential--Seven Thousand (7,000) Square Feet (R-7). This development
district will allow more urban residential density within the City through the use of small lots
and a variation in dwelling types. Trends which were originated in lower density districts are
continued and strengthened in this district and the patterns of the Comprehensive Plan are
reinforced. Sanitary sewer and water are the most essential of urban services, but all Level I
services and facilities are necessary and required for development at full density. The numerical
designation R-7 shall be interpreted to mean that the maximum density shall be one primary
dwelling unit per seven thousand (7,000) square feet of lot area.
B.       Permitted Uses. Table 16.22.030-1 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the R-10,
R-8.5 and R-7 Districts.

           Table 16.22.030-1 Low Density Residential (R-10, R-8.5 R-7) Permitted Uses

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

Land Use                                                                                 R-10   R-8.5   R-7
Residential
One single-family frame dwelling, modular dwelling unit or manufactured home per lot      P       P        P
Single-family attached dwelling units, duplexes, multiple-family units or manufactured    P       P        P
housing, approved as part of a PUD application pursuant to Section 16.63.130
Two-family attached dwelling units (duplexes) in a subdivision not approved as a PUD      P       P        P
and not to exceed the allowable density of the district1
Multifamily dwellings not approved as a PUD. Density calculation as defined in            X       X        X
Section 16.63.020 may be used where applicable
Accessory dwelling units complying with Section 16.44.050                                 P       P        P
Temporary manufactured home to allow for care of an aged or infirmed relative,            C       C        C




                                                                                                               18
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                                 May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

Land Use                                                                                    R-10     R-8.5     R-7
provided that adequate water, sewage, disposal and fire protection are available, and
that tongue, undercarriage and axles remain intact on the unit. Undercarriage wheels
and supporting base must be covered with a full ground length sign-obscuring skirting
around the entire circumference of the manufactured home.
Residential care home                                                                         P         P         P
Residential care facilities                                                                   C         C         C
Manufactured home parks, subject to the provisions of Section 16.44.040                       P         P         P
Home occupation as defined in Section 16.12.030, per the provisions of Section                P         P         P
16.69.020
Commercial
Commercial daycare facilities                                                                 C         C         C
Special event centers for hosting functions such as weddings, anniversary celebrations,       C         C         C
corporate parties and similar events
Institutional/Utilities
Public utility substations or other function                                                  C         C         C
Church, synagogue, temple or other place of worship                                           C         C         C
Public or private school(s)                                                                   C         C         C
Other
Public or private open spaces, parks and playgrounds, golf courses, tennis courts and         P         P         P
similar outdoor recreational activity areas and recreational buildings, facilities and
grounds, which include fully or partially enclosed structures for the primary or
secondary use
Large scale recreational facilities such as golf courses, aquatic centers, aquariums,         C         C         C
amusement parks and similar uses
Temporary use of a trailer, mobile home, or other building for a use incidental to            C         C         C
construction work provided that:
    The maximum time period is six months, with a maximum extension for another six
    months;
    The trailer, mobile home, or other building is connected to an approved sewage
    disposal system;
    A building permit for a permanent structure has been issued;
    The temporary home or building shall be removed upon completion or
    abandonment of construction; and
    No reasonable alternative, such as the availability of nearby rental housing exists.

Wireless communication facilities, not to include antenna support structures, subject to     C          C          C
the provisions of Section 16.44.020 of this title
Construction of new streets and roads, including the extensions of existing streets and      P          P          P
roads, that are included with the adopted transportation system plan
Any accessory structure which is customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses,        P          P          P
located on the same lot
NOTE:
1
  Location: Duplexes and triplexes must be located on a corner lot or adjacent to the intersection of two streets.
[...]




                                                                                                                       19
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                               May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

CHAPTER 16.23.030-COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS

A. Purpose.

1. Community Commercial Center District (CCC). The Community Commercial Center (CCC)
District is intended to provide locations or "nodes" for a relatively wide range of small
businesses, services and mixed use adjacent to residential areas as a convenience to nearby
residents. The CCC District is to be located and developed in a manner consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan. In order to limit impacts to residential areas, new community commercial
center nodes are intended to be limited in size to not more than five acres of contiguous land.
Building size is also limited to a thirty thousand (30,000) square foot footprint, and measured in
accordance with requirements of Table 16.23.030-2 (Footnote 5). Appropriate locations for
community commercial center nodes are at the intersection of two arterial streets (major and
minor), an arterial street and a collector street, or two collector streets, and within the Happy
Valley Town Center Plan Area.

Table 16.23.030-1 Community Commercial Center and Mixed Commercial Center (CCC, MCC)
                                   Permitted Uses

P=Permitted; C=Conditional Use; X=Prohibited

Land Use                                                                                      CCC          MCC
Residential
Pre-existing dwellings. Preexisting dwellings may be allowed to remodel or expand and shall    P             P
not be subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.72
Medium to high density residential                                                            P1, 2         P1, 3
Senior housing                                                                                 P             P
Skilled nursing facility                                                                       P             P
Congregate housing                                                                             P             P
Home occupations ( per Section 16.69.020)                                                      P             P
Home occupations, subject to a conditional use review (per Section 16.69.020)                  C             C
Commercial--Retail Uses
Art and craft supply stores, studios                                                           P             P
Bakeries                                                                                       P             P
Banks, savings and loan associations, loan companies, ATM (without drive-through)              P4            P4
Banks, savings and loan associations, loan companies, ATM (with drive-through) (per            C             P
Section 16.44.090)
Barber shops, beauty salons                                                                    P            P
Bicycle sales, supplies, repair service                                                        P            P
Book stores                                                                                    P            P
Camera stores                                                                                  P            P
Coffee shops, cafés, sandwich shops and delicatessens                                          P4           P4
Drug stores                                                                                    P4           P4
Dry cleaners and tailors                                                                       P4           P4
Land Use                                                                                      CCC          MCC
Florists                                                                                       P            P
Home furnishing stores                                                                         P            P
Gift stores                                                                                    P            P
Grocery, food, specialty foods, and produce stores                                             P4           P4
Hotels                                                                                         C            P




                                                                                                                    20
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                                May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

Land Use                                                                                             CCC         MCC
Indoor health and recreation facilities, such as racquetball courts, gymnasiums, health and           C           P
exercise spas, swimming pools, and similar uses and associated facilities
Interior decorating shops, sales and service                                                          P           P
Laundromats                                                                                           P           P
Music shops, sales and service                                                                        P           P
Optometry and optical goods, sales and service                                                        P           P
Photo finishing, photography studios                                                                  P           P
Rental stores, without outdoor storage                                                                P           P
Restaurants--full-service                                                                             P           P
Restaurants--drive-through (per Section 16.44.090)                                                    P4          P4
Secondhand stores                                                                                     C           C
Shoe sales and repair stores                                                                          P           P
Sporting goods, sales and service                                                                     P           P
Stationery stores                                                                                     P           P
Taverns, bars and cocktail lounges (a minimum distance of one thousand five hundred                   C           C
(1,500) feet from school uses)
Theaters or assembly halls                                                                            C           C
Vehicular service                                                                                     P           P
Video rental stores                                                                                   C           C
Yogurt and ice cream stores                                                                           P           P
Retail and service commercial uses similar to those above but not listed elsewhere in this            P4          P4
section upon administrative determination by the Planning Official
Commercial--Offices
Professional and administrative offices                                                               P           P
Medical office buildings, clinics and laboratories                                                    P           P
Institutional
Churches, synagogues, temples or places of worship                                                    C           C
Library, post office, community center, etc.                                                          P           P
Public parks, usable open space                                                                       C           C
Public and private schools (includes commercial day care, dancing and music schools)                  C           C
NOTES:
1
  Residential uses on upper floors of mixed use buildings are permitted. In such cases, Notes 2 and 3 below do not
apply.
2
  Freestanding residential uses at densities greater than the minimum SFA density of 10 du/acre and not to exceed
the maximum MUR-M2 density of 34 du/acre (10--34 du/acre) may be permitted in the CCC zone when
nonresidential uses occupy the street side(s) of the parcel. The footprint of such freestanding residential uses
(including associated parking and accessory uses) may not exceed 25% of the CCC zoned area of the parcel or
subject property.
3
  Residential uses at MUR-M2 densities (25--34 du/acre) in conjunction with nonresidential uses are permitted by
this code. The footprint of such freestanding residential uses (including associated parking and accessory uses) may
not exceed 25% of the MCC zoned area of the parcel or subject property.


4
 Drive-through facilities not permitted for these uses, and all other uses, within the CCC zoned areas of the Happy
Valley Town Center Plan Area.
[...]




                                                                                                                   21
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                 May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

Staff Response:

The applicant has proposed a Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map Amendment that, if
approved, would apply R-7 and CCC zoning to the subject site. The applicant's conceptual
development plan indicates the area proposed as R-7 developing as single-family detached
housing and the CCC zoned land developing as a mixed-use commercial/multi-family building.
Given the development standards of the CCC zone, the applicant estimates that the mixed-use
building could consist of 12-16 dwelling units and 7,000 square feet of commercial/retail space.
Although the specific uses of the property have not been finalized at this point, to ensure that the
proposed amendment does not allow for a scenario where the future development of the CCC
zoned lands on the subject site are not compatible with the surrounding neighborhoods (which
consist mostly of residential uses), city staff has recommended a condition of approval (Number
2) as part of this report that will prohibit several uses from occurring on the subject site that
would otherwise be allowed in the CCC zone. These criteria have been satisfied.

CHAPTER 16.41-ACCESS AND CIRCULATION

16.41.030 Vehicular access and circulation.

[...]
A.       Access to Arterial and Collector Streets.
         1.       Location and design of all accesses to and/or from arterials and collectors (as
designated in the transportation system plan) are subject to review and approval by the City
Engineer. Where practical, access from a lower functional order street shall be required.
         2.      Accesses to arterials or collectors shall be located a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) feet from any other access or street intersection. Exceptions may be granted by the
City Engineer. Evaluations of exceptions shall consider posted speed of the street on which
access is proposed, constraints due to lot patterns, and effects on safety and capacity of the
adjacent public street, bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
         3.      No development site that abuts an arterial or collector street shall be allowed
more than one access point to that street (as designated in the transportation system plan) except
as approved by the City Engineer. Evaluations of exceptions shall consider posted speed of street
on which access is proposed, constraints due to lot patterns, and effects on safety and capacity of
the adjacent public street, bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
         4.      When developed property is to be expanded or altered in a manner that
significantly affects on-site parking or circulation, both existing and proposed accesses shall be
reviewed under the standards in subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section. As a part of an
expansion or alteration approval, the City may require relocation and/or reconstruction of
existing accesses not meeting those standards.
         5.      When a partition, subdivision or a planned unit development abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street as defined within the Comprehensive Plan, the City Engineer
or Planning Commission shall require reverse frontage lots, thereby precluding access to the
parkway streets.




                                                                                                  22
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                  May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

Staff Response:

At the time the subject site develops, the City will perform a thorough evaluation of the proposed
access plan against the above criteria. The applicant's conceptual development plan (Exhibit 2)
does indicate the potential future vehicular access points to the subject site, should it develop as a
single-family detached subdivision and a mixed-use building (with multi-family dwellings
located above commercial). The City Engineer and Traffic Engineer have reviewed this
conceptual development plan and deemed the potential access points as feasible and have
recommended Condition of Approval Numbers 3-14. Within these conditions are
recommendations that would require the applicant to address the above requirements prior to the
development of the subject site by constructing left turn lanes into the two entrances envisioned
to subject site from northbound SE 132nd Avenue and eastbound SE King Road (Numbers 12
and 13). The applicant will also be required to install one-half street frontage improvements
along the subject site's frontage with SE King Road and SE 132nd Avenue (Number 7, 10 and
11). Also, Condition of Approval Number 9 addresses the issue of sight distance at the proposed
access points. Per Condition of Approval Numbers 3-14, these criteria have been satisfied.

16.41.040 Pedestrian access and circulation.

To ensure safe, direct and convenient pedestrian circulation, all developments, except single-
family detached housing (i.e., on individual lots), shall provide a continuous pedestrian and/or
multi-use pathway system as shown in the City's TSP, Happy Valley Parks Master Plan, or
North Clackamas Parks District Master Plan. (Pathways only provide for pedestrian circulation;
multi-use pathways accommodate pedestrians and bicycles.) The system of pathways shall be
designed based on the standards in subsections A through E of this section.
A.       Continuous Pathways. The pathway system shall extend throughout the development site,
and connect to all future phases of development, adjacent trails, public parks and open space
areas whenever possible. The developer may also be required to connect or stub pathways(s) to
adjacent streets and private property.
B.       Safe, Direct and Convenient Pathways. Pathways within developments shall provide safe,
reasonably direct and convenient connections between primary building entrances and all
adjacent streets. For purposes of this Code section, the "primary entrance" of commercial,
industrial, mixed use, public and institutional buildings is the main public entrance to the
building. In the case where no public entrance exists, street connections shall be provided to the
main employee entrance. For residential buildings, the "primary entrance" is the front door
(i.e., facing the street). For multifamily buildings in which each unit does not have its own
exterior entrance, the "primary entrance" may be a lobby, courtyard or breezeway that serves
as a common entrance for more than one dwelling. A determination of whether or not a bicycle
or pedestrian route is safe, direct, and convenient will be based on the following criteria:
         1.      Planned bicycle and pedestrian routes do not deviate unnecessarily from a
straight line and will not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for likely users.
         2.      Bicycle and pedestrian routes are reasonably free from hazards and provide safe
access to destinations.




                                                                                                   23
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                   May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

C.      Connection within Development. For all developments subject to site design review,
pathways shall connect to all building entrances to one another. In addition, pathways shall
connect all parking areas, storage areas, recreational facilities and common areas (as
applicable), and adjacent developments to the site, as applicable.
D.      Connections to Transit.
        1.      New retail, office and institutional buildings at or near major transit stops shall
provide for convenient pedestrian access to transit through the use of the continuous pathway
system outlined in subsections A and B above.
        2.      In addition to other requirements in this section, sites that are located at a major
transit stop shall provide the following:
                a.      Either locate buildings within twenty (20) feet of the transit stop, a transit
street or an intersection street, or provide a pedestrian plaza at the transit stop or a street
intersection;
                b.      A reasonably direct pedestrian connection between the transit stop and
building entrances on the site;
                c.      A transit passenger landing pad accessible to disabled persons;
                d.      Lighting at the transit stop.
E.      Design and Construction. Pathways shall be designed and built in accordance with City
public works standards.

Staff Response:

Staff has recommended a condition of approval (Number 3) requiring the applicant to construct
an asphaltic pedestrian path along the north side of SE King Road from the current terminus of
the existing sidewalk, located approximately 175 feet west of SE Regina Court, to the SE 132nd
Avenue/SE King Road intersection, a distance of 1,240 feet. Currently this "stretch" of SE King
Road has no sidewalks and the pathway would serve as a much needed connection from Happy
Valley Middle/Elementary School to adjacent neighborhoods to the west. The need for further
pedestrian connections will be evaluated at the time of land use review for the specific uses of
the subject site. Transit service is not provided to the subject property. Per Condition of
Approval Number 3, these criteria have been satisfied.

CHAPTER 16.61-TYPES OF REVIEW PROCEDURES

16.61.040 Type III procedure (quasi-judicial).
[...]
D.      Notice of Hearing.
        1.      Mailed Notice. The City shall mail the notice of the Type III action. The records
of the Clackamas County Assessor's Office are the official records for determining ownership.
Notice of a Type III application hearing or Type II appeal hearing shall be given by the Planning
Official or designee in the following manner:
                a.     At least twenty-one (21) days before the hearing date, notice shall be
mailed to:
                       i.    The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the
property that is the subject of the application;




                                                                                                     24
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                 May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

                       ii.   All property owners of record within three hundred (300) feet of the
site;
                         iii. Clackamas County, Clackamas Fire District No. 1 or its successor in
interest, Sunrise Water Authority or its successor in interest, school districts, public or private
utility districts or agencies and any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an
intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City. The City may notify other affected
agencies. The City shall notify the road authority, and rail authority and owner, when there is a
proposed development abutting or affecting their transportation facility and allow the agency to
review, comment on, and suggest conditions of approval for the application;
                         iv. Owners of airports in the vicinity shall be notified of a proposed zone
change in accordance with ORS 227.175;
                         v. Any neighborhood or community organization recognized by the City
Council and whose boundaries include the property proposed for development;
                         vi. Any person who submits a written request to receive notice;
                         vii. For appeals, the appellant and all persons who provided testimony in
the original decision;
                         viii. For a land use district change affecting a manufactured home or
mobile home park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175; and
                         ix. For expedited annexations, all interested and necessary parties, as
defined by Metro Code Section 3.09.020, shall be notified by mail.
                  b.     The Planning Official or designee shall have an affidavit of notice be
prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall state the date that the notice was mailed
to the persons who must receive notice.
                  c.     At least fourteen (14) business days before the hearing, notice of the
hearing shall be printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The newspaper's
affidavit of publication of the notice shall be made part of the administrative record.
         2.       Posted Notice. In addition to any other notice, the applicant shall post the
property subject to the application with at least one sign for every three hundred (300) feet of
frontage. The sign shall be purchased from the City. Such sign shall remain continuously posted
from at least fourteen (14) days prior to the end of the public written comment period or public
hearing date, A notarized statement of posting shall be submitted to the City Recorder prior to
the public hearing. Failure to post the sign may result in invalidating the final decision.
         3.       Content of Notice. Notice of appeal of a Type II administrative decision or notice
of a Type III hearing to be mailed and published pursuant to subsection (D)(1) above shall
contain the following information:
[...]

Staff Response:

The process and notices described within this section have been followed by the City. The
application was deemed complete on March 26, 2013. 35-Day Notice was sent to the
Department of Land Conservation and Development on April 9, 2013, public notice was also
sent on April 9, 2012, and newspaper notice was published on April 24, 2013. Also, the
applicant posted public notice signs on the subject site on April 12, 2013. A public hearing was
scheduled before the Planning Commission on May 14, 2013. Therefore, these criteria have
been satisfied.



                                                                                                  25
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                               May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)



F.      The Decision Process.
        1.      Basis for Decision. Approval or denial of an appeal of a Type II administrative
decision or of a Type III application shall be based on standards and criteria in this
Development Code. The standards and criteria shall relate approval or denial of a discretionary
development permit application to the development regulations and, when appropriate, to the
Comprehensive Plan for the area in which the development would occur and to the development
regulations and Comprehensive Plan for the City as a whole;
        2.      Findings and Conclusions. Approval or denial shall be based upon the criteria
and standards considered relevant to the decision. The written decision shall explain the relevant
criteria and standards, state the facts relied upon in rendering the decision, and justify the
decision according to the criteria, standards, and facts;
[...]

Staff Response:

This application is being processed through the City's Type "III" quasi-judicial review
procedure. The standards and criteria that have been used to evaluate the proposed application
are found within the Statewide Planning Goals, OAR, Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan, and
LDC. The findings of the City's evaluation of the applicant's proposal are provided within this
report. These criteria have been satisfied.

CHAPTER 16.67- COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP, SPECIFIC AREA PLANS, LAND USE
DISTRICT MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS

[...]
16.67.030 Quasi-judicial amendments.

A.      Applicability of Quasi-Judicial Amendments. Quasi-judicial amendments are those that
involve the application of adopted policy to a specific development application or Code revision,
and not the adoption of new policy (i.e., through legislative decisions). Quasi-judicial
Comprehensive Plan map/district map amendments shall follow the Type III procedure, as
governed by Section 16.61.040, using standards of approval in Section 16.67.030(C). The
approval authority shall be as follows:
        1.       The Planning Commission shall be the review authority for Comprehensive Plan
map/land use district map amendments paired with master plans under twenty (20) acres in size.
        2.       The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council on
an application for all other Comprehensive Plan map/land use district plan map amendments.
The City Council shall decide such applications.
        3.       The City Council shall be the review authority for annexations that involve the
legislative conversion of existing Clackamas County Comprehensive Plan designations/zoning
districts to City Comprehensive Plan designation/zoning districts, per the provisions of Section
16.67.070.




                                                                                                  26
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                  May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

Staff Response:

The applicant's proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map Amendment pertains to a single
property that has an area that is less than 20 acres. As a result, the proposed amendment is being
processed utilizing the City's Type "III" quasi-judicial procedure per the applicable requirements
of Section 16.61.050 (see finding, above), which involves a hearing before the Planning
Commission. This criterion has been satisfied.

B.       Filing requirements.
         1.      In order to have a complete application for any proposed text amendment, the
applicant shall submit the necessary application forms, and a narrative addressing applicable
Comprehensive Plan objectives and policies, as well as the review criteria within Section
16.40.041.
         2.      In order to have a complete application for a proposed Comprehensive Plan
map/zoning map or specific area map amendment, the applicant shall submit:
                 a.     The necessary application forms, and a narrative addressing applicable
Comprehensive Plan goals and policies, as well as the review criteria within Section 16.61.040;
                 b.     A conceptual development plan illustrating a proposed street system, lot
pattern, neighborhood circulation plan within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the subject site,
and any natural resource or steep slopes areas;
                 c.     A traffic study prepared by a professional, Oregon-licensed traffic
engineer. If a master plan that requires a full traffic impact analysis is required for a
Comprehensive Plan map amendment/land use district map, a subsequent master plan may
satisfy this provision, as determined by the Planning Official.

Staff Response:

The Comprehensive Plan/Zoning Map Amendment application that was submitted by the
applicant was reviewed and determined to contain the above items. City staff sent a notice to the
applicant that their application was complete on March 26, 2013. These criteria have been
satisfied.

C.       Criteria for Quasi-Judicial Amendments. A recommendation or a decision to approve,
approve with conditions or to deny an application for a quasi-judicial amendment shall be based
on all of the following criteria:
         1.      Approval of the request is consistent with the Statewide Planning Goals;
         2.      Approval of the request is consistent with the applicable goals and policies of the
City's Comprehensive Plan;
         3.      The property and affected area is presently provided with adequate public
facilities, services and transportation networks to support the use, or such facilities, services and
transportation networks are planned to be provided in the planning period; and




                                                                                                   27
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                  May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

Staff Response:

As demonstrated within the findings of this report, the proposed amendments are consistent with
the Statewide Planning Goals and the City's Comprehensive Plan. Also, the subject site is
located in an area that is adequately served by all public utilities. The applicant will be required
to contribute to the improvement of the adjacent transportation network to ensure that it will
have adequate capacity to support the uses allowed in the proposed zones (see below finding for
Section 16.67060.A). These criteria have been satisfied.

       4.      The change is in the public interest with regard to neighborhood or community
conditions, or corrects a mistake or inconsistency in the Comprehensive Plan or land use district
map regarding the property which is the subject of the application; and

Staff Response:

The proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map Amendment serves the public interest from
the perspective of providing a variety of housing and commercial options and providing
necessary transportation infrastructure improvements to improve the vehicular, bicycle and
pedestrian system along the frontages of the subject property as well as off-site improvements.
This intensification of land uses is proposed adjacent to a Minor Arterial (SE King Road) and
Collector (SE 132nd Avenue), which serves City objectives regarding efficient use of land and
public facilities, while limiting the extent of the intensification (Condition of Approval Number
2), so that future development will be compatible with surrounding residential uses. This
criterion has been satisfied.

         5.     When an application includes a proposed Comprehensive Plan map
amendment/land use district map amendment, the proposal shall be reviewed to determine
whether it conforms to Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-0060 (the Transportation
Planning Rule ­ TPR). If a master plan that requires a full traffic impact analysis is required for
a Comprehensive Plan map amendment/land use district map, a subsequent master plan may
satisfy this provision, as determined by the Planning Official.

Staff Response:

Section 16.67.060 of the City's LDC requires compliance with the TPR, which is addressed
within the findings of this report (see below finding). Therefore, this criterion has been satisfied.

16.67.040 Conditions of approval for quasi-judicial amendments.
A quasi-judicial decision may be for denial, approval, or approval with conditions; conditions
shall be based on applicable regulations and factual evidence in the record. Legislative
amendments may only be approved or denied.
[...]




                                                                                                   28
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                  May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

Staff Response:

City staff has included within this report what it has deemed an appropriate list of conditions of
approval for the subject application. This criterion has been satisfied.

16.67.060 Transportation planning rule compliance.
A.       Review of Applications for Effect on Transportation Facilities. When a development
application includes a proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment or land use district change,
the proposal shall be reviewed to determine whether it significantly affects a transportation
facility, in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-0060 (the
Transportation Planning Rule ­ TPR) and the traffic impact study provisions of Section
16.61.090. "Significant" means the proposal would:
         1.      Change the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation
facility (exclusive of correction of map errors). This would occur, for example, when a proposal
causes future traffic to exceed the levels associated with a "collector" street classification,
requiring a change in the classification to an "arterial" street, as identified by the City's
Transportation System Plan ("TSP"); or
         2.      Change the standards implementing a functional classification system; or
         3.      As measured at the end of the planning period identified in the TSP, allow types
or levels of land use that would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the
functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; or
         4.      Reduce the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility below
the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the TSP; or
         5.      Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is
otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified
in the TSP.

Staff Response:

It is required that a TIA submitted as part of an application for a Comprehensive Plan
Map/Zoning Map amendment provide an analysis that addresses Oregon Administrative Rule
(OAR) 660-012-0060, commonly referred to as the TPR. Within this analysis, an applicant is
required to determine if a proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map amendment would
"significantly" impact an existing transportation facility, and if so, propose mitigating measures.
As indicated in the applicant's TIA, the proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map
Amendment would result in an estimated 340 more a.m. and 268 more p.m. weekday peak hour
trips than under the current zoning. When evaluating the applicant's proposal against the TPR, it
was determined that the traffic impact from the proposed amendments would be considered
"significant" (as defined in the above section). This is due to the increased number of trips
produced by the proposed amendment deteriorating the performance of an existing transportation
facility (SE 129th and SE King Road intersection) that is otherwise projected to perform below
the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the City's TSP. As a result, the
applicant's Traffic Engineer has proposed two mitigating measures to ensure compliance with
the TPR.




                                                                                                   29
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                                  May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

   1. Make a payment to the City in an amount equaling 26 percent (the applicant's
      proportionate share) of the cost of improving the SE 129th Avenue/SE King Road
      intersection with a traffic signal or roundabout (Condition of Approval Number 4). The
      determination as to what the applicant's proportionate share would be for these
      improvements was based on the net increase in the number of trips that would result from
      the proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map Amendment (the reasonable worst
      case scenario described in the narrative of this report); and

   2. Construct an asphaltic pedestrian pathway along the north side of SE King Road from the
      current terminus of the existing sidewalk, located approximately 175 feet west of SE
      Regina Court, to the SE 132nd Avenue/SE King Road intersection, a distance of 1,240
      feet.

The City's Traffic Engineer (DKS Associates) has reviewed and concurred with the applicant's
findings and proposed mitigation methods as outlined within the TIA. However, the City's
Traffic Engineer did have one additional requirement of the applicant, that they install a
westbound left turn lane at the SE King Road/SE 129th Avenue intersection. This left turn lane
shall be provided as an interim improvement until the long term improvements (traffic signal or
roundabout) can be constructed. The City's Traffic Engineer is recommending that the left turn
lane provide 100 feet of storage and appropriate taper length. These criteria have been satisfied.

B.      Amendments That Affect Transportation Facilities. Except as provided in subsection C,
amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and land use regulations which significantly affect a
transportation facility shall assure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function,
capacity, and level of service of the facility (identified in the TSP). This shall be accomplished by
one of the following:
        1.      Adopting measures that demonstrate that allowed land uses are consistent with
the planned function of the transportation facility; or
        2.      Amending the TSP to provide transportation facilities, improvements, or services
adequate to support the proposed land uses; such amendments shall include a funding plan to
ensure the facility, improvement, or service will be provided by the end of the planning period;
or
        3.      Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce
demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation; or
        4.      Amending the planned function, capacity or performance standards of the
transportation facility; or
        5.      Providing other measures as a condition of development or through a
development agreement or similar funding method, specifying when such measures will be
provided.
C.      Exceptions. Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan or land use regulations with a
significant effect on a transportation facility, where the facility is already performing below the
minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the TSP, may be approved when all of
the following criteria are met:
        1.      The amendment does not include property located in an interchange area, as
defined under applicable law;




                                                                                                   30
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                              May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

         2.      The currently planned facilities, improvements or services are not adequate to
achieve the standard;
         3.      Development resulting from the amendment will, at a minimum, mitigates the
impacts of the amendment in a manner that avoids further degradation to the performance of the
facility by the time of the development; and
         4.      The road authority provides a written statement that the proposed funding and
timing for the proposed development mitigation are sufficient to avoid further degradation to the
facility."

Staff Response:

As discussed in the previous finding, the proposed Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map
Amendment will produce a significant affect the surrounding transportation facilities. Therefore,
the applicant's Traffic Engineer has proposed two mitigating measures, which have been
reviewed and determined to be acceptable by the City. These criteria have been satisfied.

III.   CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION:

Staff has determined that the above findings demonstrate that the proposed Comprehensive Plan
Map/Zoning Map Amendment satisfies the requirements of the Statewide Planning Goals, OAR,
City of Happy Valley Comprehensive Plan and LDC. Staff, therefore, recommends the Planning
Commission approve application CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13, subject to the proposed conditions of
approval.

                  Conditions of Approval for CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13

Administration

1. The City shall amend the Comprehensive Plan Map/Zoning Map for the subject site to reflect
   a combination of R-7 and CCC designation/zoning.

2. In conjunction with any future Design Review land use application, the developer shall
   submit future CC&R's restricting future uses of the CCC zoned land to not include
   businesses whose primary revenue source is from the sales of tobacco, pornography/nudity,
   or alcohol ("stand alone" bars and cocktail lounges), or are solely a gambling establishment.

Happy Valley Engineering Division

3. The applicant shall construct an asphaltic path along the north side of SE King Road from the
   terminus of the existing sidewalk located approximately 175 west of SE Regina Court to the
   intersection of SE King Road and SE 132nd Avenue.

4. Street design plans shall conform to the requirements of the City's "Engineering Design and
   Standard Details Manual" (Manual) current revision, and the City's Transportation System
   Plan (TSP), current revision. The referenced documents are available on the City's website.




                                                                                               31
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                               May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

5. All required public improvements shall be constructed, inspected, and accepted prior to final
   plat approval.

6. A separate westbound left turn lane shall be constructed at the SE King Road/SE 129th
   Avenue/SE Mount Scott Boulevard intersection. These improvements shall be constructed
   before final building permits are issued for the subject parcel. The westbound left turn lane
   shall be provided as an interim improvement until the long term improvements (traffic signal
   or roundabout) can be constructed. The left turn lane shall provide 100 feet of storage and
   appropriate taper length.

7. Frontage improvements on SE 132nd Avenue and SE King Road shall be conditioned
   through future land use applications. The improvements shall conform to the typical street
   sections found in the City's Transportation System Plan and the City's "Engineering Design
   and Standard Details Manual" for a collector street (SE 132nd Avenue) and a minor arterial
   (SE King Road).

Traffic Engineering

8. The site plan shall designate the internal roadways such that they meet the standards of the
   Happy Valley Transportation System Plan.

9. Minimum AASHTO sight distance requirements shall be met at all site intersections and
   driveways. AASHTO requires sight distance to be measured at a point 14.4 feet from the
   edge of the traveled way with a driver's eye height of 3.5 feet and an object height of 3.5
   feet. The proposed site driveways shall provide a minimum of 330 feet of intersection sight
   distance based on an assumed driver speed of 30 mile per hour. These shall be approved by
   the engineer prior to final site plan approval.

10. Frontage (one-half street) improvements shall be constructed on King Road along the
    property border which meet City of Happy Valley standards for a 3-lane minor arterial
    roadway. The improvements shall meet those shown in Figure 8-4 of the Happy Valley
    Transportation Plan. The one-half street improvements shall include pavement, curb,
    gutter, landscape strip, and sidewalk.

11. Frontage (one-half street) improvements shall be constructed on 132nd Avenue along the
    property border which meet City of Happy Valley standards for a 3-lane collector
    roadway. The improvements shall meet those shown in Figure 8-5A of the Happy Valley
    Transportation Plan. The one-half street improvements shall include pavement, curb,
    gutter, landscape strip, and sidewalk.

12. A northbound left turn lane shall be provided on 132nd Avenue at the project roadway. The
    left turn lane shall provide 100 feet of storage and appropriate taper length.

13. An eastbound left turn lane shall be provided on King Road at the project roadway. The left
    turn lane shall provide 100 feet of storage and appropriate taper length.




                                                                                                  32
Staff Report to the Planning Commission                                         May 14, 2013
SE 132nd Avenue and King Road Zone Change (CPA-04-13/LDC-04-13)

14. The development shall contribute 26 percent of the estimated cost for the long term
    improvements at the SE 129th Avenue/SE King Road intersection based on the proposed
    project share of future trips at the intersection.




                                                                                          33
Exhibit 1
Exhibit 2
 

 
 
MEMORANDUM  
 

Date:                  March 1, 2013                                                                            Project #: 13162


To:                    Andrew Tull 
                       3J Consulting, Inc. 
                       10445 SW Canyon Road, Suite 245
                       Beaverton, OR 97005 

From:                  Dan Seeman, Jesse Boudart and Chris Brehmer
Project:               King Road Mixeduse Development 
Subject:               Happy Valley Transportation Impact Study
 

The purpose of this report is to address the transportationrelated issues associated with the proposed 
development  to  be  located  on  the  northwest  corner  of  SE  King  Road/SE  132nd  Street  in  Happy  Valley, 
Oregon.  This  report  documents  the  analysis,  findings,  conclusions  and  recommendations  for  a  traffic 
impact  study  for  the  mixeduse  development.  The  traffic  analysis  documented  in  this  memorandum 
addresses  the  requirements  prescribed  in  the  City  of  Happy  Valley  Traffic  Impact  Study  guidelines  and 
discussions with City staff in the preapplication conference. 

The proposed development would be constructed on an approximate 4.28acre parcel at the northwest 
quadrant  of  SE  King  Road/SE  132nd  Avenue.  The  development  would  include  the  construction  of  up  to 
17  singlefamily  homes  and  a  mixeduse  building  consisting  of  16  apartments  and  7,000  square  feet  of 
commercial  retail  uses.  In  conjunction  with  the  development,  approximately  0.80  acres  of  the  4.28 
acres  are  proposed  to  be  rezoned  from  the  existing  R20  residential  designation  to  CCC  Community 
Commercial.  The  development  would  have  fullmovement  vehicular  accesses  on  SE  King  Road  and  SE 
132nd  Avenue.  A  zone  change  and  comprehensive  plan  map  amendment  are  needed  for  the  retail 
portion of the development.  

The site vicinity map is shown in Figure 1. The proposed site plan is provided in Figure 21. Construction 
of this development is expected to begin in 2014 with completion and full occupancy in 2015. 


                                                         
1
   The  site  plan  shows  15  singlefamily  homes  and  a  6,953  square  foot  multiuse  building.  For  purposes  of  assessing  a 
"reasonable  worst  case"  development  scenario  on  the  property,  this  analysis  assumes  17  singlefamily  homes,  16 
multifamily  units  (in  the  upper  floors  of  the  multiuse  building,  and  7,000  square  feet  of  commercial  retail  use  in  the 
ground  floor  of  the  multiuse  building  with  a  5,500  square  foot  convenience  market  and  a  1,500  square  foot 
coffee/donut shop. 

FILENAME: H:\PROJFILE\13162 - KING ROAD MIXED USE REDEVELOPMENT\REPORT\FINAL\13162_HAPPY VALLEY TIA
030713DOCX.DOCX

                                                                                                                             Exhibit 3
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                                   Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                               Page 4



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Based on the results of the analysis presented herein:

                 The study intersections currently operate acceptably.
                 The study intersections will continue to operate acceptably in the 2015 future with the
                 proposed development during a.m. and p.m. peak hours. Left-turn lanes are needed at the
                 SE King Road site driveway but not the SE 132nd Avenue site driveway to accommodate
                 2015 project total traffic volumes.
                 Regardless of the proposed rezone, a traffic signal with a westbound left-turn lane or a
                 roundabout will be needed at SE 129th Avenue/SE King Road intersection to operate
                 acceptably under 2028 traffic conditions.
                 To satisfy 2028 total traffic conditions with the proposed development, left-turn lanes will
                 be needed on SE King Road and SE 132nd Avenue at the site driveways.
                 No safety improvements were recommended at the study intersections based on a review
                 of available historic crash data.
                 With recommended mitigations, the proposed development complies with the
                 Transportation Planning Rule (TPR), OAR 660-012-0060.


MEMORANDUM SCOPE
The memorandum contents are organized as follows:

                 Existing conditions;
                 Traffic operations under existing and future background conditions;
                 Trip generation estimate for the proposed development;
                 Traffic operations with site development;
                 Site access operations;
                 Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) analysis;
                 Pedestrian and bicycle connectivity; and
                 Conclusions and recommendations.


In order to address the state and local requirements associated with this project, this report analyzes
the proposed zone amendment for compliance with the TPR, OAR 660-012-0060, as presented in the
TPR analysis section.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                     Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                                                                              Project #: 13162
March 7, 2013                                                                                                                                          Page 5



EXISTING CONDITIONS
The existing conditions analysis provides an overview of current transportation facilities in the study
area, including an assessment of historical crash patterns at the study intersections.


Existing Facilities
The existing transportation facilities in the study area were observed and are presented in Table 1.
Figure 3 shows the existing roadway configuration and traffic control devices at the study intersections.

Table 1: Existing Transportation Facilities and Roadway Designations

                                     Cross            Roadway          Roadway             Posted                                Bicycle        On-Street
            Roadway                 Section         Classification1     Widths             Speed       Sidewalks?                Lanes?         Parking?
                                                        Minor
 SE King Road                       2 lanes                            32-45 Feet          35 mph           Partial                No              No
                                                       Arterial1
                                                        Minor
 SE 129th Avenue                    2 lanes2                           32-45 Feet          35 mph           Partial               Yes              No
                                                       Arterial1
 SE 132nd Avenue                    2 lanes           Collector1       35-45 Feet          35 mph           Partial                No              No
1
    As defined in the 2006 Happy Valley Transportation System Plan


There are some existing sidewalks along the study roadways but they are generally not continuous in
the site vicinity. SE King Road and 132nd Avenue have 1 to 2-foot wide shoulders with no striped bicycle
facilities. There are no transit routes in the close vicinity of the proposed development. The closest
transit route is TriMet Route 155: Estacada and the closest transit stop is located approximately one
mile away on SE Sunnyside Road.


Crash Data Review
The crash histories of the study intersections were reviewed in an effort to identify intersection safety
issues. The Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) provided crash records for the study
intersections for the most recent five-year period, from January 1, 2007, through December 31, 2011.
Table 2 summarizes the crash data at the intersections. The crash data obtained from ODOT is included
in Appendix A.

Table 2: Year 2007-2011 Crash Data for the Study Intersections

                                               Crash Severity                 Crash Type                                Crash Calculations

                                                        Property                                    Crashes            Peak Hour            Crashes per
                             Total         Injury       Damage                               Rear     per             Total Entering       Million Entering
        Roadway             Crashes       Crashes         Only        Angle    Turning       End     Year               Vehicles              Vehicles1
     SE King Road/SE
      129th Avenue              2              1            1          0            1         1       0.4                 1,058                  0.10
     SE King Road/SE
      132nd Avenue              8              4            4          3            3         2       1.6                  870                   0.50

       1.     Crashes per Million Entering Vehicles = Crashes per year / (Peak Hour Total Entering Vehicles * 10 *365 days) * 1,000,000

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                                                 Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                                Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                            Page 7


As shown in Table 1, during the five-year period examined there were a total of ten reported crashes,
two of which occurred at SE King Road/SE 129th Avenue and eight of which were at SE King Road/SE
132nd Avenue. No safety-based mitigation needs were identified based on the crash rate (reported
crashes per million entering vehicles) and crash type review.


Current Levels of Service
All level-of-service analyses described in this report were performed in accordance with the procedures
stated in the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual (Reference 1). A description of level of service and the
criteria by which it is determined is presented in Appendix "B". Appendix "B" also indicates how level of
service is measured and what is generally considered as acceptable range.

The City of Happy Valley Transportation Impact Study (TIS) guidelines identify the minimum operational
standard for all signalized and unsignalized intersections as Level-of-service (LOS) D and E, respectively.

All level-of-service analyses used the peak 15-minute flow rate that occurred during the weekday a.m.
and p.m. peak hours. Using the peak 15-minute flow rate ensures that the analyses are based on a
reasonable worst-case scenario. For this reason, the analyses reflect conditions that are only likely to
occur for 15 minutes out of each average peak hour. The transportation system will likely operate
under conditions better than those described in this report during all other time periods.


TRAFFIC OPERATIONS
In order to assess the impact of the proposed development on vehicle traffic operations in the site
vicinity, traffic operations were assessed for existing 2013 conditions, future background traffic
conditions in 2015 with and without the site development with the proposed zone change, and future
2028 conditions with and without site development and with and without the proposed zone change.
Traffic operations were assessed at SE King Road/SE 129th Avenue, SE King Road/SE 132ndAvenue, and
two new development accesses assuming construction of the site, as presented in the Total Traffic
Conditions sections of this report.


Traffic Volumes and Peak Hour Operations
Manual turning-movement counts were conducted at the study intersections in January 2013. All
counts were conducted on a typical mid-week day during the morning (7:00 to 9:00 a.m.) and evening
(4:00 to 6:00 p.m.) peak time periods. The morning and evening peak hours were found to occur
between 7:25 and 8:25 a.m. and 5:00 and 6:00 p.m., respectively.

Appendix C contains the traffic count worksheets used in this study. Appendix D contains signal warrant
analysis worksheets.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                   Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                              Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                          Page 8


Existing Traffic Operations
Figure 4 summarizes the existing traffic conditions analysis for the weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hours.
As shown, both of the study intersections currently operate acceptably. A signal warrant analysis was
performed for existing conditions at the two study intersections for future comparison purposes. The
review found that four-hour and peak hour warrants were met at SE King Road/SE 129th Avenue;
however, the intersection operates acceptably today without signalization. No signal warrants were
met for SE King Road/SE 132nd Avenue intersection under current conditions.

Appendix E includes the existing traffic conditions analysis worksheets. Appendix D contains signal
warrant analysis worksheets.


2015 Background Traffic Conditions (without development on the site)
The 2015 background traffic conditions include roadway improvements, in-process developments, and
traffic growth due to other developments in Happy Valley. City of Happy Valley staff determined there
were no roadway improvements or in-process developments pending in the site vicinity.

Traffic is expected to grow in the area and growth projections were calculated using Metro's regional
travel demand model. Using the 2010 and 2035 model traffic projections and through discussion with
City of Happy Valley staff, an annual growth rate of 2% per year was assumed. Figure 5 shows the 2015
background traffic conditions operation results under existing lane configurations and traffic controls.
Both intersections were found to continue to operate acceptably in 2015. Appendix E contains 2015
background traffic operation worksheets. Appendix D contains signal warrant analysis worksheets.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                                        Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                                   Page 11


2028 Current Zoning Traffic Conditions
Similar to the development of 2015 background conditions, the 2028 "current zoning" traffic conditions
include roadway improvements, in-process developments, and traffic growth due to general
development in Happy Valley and the region. City of Happy Valley staff reported there are no in-
process developments currently planned in the site vicinity. As in the 2015 analysis, a 2% annual
growth rate was applied to estimate 2028 Current Zoning traffic volumes. It was assumed in this
analysis that in year 2028 the site would be developed in conformance with its current zoning, with up
to 7 single-family residential dwellings2. Figure 6 shows the site-generated trips under the current
zoning scenario, and their assignment to the adjacent intersections.

Figure 7 shows 2028 Current Zoning traffic operations at the two study area intersections under a
scenario maintaining existing lane configurations and traffic controls. As shown in Figure 7, the SE King
Road/SE 129th Avenue intersection would operate at level-of-service of F during the a.m. peak hour,
which does not meet City of Happy Valley unsignalized intersection requirements. To meet intersection
operation requirements, this intersection would require mitigation. The City of Happy Valley
Transportation System Plan (TSP) identifies the need for a traffic signal at SE King Road/SE 129th
Avenue; therefore, this transportation improvement was assumed in a "mitigated" scenario for future
traffic operations. The TSP also identifies a traffic signal at SE King Road/SE 132nd Avenue; however, this
traffic analysis reveals that a traffic signal would not be warranted given future traffic volumes, and no
other improvement would be required.

Figure 8 shows the needed transportation improvements to satisfy projected traffic under the 2028
Current Zoning scenario, and Figure 9 shows the resulting traffic operations for the 2028 Current
Zoning scenario with mitigations. As shown in Figure 9, all intersections would operate acceptably with
the assumed mitigations in place. Required mitigations at SE King/129th include a traffic signal with
westbound left-turn lane or a roundabout.

Appendix F contains 2015 and 2028 current zoning traffic operation worksheets. Appendix D contains
signal warrant analysis worksheets.




2
 Seven (7) single-family dwellings are estimated to generate 5 a.m. peak hour trips (1 in and 4 out) and 7 p.m. peak
hour trips (5 in and 2 out).
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                           Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                                                                         Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                                                                    Page 16


Proposed Site Development
The site development is proposed to include 17 single-family homes and a mixed-use building
consisting of up to 16 apartments and 7,000 square feet of commercial retail uses. For purposes of this
analysis, it is assumed that a reasonable worst-case commercial retail component of the development
could include a 5,500 gross square foot convenience market (15-16 hours of operation) and a 1,500
gross square foot coffee/donut shop (without a drive-through window). The actual building tenant(s)
have not been identified, thus the actual future commercial retail uses may generate equal to or fewer
trips than assumed in this study.


Trip Generation
Trips generated by the proposed development were estimated using the standard reference Trip
Generation: 9th Edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (2012) (Reference 2).
Table 3 summarizes the estimated site trip generation during a typical weekday a.m. and p.m. peak
hours. All peak hour estimates have been rounded to the nearest five trips and daily trip estimates
were rounded to the nearest 10.

Table 3: Estimated Happy Valley Development Trip Generation

                                                                                                   Weekday AM                Weekday PM
                                                             Weekday                              Peak Hour Trips           Peak Hour Trips
                                          ITE                 Daily
                 Land Use                Code      Units      Trips           Trip Type        Total     In      Out     Total      In       Out

      Single Family Residential           210       17          160             Total           15        5      10       15        10        5
      Apartment                           220       16          110             Total           10        5         5     10        5         5
      Convenience Market                           5,500
                                          852                  2,6501           Total          170       85      85       190       95        95
      (15-16 open hours)                            GSF
          Pass-by (50%)                                        (1325)                          (80)     (40)     (40)     (90)     (45)      (45)
                                                                1325           Net new          90       45      45       100       50        50
      Coffee/Donut Shop Without                    1,500
                                          936                  1,2802           Total          160       80      80       60        30        30
      Drive-Through Window                          GSF
          Pass-by (50%)                                         (640)                          (80)     (40)     (40)     (30)     (15)      (15)
      Net New                                                   640           Net New           80       40      40       30        15        15
                    Total of Proposed Uses                     4,200            Total          355      175      180      275      140       135
                                                                 Total Retail Pass-by Trips    160       80      80       120       60        60
                                                           Total Residential Net New Trips      25       10      15       25        15        10
                                                                Total Retail Net New Trips     170       85      85       130       65        65
                                                Total Residential and Retail Net New Trips     185       95      100      155       75        75

     1.     No daily trip generation rate was available for 15-16 hour convenience market in the ITE Trip Generation manual. Therefore, the ratio of
            peak hour to daily trips for a 24-hour convenience market was used to estimate daily trips.
     2.     No daily trip generation rate was available for Coffee/Donut Shop without Drive-Through Window. Therefore, the ratio of peak hour to
            daily trips for Coffee/Donut Shop with Drive-Through Window was used to estimate daily trips.




Appendix G illustrates the pass-by rate of the proposed development.

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                                         Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                                          Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                                     Page 17


Trip Distribution and Assignment
Trips generated by the proposed development were distributed onto the surrounding roadway system
based on existing traffic patterns and the location of major trip origins and destinations in the
surrounding areas. Figure 10 shows the site generated trips for the Proposed Development scenario. As
shown in Figure 10, two new driveways are assumed, one on SE King Road and one on SE 132nd Avenue
(per the site plan shown in Figure 2).


2015 Total Traffic Conditions
The total traffic conditions analysis shows how the study intersections will operate with the traffic
generated by the proposed development. The site-generated weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic
was added to the 2015 background traffic volumes, resulting in total traffic volumes. Projected traffic
volumes and associated traffic operations results are shown in Figure 11. As shown in Figure 11, all
study intersections continue to operate acceptably according to City of Happy Valley's performance
standards. As such, no mitigation measures are required for the site driveways and study intersections
to operate acceptably at the assumed opening year. The need for left-turn lanes was evaluated, and a
left-turn bay is warranted at the SE King Road/SE Melita Driveway Access, but a left-turn bay is not
warranted for the site driveway on SE 132nd Avenue.

Appendix H contains 2015 total traffic operation worksheets. Appendix I contains left-turn lane
warrants for all study area intersections.

2028 Total Traffic Conditions
The 2028 total traffic conditions were estimated by the additional increment of traffic to be generated
on the site as a result of the proposed zone change (over and above the trips that would be generated
under the existing R-20 zoning) added to 2028 background traffic volumes. Figure 12 shows future
traffic operations under a 2028 Proposed Development scenario with no traffic mitigations. As shown,
the intersection of SE 129th/SE King Road will fail with current traffic controls and land configurations;
this is consistent with the no-build findings.

As previously noted, the City of Happy Valley TSP projects the need for a traffic signal at the SE 129th/SE
King Road intersection, along with future 3-lane cross-sections on both SE King Road and SE 132nd
Avenue. Figure 13 illustrates the 2028 total traffic conditions lane configurations and traffic control
devices assumed at study area intersections. As shown, to satisfy 2028 conditions with the proposed
development, there will be a need for left-turn lanes on SE King Road and SE 132nd Avenue at the site
driveways3. Given the lane configurations illustrated in Figure 13, Figure 14 shows the resultant traffic
operations for a.m. and p.m. peak hours. This is the same result as indicated under the 2028 current
zoning scenario.


3                                                                                  nd
  Left-turn warrant analyses revealed the need for left-turn lanes at the SE 132        Avenue and SE King Road site
accesses into the proposed development.
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                            Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                              Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                         Page 18


As shown in Figure 14, the intersection of SE 132nd Avenue/SE King Road will operate at level-of-service
F during the a.m. peak hour under 2028 Total Traffic conditions. This is reflective of delay on the
northbound approach, which has less than ten vehicles. Note that the volume-to-capacity of this
movement is well within acceptable standards (v/c=0.28). In the absence of this approach, this
intersection will operate well within acceptable standards (LOS E) with all other turning and through
movements operating acceptably. Moreover, this intersection would not warrant a traffic signal. Thus,
no mitigations are recommended at this intersection.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                                        Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                                   Page 24


In summary, the mitigations needed at the two study intersections are the same for the proposed
development as under the existing zoning.

Appendix H contains 2028 total traffic operation worksheets. Appendix D contains signal warrant
analysis worksheets. Appendix I contains the left-turn lane warrant analyses.


Transportation Planning Rule Analysis
As discussed in the previous sections, an analysis was conducted to determine the impacts of the
proposed zone change and subsequent development of the site. The zone change and future
development of the site will:

           Result in the site generating an estimated 3404 more a.m. and 2684 more p.m. peak hour trips
           than under the current zoning for the site; and,
           Result in the same intersection improvements as would be needed under the existing zoning,
           namely a traffic signal with associated left-turn lanes on King Road or single-lane roundabout at
           the SE 129th/SE King Road intersection.

Half-street improvements that will be made in conjunction with the development will provide sufficient
street widths on SE King Road and SE 132nd Avenue to facilitate striping these streets for center left-
turn lanes at the site driveways.

Thus, the recommended improvements associated with the existing zoning on the property will also
provide acceptable operations and safety for the proposed development on the property.


Proportional Share of SE King Road/SE 129th Avenue Intersection Improvements
Based on this analysis, the intersection of SE King Road/SE 129 th Avenue will need a traffic signal and
major street left-turn lanes by year 2028. This intersection would fail in 2028 during a.m. peak hour;
however, a traffic signal or roundabout would improve operations during all hours of the day. Thus, the
proportional share that this project should contribute to the cost of the traffic signal or roundabout
was based on the project's share of the incremental increase in a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic
volumes to the year 2028. It is estimated that the proposed development's proportionate share of SE
King Road/SE 129th Avenue intersection improvements is 26.0 percent of the intersection improvement
cost. The intersection improvement at the SE King Road/SE 129th Avenue intersection is on Clackamas
County's list of capital improvement projects that are TSDC creditable. Accordingly, this project is
shown on that list to be TSDC creditable for ten percent of its cost. Table 4 below shows the
calculations.




4
 The proposed development will generate an estimated 345 and 275 a.m. and p.m. peak hour trips, respectively, while
under the current zoning the site would generate an estimated 5 and 7 trips during a.m. and p.m. peak hours.
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                          Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                                                           Project #: 13162
March 7, 2013                                                                                                                      Page 25


Table 4 Development's Proportionate Share of SE King Road/SE 129th Avenue
Intersection Improvements

                                                                             Total Entering Peak Hour Traffic Volumes

   Year                            Condition                  AM Peak Hour                PM Peak Hour              AM + PM Peak Hour
2013            Existing Traffic                                  930                         1,055                       1,985
                Total Traffic with Proposed
2028            Development                                       1,335                       1,495                       2,830
                Site Contribution                                 115                          105                        220
Incremental Increase in Trips                                     400                          440                        845
Proposed Development's Proportionate Share of Incremental Trips                                                          26.0%



Analyses indicate that a roundabout could operate acceptably at the SE 129th Avenue/SE King Road
intersection. Moreover, it appears that there may be sufficient physical space to accommodate a
roundabout, although there would likely need to be expanded right-of-way. The calculations included
in Table 4 would apply in the event that a roundabout is determined as the appropriate future traffic
control at the SE 129thAvenue/SE King Road intersection.


Site Access Operations
Operations at the site accesses on SE King Road and SE 132nd Avenue were assessed with left-turn lanes
into the site and were found to operate acceptably. Left-turn lanes on SE King Road and SE 132nd
Avenue are warranted, and are recommended in conjunction with development of the site as
proposed. It is further recommended that existing vegetation be cleared near the intersections to
ensure adequate intersection sight distance as vehicles are entering and exiting the development's
driveways.


Bicycle and Pedestrian Considerations
The proposed development will construct half street improvements along the site frontage on SE King
Road and SE 132nd Avenue that will accommodate future bike lanes. Based on the functional
designation of the two streets bordering the property, the Happy Valley TSP has identified bicycle lanes
along the site's frontage.

The proposed site is within a half mile of Happy Valley Elementary/Middle School. Accordingly, Happy
Valley's Traffic Impact Study guidelines indicate that a safe walking route should be described. On the
north side of SE King Road, there is a 1,240 foot gap in the sidewalk from about 175 feet west of Regina
Court to SE 132nd Avenue. If, at the time of development, this gap has not been addressed through the
development of lots to the east which front onto SE King Road, the developer may agree, via condition
of approval, to work with the City to form a development agreement to assist in the construction of a
temporary or permanent pathway along the north side of King Road from the intersection of SE 132nd
Avenue to Regina Court. The developer has significant concerns over the ability to complete the

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                              Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                                    Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                               Page 26


improvements without the acquisition of additional easements or right-of-way from property owners
fronting onto SE King Road.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Based on this evaluation, several conclusions are made:

                 The study intersections currently operate acceptably.
                 The study intersections will continue to operate acceptably in the 2015 future with the
                 proposed development during a.m. and p.m. peak hours. Left-turn lanes are needed at the
                 SE King Road site driveway but not the SE 132nd Avenue site driveway to accommodate
                 2015 project total traffic volumes.
                 Regardless of the proposed rezone, a traffic signal with a westbound left-turn lane or a
                 roundabout will be needed at SE 129th Avenue/SE King Road intersection to operate
                 acceptably under 2028 traffic conditions.
                 To satisfy 2028 total traffic conditions with the proposed development, left-turn lanes will
                 be needed on SE King Road and SE 132nd Avenue at the site driveways.
                 No safety improvements were recommended at the study intersections based on a review
                 of available historic crash data.
                 With recommended mitigations, the proposed development complies with the
                 Transportation Planning Rule (TPR), OAR 660-012-0060.

Recommended Improvements
The following improvements are recommended in conjunction with site development:
                 Half-street improvements should be constructed along the site frontage, which will
                 facilitate the eventual cross-section of SE King Road and SE 132nd Avenue to include a three-
                 lane cross-section, bike lanes, and sidewalks.
                 The development will contribute an estimated 26.0 percent of the future incremental trips
                 at the SE King Road/SE 129th Avenue intersection and thus should contribute a proportional
                 share cost toward the construction of a traffic signal with associated lane improvements or
                 a roundabout.
                 Any new landscaping and/or aboveground utilities installed along the site frontage and
                 internal roadways should be located and installed properly to ensure adequate sight
                 distance is available.
We trust that this analysis addresses the City's requirements as defined in the Traffic Impact Study
guidelines and our discussions at the pre-application conference. If you have any questions or
concerns, please call us.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                      Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                      Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                 Page 27



REFERENCES
     1. Highway Capacity Manual. National Academy of Sciences. 2000
     2. Trip Generation. 9th Edition. Institute of Transportation Engineers. 2012.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                         Portland, Oregon
King Road Mixed-use Development                                                             Project #: 13162
March 1, 2013                                                                                        Page 28



APPENDIX
Appendix A: Crash Data

Appendix B: Description of Level-of-service Methods and Criteria

Appendix C: Traffic Count Worksheets

Appendix D: Signal Warrant Analysis Worksheets

Appendix E: Existing and Background Condition Intersection HCM Operational Calculation Worksheets

Appendix F: 2015 & 2028 Current Zoning Conditions Unmitigated and Mitigated Intersection HCM
        Operational Calculation Worksheets

Appendix G: Proposed Zoning Conditions Pass-by Trips

Appendix H: 2015 & 2028 Total Traffic Condition Unmitigated and Mitigated Intersection HCM Operational
        Calculation Worksheets

Appendix I: Left-Turn Warrant Analyses




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                Portland, Oregon
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE 129th Ave -- SE King Rd                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10873903
 CITY/STATE: Happy Valley, OR                                                                                               DATE: Tue, Jan 08 2013
                      5           3                           Peak-Hour: 7:25 AM -- 8:25 AM                                  0.0        0.0

                      0    3      2
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 7:25 AM -- 7:40 AM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       292   0                           2   479
                                                                                                                1.4   0.0                      0.0       1.9
             86           0.85         158
                                                                                                                      5.8                      0.0
       184   98                        319   217
                                                                                                                5.4   5.1                      2.8       6.5

                  134      1     129
                                                                                                                             3.0 0.0 7.0

                  420            264
                                                                                                                             3.3        4.9



                           0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                           0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                           0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                        NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count              SE 129th Ave                    SE 129th Ave               SE King Rd                   SE King Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left         Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM     3           0      7     0         0        0      0     0    0       3      6      0    16      12      0    0               47
     7:05 AM     9           1     11     0         0        0      0     0    1       3      3      0    15      17      0    0               60
     7:10 AM     7           1      9     0         0        0      0     0    0       4      2      0    24      20      0    0               67
     7:15 AM     7           0      4     0         0        0      0     0    0       1      1      0    20      14      0    0               47
     7:20 AM    10           0      8     0         0        0      0     0    0       6      6      0    23      12      0    0               65
     7:25 AM    10           1     14     0         0        0      0     0    0      11    12       0    29      12      0    0               89
     7:30 AM    16           0      9     0         0        0      0     0    0      11    11       0    28      18      0    0               93
     7:35 AM    14           0     14     0         0        1      0     0    0      15      1      0    30      18      0    0               93
     7:40 AM    11           0     13     0         0        1      0     0    0       5      3      0    34      17      0    0               84
     7:45 AM    16           0      7     0         1        0      0     0    0       1      8      0    33      17      1    0               84
     7:50 AM    13           0      5     0         0        1      0     0    0       7      4      0    28       6      0    0               64
     7:55 AM     5           0      6     0         0        0      0     0    0       4      8      0    24       6      0    0               53              846
     8:00 AM     6           0     10     0         1        0      0     0    0       7      8      0    18      16      1    0               67              866
     8:05 AM     8           0     13     0         0        0      0     0    0       8    11       0    19      13      0    0               72              878
     8:10 AM    14           0     12     0         0        0      0     0    0       8      8      0    23      11      0    0               76              887
     8:15 AM    10           0     12     0         0        0      0     0    0       6    14       0    26      15      0    0               83              923
     8:20 AM    11           0     14     0         0        0      0     0    0       3    10       0    27       9      0    0               74              932
     8:25 AM     7           0      4     0         0        0      0     0    0      10      9      0    17       2      0    0               49              892
     8:30 AM     7           0     18     0         0        0      0     0    0       5      6      0    13      13      0    0               62              861
     8:35 AM    11           0      9     0         0        0      0     0    0       3      3      0    23      10      0    0               59              827
     8:40 AM    11           0     14     0         1        0      0     0    0       1      5      0    19       6      0    0               57              800
     8:45 AM     7           0     11     0         0        0      0     0    0       4      8      0    22       4      0    0               56              772
     8:50 AM     4           0     14     0         0        0      0     0    0       3      6      0    17       6      0    0               50              758
     8:55 AM     9           0      9     0         0        0      0     0    0       9      5      0    13       7      0    0               52              757
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles 160           4    148     0         0        4      0     0    0     148    96       0   348     192      0    0                      1100
 Heavy Trucks    4           0     12               0        0      0          0       4      4            4       0      0                            28
  Pedestrians                0                               0                         0                           0                                    0
    Bicycles     0           0      0               0        0      0          0       0      0            0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/14/2013 3:16 PM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE 132nd Ave/SE Waterford Ct -- SE King Rd                                                              QC JOB #: 10873901
 CITY/STATE: Happy Valley, OR                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Jan 08 2013
                   239          101                    Peak-Hour: 7:25 AM -- 8:25 AM                                2.9        8.9

                   202    0     37
                                                      Peak 15-Min: 7:25 AM -- 7:40 AM
                                                                                                                    2.0 0.0 8.1


       476   63                        38   307
                                                                                                       2.1   9.5                      7.9       2.9
             155         0.74         269
                                                                                                             5.2                      2.2
       218   0                          0   193
                                                                                                       6.4   0.0                      0.0       5.7

                    5     0     1
                                                                                                                    0.0 0.0 0.0

                    0            6
                                                                                                                    0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                          0    0    0



                                                                                                             0                          0

             0                          1                                                                    0                          0

                                                                                                             0                          0

                          0                                                                                          0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                               NA




             NA                       NA                                                                     NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                               NA



 5-Min Count SE 132nd Ave/SE Waterford Ct
                                        SE 132nd Ave/SE Waterford Ct        SE King Rd                   SE King Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period         (Northbound)               (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right     U      Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM    0      0      0     0       1     0     14     0       5      5      0      0    0       12      0    0               37
     7:05 AM    0      0      0     0       0     0     12     0       6      7      0      0    0       22      1    0               48
     7:10 AM    1      0      0     0       0     0     15     0       8      4      0      0    0       27      0    0               55
     7:15 AM    0      0      0     0       2     0     17     0       3      4      0      0    0       17      0    0               43
     7:20 AM    0      0      0     0       4     0     19     0       5      7      0      0    0       14      2    0               51
     7:25 AM    1      0      1     0       4     0     20     0       4     21      0      0    0       27      6    0               84
     7:30 AM    0      0      0     0       6     0     19     0       3     19      0      0    0       30      2    0               79
     7:35 AM    0      0      0     0      14     0     18     0       7     23      0      0    0       27      8    0               97
     7:40 AM    1      0      0     0       2     0     14     0       5     11      0      0    0       40      9    0               82
     7:45 AM    0      0      0     0       1     0     20     0       6      5      0      0    0       22      9    0               63
     7:50 AM    0      0      0     0       4     0     19     0       3      9      0      0    0       12      1    0               48
     7:55 AM    1      0      0     0       2     0     12     0       4      3      0      0    0       18      1    0               41              728
     8:00 AM    0      0      0     0       1     0     14     0       5     13      0      0    0       19      1    0               53              744
     8:05 AM    0      0      0     0       1     0     12     0       3     19      0      0    0       19      0    0               54              750
     8:10 AM    2      0      0     0       2     0     16     0       9     12      0      0    0       18      0    0               59              754
     8:15 AM    0      0      0     0       0     0     18     0       6     10      0      0    0       23      0    0               57              768
     8:20 AM    0      0      0     0       0     0     20     0       8     10      0      0    0       14      1    0               53              770
     8:25 AM    0      0      0     0       2     0      9     0       3      9      0      0    0        9      4    0               36              722
     8:30 AM    1      0      0     0       1     0     10     0       9     15      0      0    0       20      2    0               58              701
     8:35 AM    0      0      0     0       0     0     16     0       8      4      0      0    0       15      2    0               45              649
     8:40 AM    1      0      0     0       0     0      6     0       5     10      0      0    0       15      1    0               38              605
     8:45 AM    0      0      0     0       0     0     20     0       9      7      0      0    0        8      2    0               46              588
     8:50 AM    0      0      1     0       1     0      7     0       6     10      0      0    0       14      3    0               42              582
     8:55 AM    0      0      0     0       5     0      8     0       3     15      0      0    0       15      1    0               47              588
 Peak 15-Min             Northbound                 Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right     U      Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles  4      0      4     0      96     0    228     0      56    252      0      0    0      336     64    0                      1040
 Heavy Trucks   0      0      0             8     0      4             4     12      0           0        0      4                            32
  Pedestrians          0                          0                           0                           4                                    4
    Bicycles    0      0      0             0     0      0             0      0      0           0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/14/2013 3:16 PM                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE 129th Ave -- SE King Rd                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10873904
 CITY/STATE: Happy Valley, OR                                                                                               DATE: Wed, Jan 09 2013
                      0           0                           Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  0.0        0.0

                      0    0      0
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:25 PM -- 5:40 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


      206    0                           0   301
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             177          0.95          90
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
      320    143                       211   498
                                                                                                                0.3   0.7                      0.0       0.4

                   116     0     321
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.6

                   354           437
                                                                                                                             0.3        0.5



                           0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                           0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                           0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                        NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count              SE 129th Ave                    SE 129th Ave               SE King Rd                   SE King Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left         Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     4:00 PM     2           0     22     0         0        0      0     0    0      18      8      0    15       8      0    0               73
     4:05 PM     6           0     26     0         0        0      0     0    0      19      9      0    17       8      0    0               85
     4:10 PM    14           0     31     0         0        0      0     0    0      14      7      0    30      17      0    0              113
     4:15 PM    11           0     19     0         0        0      0     0    0       4     12      0    32      19      0    0               97
     4:20 PM     9           0     20     0         0        0      0     0    0       7      6      0    33      14      0    0               89
     4:25 PM     9           0     21     0         0        0      0     0    0      12     15      0     8       9      0    0               74
     4:30 PM     8           0     28     0         0        0      0     0    0       7      9      0    19      15      0    0               86
     4:35 PM    12           0     23     0         0        0      0     0    0      13     18      0    26       6      0    0               98
     4:40 PM     9           0     13     0         0        0      0     0    0      18      8      0    21       6      0    0               75
     4:45 PM    13           0     23     0         0        0      0     0    0      13     15      0    17       9      0    0               90
     4:50 PM    10           0     22     0         0        0      0     0    0       8      8      0    12      12      0    0               72
     4:55 PM    11           0     26     0         0        0      0     0    0      14      7      0    12       7      0    0               77             1029
     5:00 PM     5           0     25     0         0        0      0     0    0      11      6      0    18      12      0    0               77             1033
     5:05 PM    11           0     23     0         0        0      0     0    0      14     12      0    24       7      0    0               91             1039
     5:10 PM     8           0     23     0         0        0      0     0    0      18     10      0    15       5      0    0               79             1005
     5:15 PM    10           0     28     0         0        0      0     0    0      16     10      0    15       8      0    0               87              995
     5:20 PM    10           0     34     0         0        0      0     0    0      22     11      0    18       5      0    0              100             1006
     5:25 PM    10           0     19     0         0        0      0     0    0      20     12      0    15       9      0    0               85             1017
     5:30 PM     7           0     28     0         0        0      0     0    0      12     14      0    15      15      0    0               91             1022
     5:35 PM    12           0     29     0         0        0      0     0    0      16     16      0    19       9      0    0              101             1025
     5:40 PM    12           0     30     0         0        0      0     0    0      10     19      0    12       5      0    0               88             1038
     5:45 PM    12           0     25     0         0        0      0     0    0       9      9      0    18       4      0    0               77             1025
     5:50 PM     7           0     34     0         0        0      0     0    0      17     11      0    23       2      0    0               94             1047
     5:55 PM    12           0     23     0         0        0      0     0    0      12     13      0    19       9      0    0               88             1058
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles 116           0    304     0         0        0      0     0    0     192    168      0   196     132      0    0                      1108
 Heavy Trucks    0           0      4               0        0      0          0       0      0            0       0      0                             4
  Pedestrians                0                               0                         0                           0                                    0
    Bicycles     0           0      0               0        0      0          0       0      0            0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/14/2013 3:23 PM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE 132nd Ave/SE Waterford Ct -- SE King Rd                                                              QC JOB #: 10873902
 CITY/STATE: Happy Valley, OR                                                                                      DATE: Wed, Jan 09 2013
                   152          254                  Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  0.0        0.4

                   125    0     27
                                                    Peak 15-Min: 5:25 PM -- 5:40 PM
                                                                                                                    0.0 0.0 0.0


      294    215                       38   205
                                                                                                       0.0   0.5                      0.0       0.0
             286         0.95         165
                                                                                                             0.0                      0.0
      506    5                          2   315
                                                                                                       0.2   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                    4     1     2
                                                                                                                    0.0 0.0 0.0

                    7            7
                                                                                                                    0.0        0.0



                          1                                                                                          0    0    0



                                                                                                             0                          0

             0                          0                                                                    0                          0

                                                                                                             0                          0

                          0                                                                                          0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                               NA




             NA                       NA                                                                     NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                               NA



 5-Min Count SE 132nd Ave/SE Waterford Ct
                                        SE 132nd Ave/SE Waterford Ct        SE King Rd                   SE King Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period         (Northbound)               (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right     U      Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     4:00 PM    0      0      1     0       3     0      6     0       5     32      0      0    0       14      3    0               64
     4:05 PM    0      0      0     0       2     0      9     0      15     34      0      0    0       19      5    0               84
     4:10 PM    0      0      0     0       2     0     11     0      14     27      1      0    0       47      8    0              110
     4:15 PM    0      0      0     0       5     0     10     0      11     10      0      0    0       37      8    0               81
     4:20 PM    0      0      0     0       0     0     11     0      17     18      0      0    0       28      6    0               80
     4:25 PM    0      0      0     0       4     0      4     0       8     21      2      0    0       11      2    0               52
     4:30 PM    1      0      0     0       0     0      7     0      10     23      1      0    0       23      3    0               68
     4:35 PM    1      0      0     0       2     0     17     0      16     24      1      0    0       19      4    0               84
     4:40 PM    1      0      0     0       0     0     10     0       8     25      0      0    0       16      2    0               62
     4:45 PM    0      0      0     0       1     0     13     0      13     21      0      0    0       12      1    0               61
     4:50 PM    0      0      0     0       1     0     10     0      11     20      0      0    0       11      4    0               57
     4:55 PM    0      0      0     0       1     0      7     0      14     25      0      0    0       14      3    0               64              867
     5:00 PM    1      0      0     0       1     0     12     0      17     17      0      0    1       15      5    0               69              872
     5:05 PM    0      0      1     0       5     0     16     0      14     26      1      0    0       15      3    0               81              869
     5:10 PM    0      0      0     0       1     0     11     0      13     24      1      0    0        9      2    0               61              820
     5:15 PM    1      0      0     0       3     0      7     0      21     24      0      0    0       15      5    0               76              815
     5:20 PM    0      0      1     0       1     0     12     0      27     30      0      0    0        9      3    0               83              818
     5:25 PM    1      1      0     0       2     0     11     0      14     26      0      0    1       16      2    0               74              840
     5:30 PM    0      0      0     0       4     0     12     0      21     19      1      0    0       13      2    0               72              844
     5:35 PM    1      0      0     0       3     0      8     0      12     37      1      0    0       17      5    0               84              844
     5:40 PM    0      0      0     0       3     0      3     0      18     20      0      0    0       12      3    0               59              841
     5:45 PM    0      0      0     0       1     0     11     0      18     15      0      0    0       14      5    0               64              844
     5:50 PM    0      0      0     0       0     0     13     0      24     29      1      0    0       10      1    0               78              865
     5:55 PM    0      0      0     0       3     0      9     0      16     19      0      0    0       20      2    0               69              870
 Peak 15-Min             Northbound                 Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right     U      Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles  8      4      0     0      36     0    124     0     188    328      8      0    4      184     36    0                      920
 Heavy Trucks   0      0      0             0     0      0             4      0      0           0        0      0                            4
  Pedestrians          0                          4                           0                           0                                   4
    Bicycles    0      0      0             0     0      0             0      0      0           0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/14/2013 3:23 PM                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
