TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.        Project Summary ....................................................... 1
2.        Introduction .............................................................. 2
3.        Proposed Sit e Development ...................................... 5
                                                                                              Conditional Use
4.        Base Zone Compl iance ............................................. 8
5.        Appl icable Development Standards ....................... 14                        Class II Design
6.        Chapter 55 Design Rev iew ...................................... 31                 Review
7.        Chapter 60 Conditional Uses ................................... 46
8.        Class II Variance Request ........................................ 50               Lot Line Adjustment
9.        Lot Line Adjust ment ................................................. 53
                                                                                              Vari ance
10.       Concl usion .............................................................. 54
11.       Exhibit s .................................................................... 55




                                                                                              To
ATTACHMENTS                                                                                   Cit y of West Linn
                                                                                              Planning and
Transportation Impact Analysi s                                                               Building Department
Stormwater Report
Neighborhood Meeting Materi als                                                               For
                                                                                              We st Linn Pol ic e
                                                                                              Depart ment

                                                                                              Submitted
                                                                                              December 7 , 2012

                                                                                              Project Number
                                                                                              2120180.00


GROUP MACKENZIE
Since 1960

RiverEast Center | PO Box 14310 | Portland, OR 97293
1515 SE Water Ave, Suite 100 | Portland, OR 97214
T 503.224.9560 | F 503.228.1285 | www.grpmack.com
1.           PROJECT SUMMARY

Owner/Applicant:                              City of West Linn
                                              22500 Salamo Road
                                              West Linn, OR 97068
                                              Contact: Robert Galante
                                              (503) 720 -3609

Representative:                               Group Mackenzie
                                              1515 SE Water Ave nue, Suite 100
                                              Portland, OR 972 14
                                              Contact: Rhy s Konrad
                                              (503) 224 -9560

Cross Streets:                                13 t h Street & 8th Avenue

Tax Lot s of Site:                            2S 1E 35C Tax Lots 1 900, 2000, 2100, 2200

Site Area:                                    1.57 acres (68,497 SF) after dedication

Zoning:                                       R-10 Single Family Residential Detached
                                              MU Willamette Neighborhood Mixed-Use Transition

Requests:                                     Conditional Use
                                              Class II Design Review
                                              Lot Line Adjustment
                                              Variance

Code Chapters
Addressed:                                    Chapter          11                  R-10 District
                                              Chapter          28                  Willamette and Tualatin River Protection
                                              Chapter          32                  Water Resource Area Protection
                                              Chapter          33                  Stormwater Quality and Detention
                                              Chapter          34                  Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwel ling
                                                                                   Units, and Accessory Uses
                                              Chapter          35                  Temporary Structures and Uses
                                              Chapter          36                  Manufactured Homes
                                              Chapter          37                  Home Occupations
                                              Chapter          38                  Additional     Yard      Area     Required;
                                                                                   Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage
                                                                                   in Yards; Projections into Yards.
                                              Chapter 41                           Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots,
                                                                                   Exceptions
                                              Chapter 42                           Clear Vision Areas
                                              Chapter 44                           Fences
                                              Chapter 46                           Off-street Parking, Loading and Reservoir
                                                                                   Areas
                                              Chapter          48                  Access, Egress and Circulation
                                              Chapter          52                  Signs
                                              Chapter          53                  Sidewalk Use
                                              Chapter          54                  Landscaping
                                              Chapter          55                  Design Review
                                              Chapter          85.210              Lot Line Adjustment
                                              Chapter          60                  Conditional Use
                                              Chapter          75                  Variance

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                                             1
2.           INTRODUCTION

The City of West Linn has been evaluating alternatives for a new Police Department
facility to better support their operation al requirements, meet their current needs and
allow for future growth. Extensive site selection and evaluation has occurred over the
course of the past 5 y ears, resulting in City Council‟s direction on the subject 8 t h
Avenue property. A bond was approved by West Linn voters in November 2011, the
result of which is the acquisition of the property and now application for land use
approval in order to construct the new facility.

The site‟s vicinity is shown on the figure below, and is located near the City‟s
Historic Downtown . The site contains four existing tax lots, situated at the northeast
corner of the intersection of 8 th Avenue and 13 th Street. The site is split zoned R-10
and MU-CBD, and the proposed public safety use is a conditional use in both zones .




                                                            Figure 2.1 - Vicinity Map




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc        2
EXISTING CONDITIONS

Surrounding Development
Surrounding developme nt includes the following:
       West:             Single-family residential
                          (Zoned R-10 – Low Density Residential )
       North:            Single-family residential and co mmercial parking
                          (Zoned R-10 – Low Density Residential and GC – General Commercial )
       East:             Morton‟s Tree Service
                          (Zoned GC – General Commercial)
       South:            Willamette Fire Station and a mixture of single -family and commercial
                          development
                          (Zoned MU – Mixed-Use and GC – General Commercial)

Existing Development
The site currently contains three vacant single -family homes that have been purchased
by the City . These homes will be moved prior to development of the proposed police
station. The topography of the site slopes from the southeast to the northwest of the
site, with approximately 20 feet of fall. However, there are no Ty pe I or Type II lands
identified on the subject site.

In addition the site contains several trees, with a majority of them located on the
northerly one-third of the site. Only one tree (3 1" Walnut) has been deemed
significant by Mike Perkins, City Arbori st, and the remaining trees are non-
significant .

No significant natural resources, according to the adopted City inventories exist on
the subject site. In addition, nothing is shown on the City‟s most recent Goal 5
inventory maps.

Streets
The site is lo cated at the north east corner of 8th Avenue and 13th Street, both local
streets, with varying existing right -of-way widths.




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                3
Figure 2.2 - Aerial Map




Figure 2.3 - Existing Zoning Map




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc   4
3.        PROPOSED SITE DEVELO PMENT

BUILDING

The scale of the 21,959 SF building has been carefully composed to provide a civic
prominence to the site at the 8th Avenue entrance, while respecting the scale of the
residential neighborhood to the north and west of the site. The west end of the
building has been set into the natural slope of site, reducing the perception of height
from the residential neighborhood. The scale of the building increases towards the
east end of the site, which is closer to the commercial Willamette District of, and
functionally provides a public entrance to the building. The proposed building is
predominantly composed of structural brick, the colors of which have been selected to
complement the brick color selected for the Tualatin Valley Fire Station, located
across 8th Avenue. As the site is split zoned between residential and commercial, the
façade design has attempted to respond to the surrounding area. The brick facades
have been designed adjacent to the residential neighborhood. Where more
contemporary material selections have been made, closer to the commercial areas to
the east of the site, the colors are subdued greys, offset with dark window frames.
Parapets, detailed to respond to the historic nature of the surrounding Willamette
neighborhood, have been used for the roof forms, to convey the publi c and civic
nature of the building. The windows at the secure, west end of the building are
reduced in scale, with a more residential rhythm, similar to the Tualatin Valley Fire
station across 8th Avenue. At the east end of the building the window sy stem h as been
selected to provide larger, more open expanses of glazing, where the public interacts
more with the building and the functions are adjacent to the existing commerc ial
development to the east.

SITE IMPROVEMENTS

The proposed site improvements wi th this application include all the necessary
grading, utility, landscape and other improvements needed for the development of the
site. Code requires a minimu m of 63 and a maximum of 70 off -street parking spaces
under the Government Office Use category for 21 ,959 SF of building area. Proposed
parking consists of 63 surface parking stalls split between the public and private
secure areas. All proposed parking meets all of the parking and circulation
development standards in the Code for the proposed zone. Landscaping of the site in
the amount of 29% is proposed including areas devoted to stormwater quality and
detention.

The site improvements necessary for the proposed development require the removal of
5 existing trees on the site. A sixth tree is proposed to be removed along 13 th Street
in order to construct required frontage improvements, which include a sidewalk and
planter strip .

PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Utilities

Stormwater
Per coordination with the City Engineer , a new public storm line will be installed
within 13 t h Street. Site stormwater will connect to this line after its collected, treated
and detained on site.


H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc           5
Sewer
An 8-inch public sanitary sewer main exists in 8 t h Avenue. A new 6 -inch extension is
proposed to this existing main to serve the propose d facility.

Water
The City will be installing a new water line in both 8 t h and 13 t h to be completed prior
to site construction . A new extension is proposed into the site from 8th , including a
backflow device adjacent to the property line. The City‟s cons ultant will confirm that
there is adequate water pressure for the proposed use

Frontage Improvements
Public frontage improvements along 8 th Avenue and 13 th Street are proposed. In order
to accommodate the full right -of-way width according to local street s tandard, 8 -feet
of the subject site‟s frontage will be dedicated. A new 6 -foot wide concrete sidewalk,
6-foot planter strip with street trees, and an ADA ramp will be provided along 13 t h
Street. While we are proposing to save the existing significant walnu t tree, the
frontage improvements along 8 th Avenue will vary and include a curb tight 4 '-8'
sidewalk along the site with street trees behind . Two new driveways are proposed
including a 30 -foot primary driveway on 8 t h Avenue, and a 2 2-foot one-way secure
driveway for emergency egress to 13 t h Street.

Traffic
A complete transportation impact analysis has been prepared and submitted as part of
the application package. The following summarizes the recommended mitigation
measures for the proposed project:

REVIE W OF INTERSECTION SIGH T DISTANCE
          Adequate sight distance is available at the proposed site accesses along 8 th
          Avenue and 13 th Street.

BACKGROUND AND IN -PROCESS TRAFFIC
          Based on historical traffic growth                                      trends for the 10 th Street Corridor, the
          Willamette ar ea has experienced little                                  traffic growth over the past several years.
          However, to produce a conservative                                       analysis of future traffic conditions, an
          annual traffic growth rate of 1.0% was                                   utilized in this study.
           Additional in -process traffic to account for f ull occupancy at the Willamette
          Marketplace development was added to the roadway network using the directional
          distributions from Kittelson & Associates‟ latest Transportation Impact Analysis
          of the site.

SITE DEVELOPMENT PL AN
           Access to the site will be pr ovided by a primary full -access driveway to 8 t h
          Avenue opposite the 12 th Street approach and a secondary full -access driveway
          to 13 th Street for emergency use.
           Using the trip generation information gathered from existing police stations in
          the Portland me tropolitan area, the proposed development is projected to
          generate 39 primary trips during the weekday AM and PM peak hours.


H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                                             6
             The proposed development is expected to be completed by 2014.

TRAFFIC OPERATIONS
         Traffic operations at all study intersections wil l meet mobility standards for the
          weekday AM peak hour. However, two study intersections will not meet mobility
          standards in the PM peak hour. Mitigation measures are needed at the 8 th
          Avenue/10 th Street and Willamette Falls Drive/12 th Street intersections to
          operate at mobility standards.

MITIGATION MEASURES

Based on the findings documented in this study, the following recommen dations (as
shown on the aerial figures in the study) are made to ensure the proposed site
development will not significantly or ad versely impact traffic operations or safety at
all study intersections and proposed site accesses:
1.        Restrict northbound left -turn movements at the 8th Avenue/10th Street
          intersection by eliminating the left -turn lane, installing a pedestrian refuge
          island, and restricting potential left -turns from the through lane by posting “NO
          LEFT TURN” signage.
2.        Implement one of two mitigation measures at the Willamette Falls Drive/12th
          Street intersection:
                   Option 1 : Maintain two -way stop-control and construct short 50 -foot left
                    turn pockets on the eastbound and westbound approaches of Willamette
                    Falls Drive.
                   Option 2: Implement all -way stop -control, and install crosswalks on all
                    intersecting legs.




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc              7
4.        BASE ZO NE COMPLIANCE

As discussed above, the subject site contains tw o zoning districts. In cases where
requirements of the base zone cannot be met, the criterion of the conditional use
section will be addressed , as allowed, rather than a variance to ensure compliance
with the intent of the code. This section of the narrati ve addresses the standards of the
underlying zoning districts.

CHAPTER 11 SINGLE -FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ( R-10)

The following addresses the approval criteria identified in Chapter 1 1 Single-Family
Residential Detached, R -10 of the West Linn Development Code:

11.060 Conditional Uses

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zoning district
subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses.

       3.   Public Safety Facilities
Response: CDC 02.030 Specific words and terms, defines “Public safety facilities.
Providing protection pursuant to fire, life, and safety code sections together with the
incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Ty pical uses include fire
stations, police stations, and ambulance services. ” The proposed police station would
fall under this use description, and therefore, requires conditional use approval
subject to Chapter 60 .

11.070 Dimensional Requirements, Uses Pe rmitted Outright and Uses Permitted
Under Prescribed Conditions
Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this Code, the following are
requirements for uses within this zone:
Response: All of these standards are met as shown below .
Table 4-1 Applicable Development Standards
Standard                       Requirement                                                    Provided
1.   Minimum Lot Size               See 11.080 below.                                             N/A, no single -family
                                                                                                detached units proposed.
 2.       Minimum Front Lot Line                                              35’                 N/A, no new lots are
                                                                                                       proposed.
 3.       Average Minimum Lot Width                                           50’                 N/A, no new lots are
                                                                                                       proposed.
 4.       Average Lot Depth                                       Less than 2.5 times the lot     N/A, no new lots are
                                                                     width; more than 90’              proposed.
 5.       Minimum Yard Dimensions                                             35'                 N/A, no new lots are
                                                                                                       proposed.
          Front                                                               20'                          23’
          Side – Interior Side Yard                                          7.5'                         N/A
          Side – Abutting a Street                                            15'                          22’
          Rear                                                                20'                         133’
 6.       Maximum Height                                                      35'                        32’-6”
 7.       Maximum Lot Coverage                                               35 %                         28 %




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                                           8
 8.       Minimum access width (non -                                              15’          N/A, all accesses are
          street)                                                                            provided directly to abutting
                                                                                                       streets.
 9.       Maximum Floor Area Ratio                                         0.45, 12,370 SF         0.35, 9,519 SF
10.       Sidewall                                                         See Chapter 43      N/A, no single -family or
                                                                                               duplex residential units
                                                                                                      proposed.

11.080 Dimensional Requirements, Conditional Uses
Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot size for a
conditional use shall be determined by the approval a uthority at the time of
consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070 (A)
and (B).
Response: As the proposed public safety facility is a conditional use in the R -10 zone,
the appropriate lot size is regulated by CDC 60.070(A) . However, the lot side
requirement under 11.070.1 appears to apply only to a single -family detached unit. As
this application is for a public safety facility, th e minimum lot size standard does not
apply.

11.090 Other Applicable Development Standards

A.        The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:
          1.
         Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and
         Accessory Uses.
    2.   Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.
    3.   Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard
         Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.
    4.   Chapter 40 CDC, Building Height Limitations, Exceptions.
    5.   Chapter 41 CDC, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.
    6.   Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.
    7.   Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.
    8.   Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.
    9.   Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.
    10. Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.
    11. Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.
Response: Please see Section 5 of this narrative which addresses these standards
where applicable.

B.   The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except
     detached single -family dwellings, residential homes and residential facilities.
     (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)
Response: Chapter 55 applies to the proposed public safety facility use and is
addressed in Section 6 of this narrative.




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                                             9
CHAPTER 59                         WILLAMETT E                     NEIGHBORH OOD         MIXED   USE     TRANSI TIONAL
ZONE (MU)

The following addresses the approval criteria identified in Chapter 59 Willamette
Neighborhood Mixed -Use transitional Zone, MU , of the West Linn Development Code:

59.060 Conditional Uses

Only the following conditional uses are allowed in this zone subject to the provisions
of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses:
       7.   Public support and public safety facilities, including public parking lots.
Response: CDC 02.030 Spec ific words and terms, defines “Public Safety Facilities.
Providing protection pursuant to fire, life, and safety code sections together with the
incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include fire
stations, police stations, and ambulance services.” The proposed police station would
fall under this use description, and therefore, requires conditional use approval
subject to Chapter 60 .

59.070 Dimensional Requirements, Uses Permitted Outright and Uses Permitted
Under Prescribed Conditions

A.   Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following
     are the requirements for uses within this zone:
Response: These standards are met as shown below . Please note that the „provided‟
column assumes that the exis ting lots have been consolidated as addressed in
Section 8 of this narrative.

Table 4-2 Applicable Development Standards
          Standard                  Requirement                                                       Provided
1. Minimum Front Lot Line                35’                                                     N/A, no new lots are
                                                                                                      proposed.
 2. Average Minimum Lot                                    Width                   50’           N/A, no ne w lots are
                                                                                                      proposed.
 3. Average Lot Depth                                     Less than 2.5 times the lot            N/A, no new lots are
                                                          width; more than 90’                        proposed.
 4. Minimum Yard                                               Min.            Max.              N/A, no new lots are
    Dimensions                                                                                        proposed.
 5. Front                                                       12’              20’                      16’
 6. Side – Interior Side Yar d                             d    7.5’             N/A                      75’
 7. Side – Abutting a Street                                    12’              N/A                     N/A
 8. Rear                                                        20’              N/A                     124’
 9. Maximum Height                                        Two Stories or 35', whichever          Two Stories, 32’ -6”
                                                          is less
 10. Maximum Building Size                                6,000 SF per above grade floor            7,981 SF
 11. Maximum Floor Area                                   0.40, ground floor not to      0.29, ground floor 7,981 SF
     Ratio                                                exceed 5,000 SF
 12. Min/Max Lot Size                                     4,500/10,000 SF unless         N/A, existing lot of record.
                                                          existing lot of record




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                                         10
A.  Design Standards. All uses in the mixed -use zone shall comply with the
    provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, except for CDC 55.100(B)(7)(a), (b), (c), (h), (i),
    and (j). Further, single -family and duplex residential us es shall also comply with
    the Class I design review standards. In addition, the design standards described
    below apply to all uses.
Response: Chapter 55, except for the provisions noted in this standard, applies to the
proposed public safety facility use a nd is addressed in Section 6 of this narrative.

          1.Residential-style building with single story porch on the front, and on the
            side where it abuts a street.
      Response: As allowed under Subsection 6, the proposed public safety facility is
      not required to meet the design standards of (B) (1) through (5) of this section.
      However, d esign considerations have been incorporated into the structure to
      respond to the existing character of the surrounding properties.

          2.New sidewalk construction shall be allowed to match the historical sidewalk
            standards in this zone.
      Response: As allowed under Subsection 6, the proposed public safety facility is
      not required to meet the design standards of (B)(1) through (5) of this section.
      However, new sidewalks are proposed along the s ite‟s frontage of 8 th Avenue and
      13th Street and will meet City Public Works‟ standards.

       3.    Off-street parking shall be behind, under, or on the side of building.
      Response: As allowed under Subsection 6, the proposed public safety facility is
      not required t o meet the design standards of (B)(1) through (5) of this section.
      However, proposed public and secure parking is located on the side and behind the
      building.

          4.Garages shall not extend any closer to the street than the street -facing
            facade of the house.
      Response: As allowed under Subsection 6, the proposed public safety facility is
      not required to meet the design standards of (B)(1) through (5) of this section.
      Further, this application does not include garages associated with a residential use.

          5.There shall be no illuminated outdoor advertising on accessory buildings,
            equipment, or vending machines
      Response: As allowed under Subsection 6, the proposed public safety facility is
      not required to meet the design standards of (B)(1) through (5) of this section.
      This application does not propose outdoor advertising or accessory buildings.

          6. These design standards, subsections (B)(1) through (5) of this section, shall
             not apply to public facilities such as reservoirs, water towers, treatment
             plants, fire stations, pump stations, power transmission facilities, etc. It is
             recognized that many of these facilities, due to their functional
             requirements, cannot readily be configured to meet these design standards.
             However, attempts shall be made to make the design sympat hetic to
             surrounding properties through compatible architecture, enhanced
             landscaping, setbacks, buffers, and other reasonable means. (Ord. 1515,
             2005; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1565, 2008)
      Response: As allowed under Subsection 6, the proposed public safety facility is
      not required to meet the design standards of (B)(1) through (5) of this section.
      However, as noted above, the proposed development meets several of the
      requirements.


H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc         11
59.080 Additional Use Requirements
In addition to all other provisions of this s ection, the following additional
requirements may apply:
A.   Permitted uses may only be open from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and are subject to
     the noise provisions of Chapter 55 CDC.
Response: The proposed public safety facility is a conditional use in this zone. As
such this standard does not apply. The noise provisions of Chapter 55 are addressed in
Section 6 below.

B.    Exterior business activity shall not take place beyond the rear wall of the
      building when the subject property abuts a residential district, except for
      parking and refuse storage. Refuse storage must be buffered or enclosed and may
      not abut a property line that adjoins a residential zone.
Response: The rear of the site is proposed to be used for secure parking for police
staff, and landscaping, stormwater, and refuse storage. The portion of the site zoned
R-10 abuts a residential zone to the north and west. T he proposed refuse storage is
enclosed and buffered from the side residential property (zone) line by 11' and new
site landscaping. This standard is met.

C.   If a qualified historic residential landmark in the Willamette neighborhood is
     destroyed, it may be rebuilt on the original building footprint. (Ord. 1515, 20 05;
     Ord. 1547, 2007)
Response: The existing structures located on the subject property are not qualified
historic residential landmarks. This standard does not apply.

59.090 Dimensional Requirements, Conditional Uses
Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot size for a
conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of
consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070 (A)
and (B). (Ord. 1515, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007)
Response: As the proposed public safety facility is a conditional use in the MU zone,
the provisions of this Chapter that are not met will be reviewed under the criteria s et
forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). These include 59.070(A).6 and (A).7 with regards to
the maximum allowed building size and ground floor. Please refer to Section 7 of this
narrative.

59.100 Other Applicable Development Standards

The provisions of CDC 25.060, 25.070, 25.080 , and 25.090 , apply to properties
currently identified in the West Linn historic inventory, Chapter 26 CDC, Historic
Landmarks. The following standards apply to all development including permitted
uses:
1.    Chapter 28 CDC, Willamette and Tualatin River Protection.
2.    Chapter 36 CDC, Manufactured Homes.
3.    Chapter 32 CDC, Water Resource Area Protection.
4.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and
      Accessory Uses.
5.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.
6.    Chapter 37 CDC, Home Occupations.
7.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard
      Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.
8.    Chapter 40 CDC, Building Height Limitations, Exceptions.
9.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc     12
10.        Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.
11.        Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.
12.        Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas, except for
           the provisions of CDC 46.140, apply to all uses.
13.        Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review.


14. Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.
15. Chapter 53 CDC, Sidewalk Use. (Ord. 1547, 2007)
Response: The subject property is not identified in the West Linn historic inventory,
and as such , the provisions of CDC 2 5.060, 25.070, 25.080 and 25.090 do not apply.
The remaining standards are addressed in Section 5 of this narrative.




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc    13
5.           APPLICABLE DEVELOPME NT STANDARDS

This section addresses the applicable Development Standards required by CDC
11.090.A and 55.100.A:

CHAPTER 28 WILLAMETTE AND TUALATIN RIVER P ROTECTION
Response: The provisions of Chapter 28 do not apply to this site as it is not located
within the Willamette and Tualatin River Protection Area overlay zone.

CHAPTER 32 WATER RES OURCE AREA PROTECTIO N
Response: The provisions of Chapter 32 do not apply to this site as there is no
identified water resource areas located within the project boundary .

CHAPTER 33 STORM WATER QUALITY AND DETENTION

33.040 Approval Criteria

The Planning Director and City Engineer s hall make written findings with respect to
the following criteria when approving, approving with conditions, or denying
applications for stormwater detention permits and stormwater quality permits.

A.  Stormwater quality facilities shall meet non -point source pollution control
    standards required by the Public Works Design Standards.
Response: The proposed stormwater quality facilities will be specified to meet Public
Works Design Standards. These will be reviewed during the building permit process.

B.   Design of s tormwater detention and pollution reduction facilities and related
     detention and water quality calculations shall meet Public Works Design
     Standards and shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed to practice
     in the State of Oregon.
Response: The design and calculations of proposed stormwater facilities will meet
Public Works Standards. These will be reviewed during the building permit process.

C.   Soil stabilization techniques, erosion control, and adequate improvements to
     accommodate the intended d rainage through the drainage basin shall be used.
     Storm drainage shall not be diverted from its natural watercourse unless no
     feasible alternatives exist. Interbasin transfers of storm drainage will not be
     permitted.
Response: Erosion control methods will be provided in accordance with DEQ
standards. The proposed storm drainage will not be diverted from the site‟s current
basin.

D.   Stormwater detention and treatment facilities shall encroach no further than 25
     feet into the outside boundary of a water quality resource area. The area of
     encroachment must be replaced by adding an equal area to the water quality
     resource area on the subject property.
Response: The site does not contain a water quality resource area. This standard does
not apply.

E.        Stormwater deten tion and treatment facilities shall be vegetated with plants from
          the Metro‟s Native Plant List as described in CDC 33.070.

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc          14
Response: Proposed plantings of the storm water facilities are specified with plants
per Metro‟s Native Plant List according to Resolution 98 -2708 as required by this
standard. As there are no recommendations for groundcover within this list, we have
specified a plant species from the City of Port land BES native plant list for
stormwater facilities.

F.   Projects must either stockpile existing topsoil for reuse on the site or import
     topsoil, rather than amend subsoils. Soil amendments are allowed only where the
     applicant can demonstrate they are the on ly practical alternative for enabling
     the soil to support healthy plantings, promoting better stormwater treatment, or
     improving soil infiltration capacity (where appropriate).
Response: This project will import topsoil for support of healthy plantings. Th is
standard is met.

G.   Interim erosion control measures, such as mulching, shall be placed immediately
     upon completion of grading of the facilities. (Ord. 1463, 2000)
Response: Erosion control measures as required by DEQ will be followed during site
constru ction.

33.070 Plant Material for Water Quality Facilities

Metro‟s Native Plant List is incorporated by reference as a part of this chapter. The
applicant shall submit a detailed planting plan using species from Metro‟s Native
Plant List. The intent of thi s plan is to establish native vegetation to protect against
erosion and sediment infiltration. A mix of low maintenance trees, shrubs, and
groundcover is preferred with an even distribution.
A.   The planting plan shall be prepared by a professional landscape a rchitect if the
     development site contains more than 5,000 square feet of impervious area. The
     planting plan shall include a table listing the scientific names, size, and quantity
     of plants.
Response: The proposed planting plan has been prepared by a profes sional landscape
architect.

B.   The plan shall include plant location, species, size, and quantity for stormwater
     detention and treatment facilities. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height
     of four feet and deciduous trees shall be at least one -inch calip er in size at the
     time of planting. Shrubs shall be a minimum of one gallon in size at the time of
     planting. Spaces shall be filled at mature growth but not so that overplanting
     occurs and overcrowding results. Temporary irrigation systems or other means o f
     ensuring establishment of the plantings must be specified.
Response: The plants selected include native and native adapted plants that are not
expected to be reliant on supplemental irrigation after establishment (e.g. 18 months
per LEED standards).This standard is met.

C.   Plantings shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the need for herbicides,
     fertilizers, pesticides, or soil amendments at any time before, during, or after
     construction, or on a long -term basis. Plantings shall be designed to minimize or
     eliminate the need for frequent mowing and irrigation.
Response: The plants selected include native and native adapted plants that are not
expected to be reliant on supplemental irrigation after establishment (e.g. 18 months
per LEED standards).This st andard is met.




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc      15
D.   The applicant is responsible for implementing the planting plan during the next
     fall or spring planting season following permit approval. Prior to planting,
     noxious vegetation shall be removed. All soil areas must be covered with
     specified plants and mulch to prevent erosion.
Response: Plant materials will be implemented during construction to be planted in
accordance with best practices, which includes planting during the fall or spring.

E.  Plantings shall be incorporated into a public impr ovement guarantee agreement,
    which includes a maintenance bond as required by CDC 91.010 (C). The
    maintenance bond is required for any project involving stormwater qu ality and
    detention facilities. (Ord. 1463, 2000)
Response: A public improvement guarantee agreement will be provided if required.

CHAPTER 34 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES , ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS, AND
ACCESSORY USES
Response: No accessory structures, dwelling uni ts or uses are proposed with this
application. This chapter does not apply.

CHAPTER 35 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
Response: The future construction of the proposed police facility will have associated
temporary structures and uses in the form of constru ction trailers, equipment and
activity. At this point there are no defined details, however as construction nears this
information can be coordinated with the Planning Director. The provisions of th is
chapter are met .

CHAPTER 36 MANUFACTURED HOMES
Response: No manufactured homes are proposed with this application. This chapter
does not apply.

CHAPTER 37 HOME OCCUPATIONS
Response: This application does not include a request for any home occupations. This
chapter does not apply.

CHAPTER 38 ADDITIONAL YARD AR EA REQUIRED
Response: All setbacks required in both site zoning districts are met with this
application. This chapter does not apply.

CHAPTER 41 BUILDING HEIGHT, STRUCTURES O N STEEP LOTS, EXCEPT IONS

A.        For all zoning districts, building height shall be the vertical distance above a
          reference datum measured to the highest point of a flat roof or to the deck line of
          a mansard roof or to the highest gable, ridgeline or peak of a pitched or hipped
          roof, not including projections above roofs such as cupolas, to wers, etc. The
          reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a
          greater height of building.

          1. For relatively flat sites where there is less than a 10 -foot difference in grade
               between the front and rear of the building, the height of the building shall
               be measured from grade five feet out from the exterior wall at the front of
               the building; or


H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc           16
Response: The subject site has more than 10 -feet of grade difference between the
front and rear of the building. This standard does no t apply.

     2. For steeper lots where there is more than a 10 -foot difference in grade
          between the front and rear of the building, the height of the building is
          measured from grade at a point five feet out from the exterior wall on the
          lowest side (front or rear) of the building. One then measures vertically to
          the peak or ridgeline of the roof to determine the height.
Response: The subject site has approximately 14 feet of grade difference between the
front and rear of the building. As such the measurement o f building height has been
determined using this standard. The height of the building is 32 '-6" measured at the
northeast corner of the structure.

     3. Buildings on cross slopes or side slopes are measured at either the front or
           rear of the building using methods described in subsections (A)(1) and (2)
           of this definition only.
Response: The proposed building is not on a cross or side slope. This standard does
not apply.

CHAPTER 42 CLEAR VISION AREAS
Response: The subject site is a corner lot with a rig ht-of-way width greater than
24 feet. As such, the appropriate clear vision triangle according to CDC 42.040 (30 ')
has been provided along the intersection of 8th Avenue and 13th Street. Additionally,
the two site driveways proposed meet the requirements of th is section as shown on the
site and landscape plan. The standards of this chapter have been met.

CHAPTER 44 FENCES & SCREENING O UTDOOR STORAGE

44.020 Sight-Obscuring Fence; Setback and Height Limitations

A.         A sight- or non-sight-obscuring fence may be lo cated on the property line or in a
          yard setback area subject to the following:

          1.
           The fence is located within:
           a. A required front yard area, and it does not exceed three feet, except
                pillars and driveway entry features subject to the requirements of
                Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas, and approval by the Planning
                Director;
Response: This application does not include fences or walls within the front yard
along 8 th Avenue. This standard does not apply.

                    b.
               A required side                                 yard which abuts a street and it is within that portion
               of the side yard                                which is also part of the front yard setback area and it
               does not exceed                                 three feet;
Response: The proposed wall                                     along 13 th Street is not within the front y ard. This
standard does not apply.

                    c.
             A required side yard which abuts a street and it is within that portion
             of the side yard which is not also a portion of the front yard setback
             area and it does not exceed six feet provided the provisions of Chapter
             42 CDC are met;
Response: The proposed wall along 13 th Street will not exceed 6 feet. The wall will
include a vehicle gate for security setbac k from the driveway with 13 th Street,

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                                    17
meeting the vision clearance standards of Chapter 42. No other fences or walls are
proposed along a side y ard which abuts a street. This standard is met.

                    d.
             A required rear yard which abuts a street and it does not exceed six
             feet; or
Response: The proposed fence and wall do not abut a street . This standard does not
apply.
                    e.
               A required side yard area which does not abut a street or a rear yard
               and it does not exceed six feet.
Response: The proposed fence within the rear y ard does will not exceed 6 feet. The
remainder of the secure wall is within the interior of the site, and outside of a
required rear or side yard. This standard is met.


B.        Fence or wall on a retaining wall. When a fence is built on a retaining wa ll or an
          artificial berm, the following standards shall apply:

          1.
          When the retaining wall or artificial berm is 30 inches or less in height
          from finished grade, the maximum fence or wall height on top of the
          retaining wall shall be six feet.
     2.   When the retaining wall or earth berm is greater than 30 inches in height,
          the combined height of the retaining wall and fence or wall from finished
          grade shall not exceed eight and one -half feet.
     3.   Fences or walls located on top of retaining walls or earth berms in excess
          of 30 inches above finished grade may exceed the total allowed combined
          height of eight and one -half feet; provided, that the fence or wall is located
          a minimum of two feet from the retaining wall and the fence or wall height
          shall not exceed si x feet.
Response: The proposed fence near the northern property line will be constructed on a
24-inch retaining wall. The fence will be 6 feet and the combined height of the fence
and wall will not exceed 8.5 feet. This standard is met.

44.030 Screening o f Outdoor Storage
A.        All service, repair, and storage activities carried on in connection with any
          commercial, business or industrial activity and not conducted within an enclosed
          building shall be screened from view of all adjacent properties and adjacen t
          streets by a sight -obscuring fence.

B.   The sight -obscuring fence shall be in accordance with provisions of Chapter 42
     CDC, Clear Vision Areas, and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 55
     CDC, Design Review.
Response: This application does not include outdoor storage. This standard does not
apply.

44.040 Landscaping
Landscap ing which is located on the fence line and which impairs sight vision shall
not be located within the clear vision area as provided in Chapter 42 CDC.
Response: Landscaping along the site‟s 13 th Street frontage will meet the
requirements of Chapter 42.

44.050 Standards for Construction
A.        The structural side of the fence shall face the owner‟s property; and

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc          18
B.   The sides of the fence abutting adjoining properties and the street shall be
     maintained. (Ord. 1291, 1990)
Response: The construction of the fence near the northern property line will be
specified to be constructed in compliance with (A). Coordination with the abutting
property owners for maintenance of the fence w ill occur, although the fence is
proposed to be located entirely on the subject property. This standard is met.

CHAPTER 46 OFF-STREET PARKING AND L OADING

46.090 Minimum Off -Street Parking Space Requirements

C.        Commercial
          5.   Professional offices, banks and savings and loans, and government offices.
               One space for every 350 sq. ft. of gross area.
          Response: The proposed gross area of the building is 21,959 SF. Per this use
          classification, a minimu m of 63 spaces and a maximum of 70 spaces (per CDC
          46.090.F). We are proposing to have 6 3 spaces meeting the minimum and
          maximu m parking space requirements.

46.110 Reservoir Areas Required for Drive -In Uses
Response: The proposed public safety facility is not a listed drive -in use. This
standard does not apply.

46.120 Driveways Required On Site
Response: The site design includes a primary publicly accessible driveway to 8 th
Avenue meeting this standard.

46.130 Off-Street Loading Spaces
Buildings or structures to be built or substantially altered, which receive and
distribute material or merchandise by truck, shall provide and maintain off -street
loading and maneuvering space. The dimensional standard for loading spaces is a
minimum of 14 feet wide by 20 feet long or proportionate to accommodate the size of
delivery trucks that typically serve the proposed use as follows:
Response: The proposed public safety facility does not receive and distribute material
or merchandise by truck. As such no loading spaces are proposed. This standard does
not apply.

46.140 Exemption s to Parking Requirements
Response: The subject site is not located within the Willamette Falls Drive
Commercial District/Overlay Zone. This standard does not apply.

46.150                    Design and Standards
The following standards apply to the design and improvement o f areas used for
vehicle parking, storage, loading, and circulation:

A.        Design Standards:

          1.        “One standard parking space” means a minimum for a parking stall of eight
                    feet in width and 16 feet in length. These stalls shall be identified as
                    “compact.” To accommodate larger cars, 50 percent of the required parking
                    spaces shall have a minimum dimension of nine feet in width and 18 feet in
                    length (nine feet by 18 feet). When multi -family parking stalls back onto a
                    main driveway, the stalls shall be nine feet by 20 feet .

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc             19
Response: As is shown on the attached site plan (Sheet C2.1), 48 “standard” (9 'x18')
parking spaces are proposed and 14 “compact” (9 'x 16') parking spaces . This use
requires a minimu m of 63 parking spaces, and 14 (22%) are proposed. This stand ard is
met.

          2.
          Disabled parking and maneuvering spaces shall be consistent with current
          federal dimensional standards and Section 46.150(B) and placed nearest to
          accessible building entryways and ramps.
Response: The 3 disabled parking spaces associated w ith the proposed development
are consistent with all applicable dimensional standards. This standard is met.

          3.
          Parking spaces located in the public right -of-way that require backing
          movements or other maneuvering within a street or right -of-way are
          permitted with City Engineer approval as is in the case of Willamette Falls
          Drive parking facilities.
Response: No parking spaces are proposed within the right -of-way. This standard
does not apply.

          4.
         Service drives shall be designed and constructed to facilit ate the flow of
         traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic access and egress, and maximum
         safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site.
Response: All proposed service drives have been designed to accommodate the site‟s
vehicular traffic and acce ss, including minimizing conflicts of the pedestrian
connection to the building from 8 th Avenue. This standard is met.

          5.
           Each parking and/or loading space shall have clear access, whereby the
           relocation of other vehicles to utilize the parking space is n ot required.
Response: All parking areas have been designed so that no double stacking areas
exist. This standard is met.

          6.
           Except for single and two -family residences, any area intended to be used to
           meet the off -street parking requirements as contained in this chapter shall
           have all parking spaces clearly marked using a permanent paint. All interior
           drives and access aisles shall be clearly marked and signed to show
           direction of flow and maintain vehicular and pedestrian safety. Permeable
           parking surfac e spaces may have an alternative delineation for parking
           spaces.
Response: All areas proposed to be used for parking and drive aisles will be marked
with a permanent paint and directional signage to facilitate safe circulation through
the site. This standa rd is met.

          7.
          Except for residential parking, and parking for public parks and trailheads,
          at least 50 percent of all areas used for the parking and/or storage and/or
          maneuvering of any vehicle, boat and/or trailer shall be improved with
          asphalt or concrete surfaces according to the same standards required for
          the construction and acceptance of city streets.
Response: All proposed parking areas will be paved with asphalt concrete. This
standard is met.

          8.        Off-street parking spaces for single - and two -family residences shall be
                    improved with an asphalt or concrete surface, or a permeable parking
                    surface designed to reduce surface runoff, to specifications as approved by
                    the Building Official. Other parking facilities for two - and single-family
                    homes that ar e to accommodate additional vehicles, boats, recreational

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc            20
         vehicles, and trailers, etc., need not be paved. All parking for multi -family
         residential development shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. Driveways
         shall measure at least 20 feet from the back of sidewalk to garage or the end
         of the parking pad to accommodate cars and sport utility vehicles without
         the vehicles blocking the public sidewalk.
Response: Single and two family residences are not proposed. This standard does not
apply.

          9.
          Access drives from the street to off -street parking or loading areas shall be
          designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic and provide
          maximum safety for pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the site. The number
          of access drives shall be limited to the m inimum that will allow the property
          to accommodate and service the anticipated traffic. Access drives shall be
          clearly and permanently marked and defined through use of rails, fences,
          walls, or other barriers or markers on frontage not occupied by service
          drives.
Response: The site‟s function as a police facility requires a minimum of two access
points. The access point from 8 th Avenue is intended to provide both police and
public access to the site. The access point from 13 th Street is intended to provide
secure access for police only in the event of an emergency . Both access drive s are
easily identifiable with the proposed improvements associated with the development,
and the construction of a standard commercial driveway apron. This standard is met.

          10.
         Access drives shall have a minimum vision clearance as provided in Chapter
         42, Clear Vision Areas.
Response: The proposed access drives meet the minimum vision clearance
requirements in Chapter 42. This standard is met.

          11.
           Parking spaces along the bounda ries of a parking lot or adjacent to interior
           landscaped areas or sidewalks shall be provided with a wheel stop at least 4
           inches high located 2 feet back from the front of the parking stall.
           Alternately, landscaped areas or sidewalks adjacent to the parki ng stalls
           without wheel stops shall be two feet wider.
Response: Several parking spaces are proposed bordering interior landscape areas and
sidewalks. The minimum dimension of parking lot landscaping and internal sidewalks
is 5 feet and 6 f eet, (CDC 46.150 .A.20 and 54.020.E.3.f ), respectively . Twenty -two
(22) parking stalls have been specified for wheel stops in the secured parking area,
where the abutting landscape area or sidewalk dimension is less than required by this
standard . The remaining sidewalk and internal parking lot landscape areas ha ve been
increased to avoid installation of wheel stops. This standard is met.




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc     21
          12.
          Off-street parking and loading areas shall be drained in accordance with
          plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer. St orm drainage at
          commercial sites may also have to be collected to treat oils and other
          residue.
Response: As shown on the attached utility plan, all stormwater associated with
parking and loading areas will be collected via a series of catch basins and div erted
into a water quality and detention pond. This standard is met.

          13.  Artificial lighting on all off -street parking facilities shall be designed to
               deflect all light downward away from surrounding residences and so as not
               to create a hazard to the publ ic use of any road or street.
          Response: The proposed site lighting associated with this application is designed
          to deflect light downward away from the northerly abutting residences as is
          shown on the attached photometric plan and cut sheet (See Exhibits B &F). This
          standard is met.

          17.  The parking area shall have less than a five percent grade. No drainage
               across adjacent sidewalks or walkways is allowed.
          Response: All proposed parking areas have a grade no greater than 5% as shown
          on the site grading pla n. No drainage across adjacent sidewalks or walkways is
          proposed. This standard is met.

          18.
          Commercial, office, industrial, and public parking lots may not occupy more
          than 50 percent of the main lot frontage of a development site. The
          remaining frontage shall comprise buildings or landscaping. If over 50
          percent of the lineal frontage comprises parking lot, the landscape strip
          between the right -of-way and parking lot shall be increased to 15 feet wide
          and shall include terrain variations (e.g., one -foot-high berm) plus
          landscaping. The defensible space of the parking lot should not be
          compromised.
Response: The main lot frontage of the subject site is 8 th Avenue. The public parking
area located to the side of the proposed building is setback from the front age by a
minimum of 15 feet of landscaping. Th is standard is met.

          19.
          Areas of the parking lot improved with asphalt or concrete surfaces shall be
          designed into areas of 12 or less spaces through the use of defined
          landscaped area.
Response: Parking area s proposed with this application are design ated into areas of
12 parking spaces or less through the use of internal landscape areas. This standard is
met.

          20.       Pedestrian walkways shall be provided in parking areas having 20 or more
                    spaces. Walkways or sid ewalks shall be constructed between major
                    buildings/activity areas (an example in multi -family housing: between
                    recreation center, swimming pool, manager‟s office, park or open space
                    areas, parking lots, etc.) within a development, between adjacent
                    developments and the new development, as feasible, and between major
                    buildings/activity areas within the development and adjacent streets and all
                    adjacent transit stops. Internal parking lot circulation and design should
                    maintain ease of access for pedestrians fr om streets and transit stops.
                    Walkways shall be constructed using a material that visually contrasts with
                    the parking lot and driveway surface. Walkways shall be further identifiable
                    to pedestrians and motorists by grade separation, walls, curbs, surface

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc             22
          texture (surface texture shall not interfere with safe use of wheelchairs,
          baby carriages, shopping carts, etc.), and/or landscaping. Walkways shall
          be six feet wide. The arrangement and layout of the paths shall depend on
          functional requirements.
Response: A pedestrian walkway is proposed abutting the western public parking
spaces. This walkway connects to the main link to the proposed plaza and public street
system associated with 8 th Avenue. This walkway is proposed to be constructed of
scored concrete and protected by a raised curb, which is visually different than the
abutting service drives. This walkway has been extended to 8 feet in width as required
by CDC 46.150.A.11, where it abuts parking spaces . An additional walkway is
proposed within the secure d parking area that meets this standard. This standard is
met.

          21.
          The parking and circulation patterns are easily comprehended and defined.
          The patterns shall be clear to minimize traffic hazards and congestion and
          to facilitate emergency vehicles.
Response: The parking and vehicle circulation areas associated with the proposed
development provide clear and accessible traffic patterns for emergency vehicles
within both public and secure parking areas. This standard is met.

     22. The parking spaces shall be close to the related use.
Response: The proposed parking spaces (both public and secure) are located as close
to the proposed buildings as is possible, considering the slopes of the existing site.
This standard is met.

    23. Permeable parking spaces shall b e designed and built to City standards.
Response: Permeable parking spaces are not proposed. This standard does not apply.

B.        Accessible Parking Standards for Persons With Disabilities: If any parking is
          provided for the public or visitors, or both, the n eeds of the people with
          disabilities shall be based upon the following standards or current applicable
          federal standards, whichever is more stringent:

     1.   Minimum number of accessible parking space requirements:
Response: The proposed 21,959 SF of building requires a minimu m of 63 spaces
(assuming an office use according to 46.090.C). As such three accessible (1 van
accessible) spaces are required to be accessible and are provided. This standard is
met.

          2.
          Location of parking spaces. Parking spaces for the individual with a
          disability that serve a particular building shall be located on the shortest
          possible accessible circulation route to an accessible entrance to a
          building. In separate parking structures or lots that do not serve a
          particular building, p arking spaces for the persons with disabilities shall be
          located on the shortest possible circulation route to an accessible
          pedestrian entrance of the parking facility.
Response: The proposed accessible parking spaces are provided nearest the building
entrances. This standard is met.

      3.     Accessible parking space and aisle shall meet ADA vertical and
      horizontal slope standards.
Response: All accessible parking spaces and aisles meet the ADA standards. This
standard is met.



H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc      23
             5.
           One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be
           served by an access aisle 96 inches wide. The van stall shall have an
           adjacent 8 -foot wide aisle. All other accessible stalls shall have a 6 -foot
           wide aisle. Two vehicles may share the same aisle if it is between the m.
           The vertical clearance of the van space shall be 96 inches.
Response: Of the three ADA spaces provided, one is van accessible exceeding this
standard.

             6.
            Van-accessible parking spaces shall have an additional sign marked
            “Van Accessible” mounted below the accessible parking sign. A van -
            accessible parking space reserved for wheelchair users shall have a sign
            that includes the words “Wheelchair Use Only.” Van -accessible parking
            shall have an adjacent eight -foot-wide aisle. All other accessible stalls
            shall have a six -foot-wide aisle. Two vehicles may share the same aisle if
            it is between them. The vertical clearance of the van space shall be 96
            inches.
Response: The proposed van -accessible parking space will include required signage in
     accordance with thi s standard as noted on the site plan.

D.    Bicycle Facilities and Parking:
      1.     Provisions shall be made for pedestrian and bicycle ways if such
             facilities are shown on an adopted plan.
Response: Provisions have been provided for pedestrian s and bicycles from the public
system along 8 th Avenue. This standard is met.

             2.
             Bicycle parking facilities shall either be lockable enclosures in which
             the bicycle is stored, or secure stationary racks which accommodate
             bicyclist's locks securing the frame and both whee ls. The bicycle parking
             shall be no more than 50 feet from the entrance to the building, well lit,
             observable, and properly signed.
Response: A total of 1 1 bicycle parking spaces are required with this application.
Several locations of bicycle parking are proposed for the variety of uses associated
with the proposed building. Four spaces are proposed near the main building entrance
for the public, 4 spaces are proposed within the secured parking area near the lower
employee entrance , and an additional 3 spa ces are proposed within the sally port for
police use. The 4 public spaces and 3 spaces within the sally port will be covered.
Stationary racks are proposed at the exterior locations, and wall mounted racks will be
provided within the interior location. This standard is met.

             3.           Bicycle parking must be provided in the following amounts:
              Libraries, Museums, Government Offices, etc. 2, or 1.5 spaces per 1,000
              gross sq. ft., whichever is greater. 25% covered.
Response: The proposed public safety facility has b een interpreted as an office for the
purposes of determining required bicycle parking. The proposed 21,959 SF of building
requires a minimu m of 33 spaces and 8 to be covered. Several locations of bicycle
parking are proposed for the variety of uses associa ted with the proposed building. Six
spaces are proposed near the main building entrance for the public, 4 spaces are
proposed within the secured parking area near the lower employee entrance, and the
remaining spaces are are proposed within the sally port for the police use. All spaces
within the sally port will be covered. This standard is met.

E.        Office or industrial developments shall be allowed a 10 percent reduction in the
          number of required parking spaces when the property owner agrees to a demand
          management program that includes three or more of the following measures:

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc        24
Response: A reduction in the number of required spaces is not proposed with this
application. This standard does not apply.

CHAPTER 48 ACCESS

48.040 MINI MUM VEHI CLE REQU I REMENTS FOR NO N-RESIDENTI AL USES

Access, egress, and circulation system for all non -residential uses shall not be less
than the following:

A.         Service drives for non -residential uses shall be fully improved with hard surface
          pavement:
          1.   With a minimum of 24 -foot width when accommodating two -way traffic; or
          2.   With a minimum of 15 -foot width when accommodating one -way traffic.
               Horizontal clearance shall be two and one -half feet wide on either side of
               the driveway.
          3.   Meet the requirements of CDC 48.030 (E)(3) through (6).
          4.   Pickup window driveways may be 12 feet wide unless the Fire Chief
               determines additional width is required.
          Response: Two types of services drives are proposed . The site‟s primary public
          service drive from 8 th Avenue will accommodate two -way traffic and is 30 -feet
          wide. A secondary service drive from 13th Street is intended for emergency
          egress only and is one -way . This drive is 22 -feet in width in order to
          accommodate emergency access and service of the site‟s refuse storage . . No
          pickup windows are proposed. CDC 48.030(E)(3) -(6)

          3.       Minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet, 6 inches.

          4.        Appropriate turnaround facilities per Fire Chief‟s standards for emerge ncy
                    vehicles when the drive is over 150 feet long. Fire Department turnaround
                    areas shall not exceed 7% grade unless waived by the Fire Chief.

          5.       The grade shall not exceed 10 % on average, with a maximu m of 15 %.

          6.       A minimum centerline turning radius of 45 feet for the curve.

These standards are met.

48.060 WIDTH AND LOCATION O F CURB CUTS AND ACCE SS SEPARATION
      REQUI REMENTS

A.  Minimum curb cut width shall be 16 feet.
Response: The proposed curb cut widths exceed this standard.

B.   Maximum curb cut width sh all be 36 feet, except along Highway 43 in which case
     the maximum curb cut shall be 40 feet. For emergency service providers,
     including fire stations, the maximum shall be 50 feet.
Response: The proposed curb cuts are 36 feet from 8 th Avenue and 24 feet fr om 13th
Street meeting the maximum standard for an emergency service provider.

C.         No curb cuts shall be allowed any closer to an intersecting street right -of-way
          line than the following:
          1.    On an arterial when intersected by another arterial, 150 feet.

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc            25
     2.   On an arterial when intersected by a collector, 100 feet.
     3.   On an arterial when intersected by a local street, 100 feet.
     4.   On a collector when intersecting an arterial street, 100 feet.
     5.   On a collector when intersected by another collector or local stree t, 35 feet.
     6.   On a local street when intersecting any other street, 35 feet.
Response: Both 13 t h and 8 t h are classified as local streets. Both curb cuts are in
excess of 35 feet from the intersection of 13 th and 8th. This standard is met.

D.    There shall be a minimum distance between any two adjacent curb cuts on the
     same side of a public street, except for one -way entrances and exits, as follows:
     1.   On an arterial street, 150 feet.
     2.   On a collector street, 75 feet.
     3.   Between any two curb cuts on the same lot on a local street, 30 feet.
Response: Both 13 th and 8th are classified as local streets. The curb cut proposed on
8th is approximately 50„ from the nearest existing curb cut to the east. The curb cut
proposed on 13 th is approximately 128' from the near est existing curb cu t to the north.
This standard is met.

E.   A rolled curb may be installed in lieu of curb cuts and access separation
     requirements.
Response: Rolled curbs are not proposed with this development. This standard does
not apply.

F.  Curb cuts sh all be kept to the minimum, particularly on Highway 43.
    Consolidation of driveways is preferred. The standard on Highway 43 is one curb
    cut per business if consolidation of driveways is not possible .
Response: The subject site does not abut Highway 43. Thi s standard does not apply.

G.  Adequate line of sight pursuant to engineering standards should be afforded at
    each driveway or accessway. (Ord. 1270, 1990; Ord. 1584, 2008)
Response: Site distance requirements have been addressed in the traffic study.


CHAPTER 52 SIGNS
Response: Separate permits for building and site signage as required by Section
52.103 will be applied for independent of this land use application. Applicable
provisions of this chapter will be reviewed at that time.

CHAPTER 53 SIDEWALK USE
Response: This application does not propose the display of merchandise or the service
of food or beverages within the sidewalks. This chapter does not apply.

CHAPTER 54 LANDSCAPING

54.020 Approval Criteria

A.        Every development proposal requires inventor ying existing site conditions which
          include trees and landscaping. In designing the new project, every reasonable
          attempt should be made to preserve and protect existing trees and to incorporate
          them into the new landscape plan. Similarly, significant land scaping (e.g.,
          bushes, shrubs) should be integrated. The rationale is that saving a 30 -foot-tall
          mature tree helps maintain the continuity of the site, they are qualitatively
          superior to two or three two -inch caliper street trees, they provide immediate

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc         26
     micro-climate benefits (e.g., shade), they soften views of the street, and they can
     increase the attractiveness, marketability, and value of the development.
Response: The attached existing conditions plan shows all existing trees located on
the site. The pr oposed development includes the removal of 6 existing trees due to
unavoidable impacts associated with the construction of the new facility. The existing
significant walnut tree along the frontage of 8 th Avenue will be preserved. All trees
proposed to be r emoved will be replaced with the new landscaping as is shown on
Sheet L1.0. This standard is met.

B.   To encourage tree preservation, the parking requirement may be reduced by one
     space for every significant tree that is preserved in the parking lot area f or a
     maximum reduction of 10 percent of the required parking. The City Parks
     supervisor or arborist shall determine the significance of the tree and/or
     landscaping to determine eligibility for these reductions.
Response: No significant trees, as identified by the city arborist , exist within the
parking lot area. This standard does not apply .

C. Developers must also comply with the Municipal Code chapter on tree protection.
Response: Chapter 8.5 of the Municipal Code contains the Community Tree
Ordinance. Ho wever, there are no specific details for tree protection other than for
street trees. As such, the Tree Technical Manual has been consulted and the details
specified on the submitted plans for tree protection. This standard is met.

D.   Heritage trees. Heri tage trees are trees which, because of their age, type,
     notability, or historical association are of special importance.
Response: No heritage trees are located on the subject site. This standard does not
apply.

E.        Landscaping - by type, location and amo unt.
          2.   Non-residential uses. A minimum of 20 percent of the gross site area shall
               be landscaped. Parking lot landscaping may be counted in the percentage.
          Response: As shown on the attached Site Plan (Sheet C2.0), a total of 20,338 SF
          or 29% of the site is proposed to be landscaped. This standard is met.
          3.   All uses (residential uses [non -single family] and non -residential uses):
               a.   The landscaping shall be located in defined landscaped areas which
                    are uniformly distributed throughout the parking or loa ding area.
                    There shall be one shade tree planted for every eight parking spaces.
                    These trees shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking lot to
                    provide shade. Parking lots with over 20 spaces shall have a minimum
                    10 percent of the interior of the pa rking lot devoted to landscaping.
                    Pedestrian walkways in the landscaped areas are not to be counted in
                    the percentage. The perimeter landscaping, explained in subsection
                    (E)(3)(d) of this section, shall not be included in the 10 percent figure.
                    Parking lots with 10 to 20 spaces shall have a minimum five percent of
                    the interior of the parking lot devoted to landscaping. The perimeter
                    landscaping, as explained above, shall not be included in the five
                    percent. Parking lots with fewer than 10 spaces shall have the standard
                    perimeter landscaping and at least two shade trees. Non -residential
                    parking areas paved with a permeable parking surface may reduce the
                    required minimum interior landscaping by one -third for the area with
                    the permeable parking surface only.
          Response: The proposed parking area contains 6 3 spaces, and requires 8 shade
          trees. As shown on the attached landscape plan, 10 shade trees are proposed in

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc           27
          addition to the trees intended for perimeter landscaping. In addition, 15 % of the
          parking area is pro posed to be landscaped, excluding the perimeter landscaping.
          This standard is met.

                b.   The landscaped areas shall not have a width of less than five feet.
          Response: All internal parking lot landscape areas with trees are at least five
          feet. This standard i s met.

                    c.
                     The soils, site, proposed soil amendments, and proposed irrigation
                     system shall be appropriate for the healthy and long term maintenance
                     of the proposed plant species.
          Response: The proposed landscape improvements , accompanying planting
          specifications and irrigation system will ensure a long -lasting effect for the
          subject site. The plants selected include native and native adapted plants that are
          not expected to be reliant on supplemental irrigation after establishment (e.g. 18
          months). This standard is met.

                    d.
                    A parking, loading, or service area which abuts a street shall be set
                    back from the right -of-way line by perimeter landscaping in the form of
                    a landscaped strip at least 10 feet in width. When a parking, loading,
                    or service area, or driv eway is contiguous to an adjoining parcel, there
                    shall be an intervening five -foot wide landscape strip. The landscaped
                    area shall contain:
                    1)   Street trees spaced as appropriate to the species, not to exceed 50
                         feet apart on the average;
                    2)   Shrubs, not to reach a height greater than three feet six inches,
                         spaced no more than five feet apart on the average; or,
                    3)   Vegetative ground cover such as grass, wild flowers, or other
                         landscape material to cover 100 percent of the exposed ground
                         within two growing sea sons. No bark mulch shall be allowed
                         except under the canopy of low level shrubs.
          Response: The parking areas near the abutting right -of-way s are setback
          approximately 17 feet from 8 th Avenue and 19 feet from 13 th Street. The parking
          along the eastern prop erty line is setback a minimu m of 12 feet and the parking
          along the northe rn property line a minimum of 6 feet .

          Street trees are proposed along both site frontages. A mixture of trees, shrubs
          and ground cover are proposed within the perimeter landscape a reas abutting all
          lot lines. This standard is met.

                    e.
                    If over 50 percent of the lineal frontage of the main street or arterial
                    adjacent to the development site comprises parking lot, the landscape
                    strip between the right -of-way and parking lot shall be in creased to 15
                    feet in width and shall include terrain variations (e.g., 1 -foot high
                    berm) plus landscaping. This extra requirement only applies to one
                    street frontage.
          Response: The subject site does not front on a main street or arterial. This
          standard do es not apply.

                    f.        A parking, loading, or a service area which abuts a property line shall
                              be separated from the property line by a landscaped area at least five
                              feet in width and which shall act as a screen and noise buffer and the
                              adequacy of the screen a nd buffer shall be determined by the criteria


H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                   28
                     set forth in Section 55.100(C) and (D) except where shared parking is
                     approved under Section 46.040. (ORD. 1408)
          Response: All parking areas are separated from pe rimeter lot lines by at least
          6 feet. The landsc aped area in this space will act as a screen and noise buffer, in
          particular where the secured parking is located as this area is enclosed with a
          fence, in addition to landscaping. This standard does not apply.

                    g.
                    All areas in a parking lot not used for p arking, maneuvering, or
                    circulation shall be landscaped.
          Response: All parking areas not used for parking, maneuvering, or circulation
          are landscaped as is shown on Sheet L1.0. This standard is met.

                    h.
                     The landscaping in parking areas shall not obstruct l ines of sight for
                     safe traffic operation.
          Response: The proposed landscape has been specified to meet the maximum
          height allowed by Chapter 42 so as to not obstruct lines of sight as required by
          for safe traffic movements. This standard is met.

                    i.
                    Outdoor storage areas, service areas (loading docks, refuse deposits,
                    and delivery areas), and above -ground utility facilities shall be
                    buffered and screened to obscure their view from adjoining properties
                    and to reduce noise levels to acceptable levels at the pr operty line. The
                    adequacy of the buffer and screening shall be determined by the
                    criteria set forth in Section 55.100(C)(1).
          Response: The proposed trash enclosure is proposed to be enclosed and screened
          using a 6-foot tall decorative CMU wall with brick a ccent similar to the materials
          used for the proposed buildings. This standard is met.

                    j.Crime prevention shall be considered and plant materials shall not be
                      located in a manner which prohibits surveillance of public and semi -
                      public areas (shared or comm on areas).
             Response: The proposed landscap e areas and plant materials will not restrict
             surveillance of public and semi -public areas through proper spacing and
             grouping of materials that could adversely affect the safety of the site in terms
             of security. T his standard is met.

                    k.Irrigation facilities shall be located so that landscaped areas can be
                      properly maintained and so that the facilities do not interfere with
                      vehicular or pedestrian circulation.
             Response: Irrigation facilities will be constructed a s a design -build system.
             The attached irrigation zones have been specified which will not affect the on -
             site circulation. t This standard is met.

                    l.        For commercial, office, multi -family, and other sites, the developer
                              shall select trees that possess the following characteristics:
                              1)   Provide generous "spreading" canopy for shade.
                              2)   Roots do not break up adjacent paving.
                              3)   Tree canopy spread starts at least six feet up from grade in, or
                                   adjacent to, parking lots, roads, or sidewalks unless the tree is
                                   columnar in nature.
                              4)   No sticky leaves or sap dripping trees (no honey dew excretion).
                              5)   No seed pods or fruit bearing trees (flowering trees are
                                   acceptable).
                              6)   Disease resistant.

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                  29
                      7)   Compatible to planter size.
                      8)   Drought tolerant unless irrigation is provided.
                      9)   Attractive foliage or form all seasons.
             Response: All proposed landscape materials comply with the above -mentioned
             criteria as shown on the landscape plan. The plants selected include native and
             native adapted plants that are not expected to be reliant on supplemental
             irrigation after establishment (e.g. 18 months per LEED standards). This
             standard is met.

                    m.
                     Plant materials (shrubs, ground cover, etc.) shall be selected for their
                     appropriateness to the site, drought tolerance, year -round greenery
                     and coverage, staggered flowering periods, and avoidance of nuisance
                     plants (Scotch broom, etc.).
             Response: The plants selected include native and native adapted plants that are
             not expected to be reliant on supplemental irrigation after establish ment (e.g.
             18 months per LEED standards).




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc          30
6.           CHAPTER 55 DESIGN RE VIEW

55.100.B.              Relationship to the Natural and Physical Environment
          1.
          The buildings and other site elements shall be designed and located so that
          all heritage trees, as defined in the mun icipal code, shall be saved …
Response: No City designated Heritage Trees are located on the site. This standard is
not applicable.
          2.
          All heritage trees, as defined in the municipal code, all trees and clusters of
          trees (“cluster” is defined as three or mo re trees with overlapping
          driplines; however, native oaks need not have an overlapping dripline) that
          are considered significant by the City Arborist, either individually or in
          consultation with certified arborists or similarly qualified professionals,
          based on accepted arboricultural standards including consideration of their
          size, type, location, health, long term survivability, and/or numbers, shall
          be protected pursuant to the criteria of subsections (B)(2)(a) through (f) of
          this section. In cases where there is a difference of opinion on the
          significance of a tree or tree cluster, the City Arborist‟s findings shall
          prevail. It is important to acknowledge that all trees are not significant and,
          further, that this code section will not necessarily protect all trees deemed
          significant.
Response: In the opinion of the city arborist using the criteria listed in this standard,
the subject site contains one significant tree, a 31 " walnut abutting 8 th Avenue.

                    a.
                Non-residential and residential projects on Typ e I and Type II lands
                shall protect all heritage trees and all significant trees and tree
                clusters by either the dedication of these areas or establishing tree
                conservation easements. Development of Type I and II lands shall
                require the careful layout of streets, driveways, building pads, lots,
                and utilities to avoid heritage trees and significant trees and tree
                clusters, and other natural resources pursuant to this code . The method
                for delineating the protected trees or tree clusters (“dripline + 10
                feet”) is explained in subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section. Exemptions
                of subsections (B)(2)(c), (e), and (f) of this section shall apply.
Response: The subject site does not contain Type I and Type II lands. This standard
does not apply.

                    b.        Non-residential an d residential projects on non -Type I and II lands
                              shall set aside up to 20 percent of the area to protect trees and tree
                              clusters that are determined to be significant, plus any heritage trees.
                              Therefore, in the event that the City Arborist determines that a
                              significant tree cluster exists at a development site, then up to 20
                              percent of the non -Type I and II lands shall be devoted to the
                              protection of those trees, either by dedication or easement The exact
                              percentage is determined by establishing the dripli nes of the trees or
                              tree clusters that are to be protected. In order to protect the roots
                              which typically extend further, an additional 10 -foot measurement
                              beyond the dripline shall be added. The square footage of the area
                              inside this “dripline plus 10 fee t” measurement shall be the basis for
                              calculating the percentage (see figure below). The City Arborist will
                              identify which tree(s) are to be protected. Development of non -Type I
                              and II lands shall also require the careful layout of streets, driveways,
                              building pads, lots, and utilities to avoid significant trees, tree
                              clusters, heritage trees, and other natural resources pursuant to this

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                    31
               code. Exemptions of subsections (B)(2)(c), (e), and (f) of this section
               shall apply. Please note that in the event that m ore than 20 percent of
               the non -Type I and II lands comprise significant trees or tree clusters,
               the developer shall not be required to save the excess trees, but is
               encouraged to do so.
Response: The subject site does not contain Type I or II lands, however does contain
one significant tree according to the city arborist . Therefore, up to 20% of the subject
site can be devoted to protection of this tree. The dripline of the significant tree has
been surveyed and included in the attached plan set. An additio nal 10 feet has been
added to the dripline in accordance with this standard.

The total square footage of the „dripline plus 10 feet‟ is 5,043 SF , of which 2,322 SF
is on the subject property. The portion of the tree located on site and outside of the
public right -of-way is 3 % of the subject site.

As shown on the attached plans, the proposed development does not a void the
„dripline plus 10 foot area. As required by this standard, the proposed design has been
carefully considered in terms of tree protecti on and impact. Additionally, specific
requirements have been provided by the City Arborist ( Exhibit E) to ensure that the
long-term health of the tree is maintained. A variance to this standard is included in
this request to allow impact into the „dripine plus 10 feet of the site‟s significant tree.

                    c.
             Where stubouts of streets occur on abutting properties, and the
             extension of those streets will mean the loss of significant trees, tree
             clusters, or heritage trees, it is understood that tree loss may be
             inevitable. In these cases, the objective shall be to minimize tree loss.
             These provisions shall also apply in those cases where access, per
             construction code standards, to a parcel is blocked by a row or screen
             of significant trees or tree clusters.
Response: Stubouts of streets do not exist on abutting properties. This standard is not
applicable.

                    d.
              For both non-residential and residential development, the layout shall
              achieve at least 70 percent of maximum density for the developable net
              area. The develop able net area excludes all Type I and II lands and up
              to 20 percent of the remainder of the site for the purpose of protection
              of stands or clusters of trees as defined in subsection (B)(2) of this
              section.
Response: Please see the following breakdown:

                              Total Adjusted Site Area                                  68,497 SF
                              Less 20 % of Remaining Site Area                         (13,699 SF)
                              Net Developable Area                                      54,798 SF
                              6,000 SF (MU) & 35% (R -10)                          6,000 SF/19,179 SF
                              70 % of the Maximum Allowed Density                  4,200 SF/ 13,425 SF
                              Proposed Building Coverage                                15,285 SF

As shown on the above table the proposed layout achieves more than 70% of the
maximum density allowed (by either zoning designation) for the site. This standard is
met.

                    e.        For arterial and collector street projects, including Oregon
                              Department of Transportation street improvements, the roads and
                              graded areas shall avoid tree clusters where possible. Significant

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                         32
              trees, tree clusters, and heritage tree loss may occur, however, but
              shall be minimized.
Response: This project is not an arterial or co llector street project. This standard does
not apply.

                    f.
                If the protection of significant tree(s) or tree clusters is to occur in an
                area of grading that is necessary for the development of street grades,
                per City construction codes, which will result in an adjustment in the
                grade of over or under two feet, which will then threaten the health of
                the tree(s), the applicant will submit evidence to the Planning Director
                that all reasonable alternative grading plans have been considered and
                cannot work. The ap plicant will then submit a mitigation plan to the
                City Arborist to compensate for the removal of the tree(s) on an “inch
                by inch” basis (e.g., a 48 -inch Douglas fir could be replaced by 12
                trees, each four -inch). The mix of tree sizes and types shall be
                approved by the City Arborist.
Response: The proposed impacts to the site‟s significant tree are not related to a
grading effort that will result in an adjustment of over or under two feet for the
development of street grades . However, impacts are necessary for the development of
public sidewalks, as required by City public works standards, modified to increase the
health of the significant tree. This standard does not apply.
          3.
          The topography and natural drainage shall be preserved to the greatest
          degree po ssible.
Response: The existing site slope s from the southeast to the northeast, where the low
point of the site is located ( thus, the natural drainage pattern). In order to
accommodate development and provide acceptable grades for circulation, grading of
the site must occur. The design of the proposed development takes into consideration
the natural characteristics of the site and specifies retaining walls, and building
basement walls to utilize the existing slope . As such, careful placement of structures
and matching of existing grade lines have been provided to the best degree possible.
This standard is met.

          4.
         The structures shall not be located in areas subject to slumping and sliding .
         The Comprehensive Plan Background Report‟s Hazard Map, or updated
         material as available and as deemed acceptable by the Planning Director,
         shall be the basis for preliminary determination.
Response: According to the Landslide Inventory Map of the Northeast Quarter of the
Canby Quadrangle, dated 2009, the subject property do es not contain areas subject to
slumping and sliding. This standard is met.

          5.
          There shall be adequate distance between on site buildings and on site off
          site buildings on adjoining properties to provide for adequate light and air
          circulation and for fire protection.
Response: The site separated from abutting structures on two sides by abutting rights -
of-way. The proposed structure is oriented toward 8 th Avenue, which creates the
maximum distance between adjoining properties to the north as well as the east for
light and air circulation . Fire protection can occur from abutting rights -of-way or by
access through the internal drive aisles . This standard is met.
          6.        Architecture
                    a.  The predominant architecture of West Linn identified in the West Linn
                        vision process was contemporary vernacular residential designs
                        emphasizing natural materials : wood with brick and stone detail.
                        Colors are subdued earth tones: greys, brown, off -whites, slate, and

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc           33
               greens. Pitched roofs with overhanging eaves, decks, and details lik e
               generous multi -light windows with oversized trim are common . Also in
               evidence are the 1890s Queen Anne style homes of the Willamette
               neighborhood. Neo -traditional homes of the newer subdivisions feature
               large front porches with detailed porch supports, d ormers, bracketed
               overhanging eaves, and rear parking for cars. Many of these design
               elements have already been incorporated in commercial and office
               architecture.
Response: The building is predominantly composed of structural brick, the colors of
which have been selected to complement the brick color selected for the Tualatin
Valley Fire Station, located across 8 t h Avenue. The brick facades have been designed
adjacent to the residential neighborhood. Where more contemporary material
selections have been ma de, closer to the commercial areas to the east of the site, the
colors are subdued grey s, offset with dark window frames. The parapets are detailed
to respond to the historic nature of the surrounding Willamette neighborhood. This
standard is met.
          b.   The proposed structure(s) scale shall be compatible with the existing
               structure(s) on site and on adjoining sites. Contextual design is
               required. Contextual design means respecting and incorporating
               prominent architectural styles, building lines, roof forms, rhythm of
               windows, building scale and massing, materials and colors of
               surrounding buildings in the proposed structure.
Response: The scale of the building has been carefully composed to provide a civic
prominence to the site at the 8 t h Avenue entrance, wh ile respecting the scale of the
residential neighborhood to the north and west of the site. The west end of the
building has been set into the natural slope of site , reducing the perception of height
from the residential neighborhood. The scale of the buil ding increases towards the
east end of the site, which is closer to the commercial district of Willamette, and
functionally provides a public entrance to the building. Parapets have been used for
the roof forms, to convey the public and civic nature of the building. The windows at
the secure, w est end of the building are reduced in scale, with a more residential
rhythm, similar to the Tualatin Valley Fire station across 8 t h Avenue. At the east end
of the building the window sy stem has been selected to provi de larger, more open
expanses of glazing, where the public interacts more with the building and the
functions are adjacent to the existing commercial development to the east. This
standard is met.

                    c.
                While there has been discussion in Chapter 24 about tr ansition, it is
                appropriate that new buildings should architecturally transition in
                terms of bulk and mass to work with or fit, adjacent existing buildings.
                This transition can be accomplished by selecting designs that “step
                down” or “step up” from small t o big structures and vice versa (see
                figure below). Transitions may also take the form of carrying building
                patterns and lines (e.g., parapets, windows, etc.) from the existing
                building to the new one.
Response: See response above , particularly related to the transition from the
residential area to the west and commercial area to the east . This standard is met.

                    d.        Contrasting architecture shall only be permitted when the design is
                              manifestly superior to adjacent architecture in terms of creativity,
                              design, and workmanship and/or it is adequately separated from other
                              buildings by distance, screening, grade variations, or is part of a
                              development site that is large enough to set its own style of
                              architecture .

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                34
Response: The adjacent structures include a mixtu re of single -family residential, civic
structures, and commercial buildings. Given this mix of uses and corresponding
architectural styles, the proposed building design has been selected to respond to the
varying existing structures, and land uses surround ing the subject site. This standard
is met.

                    e.        Human scale is a term that seeks to accommodate the users of the
                              building and the notion that building should be designed around the
                              human scale (i.e., their size and the average range of their perception).
                              Human scale shall be accommodated in all designs by, for example,
                              multi-light windows that are broken up into numerous panes, intimately
                              scaled entryways, and visual breaks (exaggerated eaves, indentations,
                              ledges, parapets, awnings, engaged columns, etc.) in the facades of
                              buildings, both vertically and horizontally.

                The human scale is enhanced by bringing the building and its main
                entrance up to the edge of the sidewalk. It creates a more dramatic and
                interesting streetscape and improves the “height and width” ratio
                referenced in this section.
Response: The public entrance of the building has been brought to the sidewalk
through a combination of landscaped plaza space, entry canopy and integration of the
existing walnut tree into the public area. Where la rge expanses of glazing are
provided, the windows are broken up into numerous panes using mullions, both
vertically and horizontally to reduce the perceived scale. The plaza has been designed
to provide comfortable seating and interaction areas for visitor s and passers -by. The
façade al ong 8th Avenue and 13th S treet have been broken into a more pedestrian -
friendly scale, by stepping the building footprint at various depths away from the
sidewalk and grouping the windows at the secure areas of the building t o provide
visual resting places for the casual onlooker. The landscaping along 8th Avenue and
13th Street has been d esigned to promote a pedestrian -friendly streetscape, an
understanding of the buildings storm water sy stem, and a reduction in the scale usi ng
a variety of sculptural hardscape and cultivated landscaping features, while providing
security for the functions inside the building. This standard is met.

                    f.        The main front elevation of commercial and office building shall
                              provide at least 60 percen t windows or transparency at the pedestrian
                              level to create more interesting streetscape and window shopping
                              opportunities. One side elevation shall provide at least 30 percent
                              transparency. Any additional side or rear elevation, which is visible
                              from a co llector road or greater classification, shall also have at least
                              30 percent transparency. Transparency on other elevations is optional.
                              The transparency is measured in lineal fashion. For example, a 100 -
                              foot-long building elevation shall have at least 60 f eet (60 percent of
                              100 feet) in length of windows. The window height shall be, at
                              minimum, three feet tall. The exception to transparency would be cases
                              where demonstrated functional constraints or topography restrict that
                              elevation from being used. When t his exemption is applied to the main
                              front elevation, the square footage of transparency that would
                              ordinarily be required by the above formula shall be installed on the
                              remaining elevations at pedestrian level in addition to any
                              transparency required by a side elevation, and vice versa. The rear of
                              the building is not required to include transparency. The transparency
                              must be flush with the building elevation.


H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                     35
Response: This standard does not apply to the proposed public safety facility as it is
not a commercial or office building with associated window shopping opportunities.
However, the street -facing facades have provided window areas where internal
functional constraints (safety and security) allow. The western elevation provides 33%
of window transpare nce, and the combined southern elevation provides 54% of
window transparency. Topographic constraints limit the amount of window area that
can be used on the northeast elevation to attempt to meet the requirement.

                    g.
                Variations in depth and roof line are encouraged for all elevations. To
                vary the otherwise blank wall of most rear elevations, continuous flat
                elevations of over 100 feet in length should be avoided by indents or
                variations in the wall. The use of decorative brick, masonry, or stone
                insets an d/or designs is encouraged. Another way to vary or soften this
                elevation is through terrain variations such as an undulating grass
                area with trees to provide vertical relief.
Response: The height of the parapet varies on all elevations, and each elevation has
been broken up with a combination of building stepping, window openings, material
choices and horizontal projections so that no continuous flat elevations over 100 feet
are proposed . This standard is met.

                    h.
                Consideration of the micro -climate (e.g., sensitivity to wind, sun
                angles, shade, etc.) shall be made for building users, pedestrians, and
                transit users, including features like awnings.
Response: In response to sun angles , larger overhangs have been provided along the
east elevation. An entry can opy extends to the sidewalk at the main building entrance.
This standard is met.

                    i.
                The vision statement identified a strong commitment to developing safe
               and attractive pedestrian environments with broad sidewalks, canopied
               with trees and awnings.
Response: The landscaping along 8th Avenue and 13th Street has been designed to
promote a pedestrian -friendly streetscape, an understanding of the buildings storm
water system, and a reduction in the scale using a variety of sculptural hardscape and
cultivated landscaping features, while providing security for the functions inside the
building. Street trees and sidewalks will be provided along 8 th Avenue and a double
row along 13th Street. This standard is met.

                    j.
              Sidewalk cafes, kiosks, vendors, and street fu rniture are encouraged.
              However, at least a four -foot-wide pedestrian accessway must be
              maintained.
Response: Seating is provided in the entry plaza. Sidewalks along 8th and 13th will
maintain a minimu m clear accessway of four feet. This standard is met.

          7.        Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) compliance. The automobile shall be
                    shifted from a dominant role, relative to other modes of transportation, by
                    the following means:

                    a.        Commercial and office development shall be oriented to the street. At
                              least one public entrance shall be located facing an arterial street or,
                              if the project does not front on an arterial, facing a collector street;
                              or, if the project does not front on a collector, facing the local street
                              with highest traffic levels. Parking lots shall be placed behind or to the
                              side of commercial and office development. When a large and/or multi -
                              building development is occurring on a large undeveloped tract (three

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                     36
               plus acres), it is acceptable to focus internally; however, at least 20
               percent of the ma in adjacent right -of-way shall have buildings
               contiguous to it unless waived per subsection (B)(7)(c) of this section.
               These buildings shall be oriented to the adjacent street and include
               pedestrian-oriented transparencies on those elevations...
Response: The proposed building abuts two local streets. The building has been
oriented toward 8 th Avenue, as this is a more commercial frontage. Parking has been
located on the side and behind the proposed structure. This standard is met.

                    b.
             Multi-family projects shall be required to keep the parking at the side
             or rear of the buildings or behind the building line of the structure as
             it would appear from the right -of-way inside the multi -family project…
Response: The proposed project is not a multi -family project. This standard is not
     applicable.

                    c.
             Commercial, office, and multi -family projects shall be built as close to
             the adjacent main right -of-way as practical to facilitate safe
             pedestrian and transit access. Reduced frontages by buildings on
             public rights -of-way may be allowed due to extreme topographic (e.g.,
             slope, creek, wetlands, etc.) conditions or compelling functional
             limitations, not just inconveniences or design challenges.
Response: Pedestrian access to the site is proposed from the site‟s 8 th Avenue
     frontage to the main public entrance. The proposed building has been located as
     close as practical to this frontage, while maintaining the heath of the existing
     walnut tree. This standard is met.

                    d.
             Accessways, parking lots, and internal driveways shall accommodate
             pedestrian circulation and access by specially textured, colored, or
             clearly defined footpaths at least six feet wide. Paths shall be eight
             feet wide when abutting parking areas or travel lanes. Paths shall be
             separated from parking or travel lanes by either landscaping, planters,
             curbs, bollards, or raised surfaces ...
Response: Pedestrian circulation is proposed internal to the site through new
     sidewalks that are at least six feet wide and eight feet wide where abutting
     parking areas. These s idewalks are protected with raised curbs. This standard is
     met.

                    e.
                Paths shall provide direct routes that pedestrians will use between
                buildings,   adjacent    rights -of-way,  and    adjacent    commercial
                developments. They shall be clearly identified. They shall be laid out to
                attract use and to discourage people from cutting through parking lots
                and impacting environmentally sensitive areas.
Response: The proposed internal sidewalks provide direct route to the main public
entrance from the public parking area. Addi tionally, the proposed public entrance
plaza facilitates direct access from the public sidewalks along 8 th Avenue. This
standard is met.

                    f.
               At least one entrance to the building shall be on the main street, or as
               close as possible to the main street. The entrance shall be designed to
               identify itself as a main point of ingress/egress.
Response: A main entrance to the building has been provided to 8th Avenue. This
standard is met.




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc      37
                    g.
               Where transit service exists, or is expected to exist, there shall be a
               main entrance within a safe and reasonable distance of the transit
               stop. A pathway shall be provided to facilitate a direct connection.
Response: There are no existing or planned transit stops along the site‟s frontage.
This standard does not apply .

                    h.
               Projects shall bring at least part of the project adjacent to or near the
               main street right -of-way in order to enhance the height -to-width ratio
               along that particular street. (The “height -to-width ratio” is an
               architectural term that emphasizes height or verti cal dimension of
               buildings adjacent to streets. The higher and closer the building is,
               and the narrower the width of the street, the more attractive and
               intimate the streetscape becomes.) For every one foot in street width,
               the adjacent building ideally sh ould be one to two feet higher. This
               ratio is considered ideal in framing and defining the streetscape.
Response: The proposed building has been placed near the site‟s main street right -of-
way along 8 th Avenue to enhance the height -to-width ratio. The sugg ested standard
ratio of 1:1 or more of building height to right -of-way is not met with the proposed
building. As indicated above, the site is located in a transition area between
residential and commercial and the building‟s scale has been designed to resp onsibly
respond to the scale of the surrounding structures. The intent of this s tandard is met.

                    i.
               These architectural standards shall apply to public facilities such as
               reservoirs, water towers, treatment plants, fire stations, pump stations,
               power trans mission facilities, etc . It is recognized that many of these
               facilities, due to their functional requirements, cannot readily be
               configured to meet these architectural standards. However, attempts
               shall be made to make the design sympathetic to surrounding
               properties by landscaping, setbacks, buffers, and all reasonable
               architectural means.
Response: As this is a public facility, attempts to meet the standards above have been
incorporated, where possible, given the functional requirements of the proposed us e.

                    j.
             Parking spaces at trailheads shall be located so as to preserve the view
             of, and access to, the trai lhead entrance from the roadway. The
             entrance apron to the trailhead shall be marked: “No Parking,” and
             include design features to foster trail reco gnition.
Response: The site does not contain a trailhead. This standard does not apply.

C.        Compatibility between adjoining uses, buffering, and screening.
          1. In addition to the compatibility requirements contained in Chapter 24,
             buffering shall be provi ded between different land uses; for example,
             buffering between single -family homes and apartment blocks. However, no
             buffering is required between single -family homes and duplexes or single -
             family attached units. The following factors shall be considered in
             determining the adequacy of the type and extent of the buffer:

                    a. The purpose of the buffer, for example to decrease noise levels, absorb
                         air pollution, filter dust, or to provide a visual barrier.
                    b. The size of the buffer required to achieve the purpose in terms of width and height.
                    c.   The direction(s) from which buffering is needed.
                    d.   The required density of the buffering.
                    e. Whether the viewer is stationary or mobile.


H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc                        38
 Response: As the subject site is split zoned, and abuts different zoning and la nd uses,
and buffers for this project vary. As proposed, the site design contains a dual purpose
visual and secure buffer between the secure parking area and the abutting residential
uses to the north. A 6-foot tall fence is proposed to enclose the secure parking area in
order to provide the required security for the police. In addition, by meeting the
minimum perimeter landscape separation requirements, this visual separation is
further enhanced. This standard is met.

          2.
          On-site screening from view from a djoining properties of such things as
          service areas, storage areas, and parking lots shall be provided and the
          following factors will be considered in determining the adequacy of the type
          and extent of the screening :
          a. What needs to be screened?
          b. The direction from which it is needed.
          c. How dense the screen needs to be.
          d. Whether the viewer is stationary or mobile.
          e. Whether the screening needs to be year -round.
Response: As indicated above, the proposed screening of the rear secure parking area
will consist of a fence and landscaping. Additionally the proposed refuse area will be
enclosed and separated from the abutting residential and street lot lines. This standard
is met.

          3.
          Roof top air cooling and heating systems and other mechanical equipment
          shall be screened from view from adjoining properties.
Response: The proposed rooftop mechanical units will be located away from the
abutting right -of-way and screened with proposed parapets. This standard is met.

D.        Privacy and Noise.

          1.
          Structures which include residential dwelling units shall provide private
          outdoor areas for each ground floor unit which is screened from view by
          adjoining units.
Response: This proposal does not include residential units. This standard is not
applicable.

          2.
          Residential dwelling units shall be placed on the site in areas having
          minimal noise exposure to the extent possible…
Response: This proposal does not include residential units. This standard is not
applicable.

          3.
          Structures or on site activity areas which generate noise, lights, or glare
          shall be buffered from adjoining residential uses in accordance with the
          standards in Section 55.100(C) where applicable.
Response: The rear secure parking area may generate low levels of noise and light
associated with police vehi cle headlights. The impacts of this portion of the site from
adjoining residential uses are mitigated with the proposed 6-foot tall fence and
abutting landscape. This standard is met.

          4.        Businesses or activities that can reasonably be expected to generate noise in
                    excess of the noise standards contained in West Linn Municipal Code
                    Section 5.487 shall undertake and submit appropriate noise studies and
                    mitigate as necessary to co mply with the code. (See CDC 55.110(B)(11)
                    and 55.120(M).)



H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc              39
Response: The proposed public safety facility is not intended to generate noise in
excess of the standards contained in WLMC 5.487. The majority of incent responses
will occur from vehicles already on patrol. Should any responses be necessary directly
from this facility, the noise associated would be exempted under 5.487.(3). An
emergency generator is necessary to serve the facility in the event of an emergency.
Noise associated with this equipment will be encountered only in the event of an
emergency . All other activitie s associated with the facility will occur within the
building. This standard is met.

E.   Private Outdoor Area.
Response: This section only applies to multi -family projects. This criterion is not
applicable.

F.   Shared Outdoor Recreation Areas.
Response: This section only applies to multi -family projects and projects with 10 or
more duplexes or single -family attached dwellings on lots under 4,000 SF. This
standard is not applicable.

G.        Demarcation of Public, Semi -Public, and Private Spaces. The structures and site
          improvements shall be designed so that public areas such as streets or public
          gathering places, semi -public areas, and private outdoor areas are clearly
          defined in order to establish persons having a right to be in the space, to provide
          for crime prev ention, and to establish maintenance responsibility. These areas
          may be defi ned by:
          1. A deck, patio, fence, low wall, hedge, or draping vine;
          2. A trellis or arbor;
          3. A change in level;
          4. A change in the texture of the path material;
          5. Sign; or
          6. Landscaping.
          Use of gates to demarcate the boundary between a public street and a private
          access driveway is prohibited.

Response: As the site is a public facility, maintenance will be the responsibility of
the City of West Linn. The public entrance of the bui lding has been brought to the
sidewalk through a combination of landscaped plaza space, entry canopy and
integration of the existing walnut tree into the public area. The plaza has been
designed to provide comfortable seating and interaction areas for visi tors and passers -
by. The landscaping along 8th Avenue and 13th Street has been designed to promote a
pedestrian -friendly streetscape, an understanding of the buildings storm water sy stem,
and a reduction in the scale using a variety of sculptural hardscape and cultivated
landscaping features, while providing security for the functions inside the building.
This standard is met.

H. Public Transit.
Response: The site does not abut an existing or planned public transit route. This
standard does not apply.
I.        Public Facilities.

          1.        Streets. Sufficient right -of-way and slope easement shall be dedicated to
                    accommodate all abutting streets to be improved to City‟s Improvement
                    Standards and Specifications . . .


H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc            40
Response: Sufficient right -of-way is planned to be de dicated on both 8th Avenue and
13th Street to meet the local street standard. This standard is met.

          2.
          Drainage. A registered civil engineer shall prepare a plan and statement
          which shall be supported by factual data that clearly shows that there will
          be no adverse impacts from increased intensity of runoff off site or the plan
          and statement shall identify all off -site impacts and measures to mitigate
          those impacts. The plan and statement shall, at a minimum, determine off -
          site impacts from a 25 -year storm. The City Engineer shall adjust storm
          drainage facilities for applications which contain permeable parking
          surfaces based upon a quantitative analysis of the increased water retention
          and water quality characteristics of the permeable parking surface.
     Catch basins shall be installed and connected to pipelines leading to storm
          sewers or drainageways.
     All plans will then be reviewed by the City Engineer.
Response: As indicated in the attached preliminary Stormwater Report, there will be
no adverse impacts fr om the increased intensity of runoff from the site. This standard
is met.

          3.
         Municipal water. A registered civil engineer shall prepare a plan for the
         provision of water which demonstrates to the City Engineer‟s satisfaction
         the availability of sufficien t volume, capacity, and pressure to serve the
         proposed development‟s domestic, commercial, and industrial fire flows. All
         plans will then be reviewed by the City Engineer.
Response: The City‟s consultant will confirm that s ufficient water capacity is
     available for the proposed development from the public line located in 8 th
     Avenue. Please refer to the attached utility plan for the proposed locations,
     size, and connection points to the existing public infrastructure. This standard
     is met.

          4.
         Sanitary sewer s. A registered civil engineer shall prepare a sewerage
         collection system plan which demonstrates sufficient on -site capacity to
         serve the proposed development. The City Engineer shall determine whether
         the existing City system has sufficient capacity to s erve the development.
Response: Sufficient sanitary sewer capacity is available for the proposed
     development via the public line located in 8 th Avenue. Please refer to the
     attached utility plan for the proposed locations, size, and connection points to
     the existing public infrastructure. This standard is met.

          5.
           Solid waste and recycling storage areas. Appropriately sized and located
           solid waste and recycling areas shall be provided. Metro standards shall be
           used.
Response: One appropriately sized solid w aste and recy cling storage area is proposed
at the west of the site. The facility will be accessible via the secured, emergency
access point from 13 th Street. Please see the attached site plan (Sheet C2.1) for
specific locations. This standard is met.

J.        Crime prevention and safety/defensible space.

          1.
          Windows shall be located so that areas vulnerable to crime can be surveyed
          by the occupants.
Response: Where the security and safety of the internal functions of the proposed
police facility allow, windows have been located. Where the window areas are located,
building users will have the ability to view the exterior site. In addition, sufficient

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc    41
lighting will be provided as is shown on the attached lighting plan (Sheet E1.0) which
will provide adequate safe ty during night hours. This standard is met.

          2.
          Interior laundry and service areas shall be located in a way that they can be
          observed by others.
Response: The proposed use does not contain interior laundry or service areas. This
standard does not apply.

          3.
           Mail boxes, recycling, and solid waste facilities shall be located in lighted
           areas having vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Response: All outdoor pedestrian areas (i.e., walkway s, trash, and recycling areas,
etc.) will be lighted. Mailboxes will be loc ated within each building. This standard is
met.

          4.
          The exterior lighting levels shall be selected and the angles shall be
          oriented towards areas vulnerable to crime.
Response: The site design does not have areas vulnerable to crime. Even so, exterior
lighting has been designed to provide adequate illumination during night hours to
ensure that no areas become vulnerable to crime. This standard is met.

          5.
          Light fixtures shall be provided in areas having heavy pedestrian or
          vehicular traffic and in potentia lly dangerous areas such as parking lots,
          stairs, ramps, and abrupt grade changes.
Response: The site lighting poles are located in such a way that it provides even
illumination at the parking areas, drive aisles, and sidewalks. This standard is met.

          6.
         Fixtures shall be placed at a height so that light patterns overlap at a
         height of seven feet which is sufficient to illuminate a person. All
         commercial, industrial, residential, and public facility projects undergoing
         design review shall use low or high pr essure sodium bulbs and be able to
         demonstrate effective shielding so that the light is directed downwards
         rather than omni -directional. Omni -directional lights of an ornamental
         nature may be used in general commercial districts only.
Response: Site lighting is proposed as shown on the attached photometric plan and
     LED luminaire cut sheet. The lighting will be directed downwards to shield
     light. This standard is met.

          7.
          Lines of sight shall be reasonably established so that the development site is
          visible to police and residents.
Response: As shown on the site plan, the public area of the site is visible from 8 th
Avenue. The remainder of the site is contained within the secure d parking area, and is
intentionally not visible to the public for security and sa fety reasons. This standard is
met.

          8.
         Security fences for utilities (e.g., power transformers, pump stations,
         pipeline control equipment, etc.) or wireless communication facilities may
         be up to eight feet tall in order to protect public safety…
Response: This standard is not applicable.

K.        Provisions for persons with disabilities.

          1. The needs of a person with a disability shall be provided for. Accessible
              routes shall be provided between all buildings and accessible site facilities.
              The accessible route shall be the most practical direct route between


H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc          42
          accessible building entries, accessible site facilities, and the accessible
          entry to the site. An accessible route shall connect to the public right -of-
          way and to at least one on -site or adjacent transit st op (if the area is served
          by transit). All facilities shall conform to, or exceed, the Americans with
          Disabilities Act (ADA) standards, including those included in the Uniform
          Building Code.
Response: All applicable regulations set forth in the ADA have be en provided
including the appropriate number of accessible parking spaces and walkway s. This
standard is met.

L.   Signs.
Response: At this time, details of signage are unknown. Future permits will be sought
for desired site and building signage.

M. Utilities
The developer shall make necessary arrangements with utility companies or other
persons or corporations affected for the installation of underground lines and
facilities. Electrical lines and other wires, including but not limited to
communication, s treet lighting, and cable television, shall be placed underground, as
practical. The design standards of Tables 1 and 2 above, and of subsection 5.487 of
the West Linn Municipa l Code relative to existing high ambient noise levels shall
apply to this section.
Response: The applicant will be responsible for arrangements with utility companies
related to changes in electrical lines and other wires including , but not limited to
communication, street lighting, and cable television.

N . Wireless Communication Facilities.
Response: This section is not applicable.

O .       Refuse and recycling standards

          1.
         All commercial, industrial and multi -family developments over five units
         requiring Clas s II design review shall comply with the standards set forth in
         these provisions. Modifications to these provisions may be permitted if the
         Planning Commission determines that the changes are consistent with the
         purpose of these provisions and the City rec eives written evidence from the
         local franchised solid waste and recycling firm that they are in agreement
         with the proposed modifications.
Response: This section is applicable.

          2.
          Compactors, containers, and drop boxes shall be located on a level Portland
          cement concrete pad, a minimum of four inches thick, at ground elevation or
          other location compatible with the local franchise collection firm‟s
          equipment at the time of construction. The pad shall be designed to
          discharge surface water runoff to avoid po nding.
Response: The proposed solid waste and recycling area will be provided on a concrete
pad and graded to avoid ponding. This standard is met .

          3.        Recycling and solid waste service areas
                    a. Recycling receptacles shall be designed and located to serve th e
                         collection requirements for the specific type of material.
                    b. The recycling area shall be located in close proximity to the garbage
                         container areas and be accessible to the local franchised collection
                         firm‟s equipment.

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc           43
           c. Recycling receptacles or shelter s located outside a structure shall have
                lids and be covered by a roof constructed of water and insect -resistive
                material. The maintenance of enclosures, receptacles and shelters is
                the responsibility of the property owner.
           d. The location of the recycling area and method of storage shall be
                approved by the local fire marshal.
           e. Recycling and solid waste service areas shall be at ground level and/or
                otherwise accessible to the franchised solid waste and recycling
                collection firm.
           f. Recycling and solid was te service areas shall be used only for purposes of
                storing solid waste and recyclable materials and shall not be a general
                storage area to store personal belongings of tenants, lessees, property
                management or owners of the development or premises.
           g. Recyclable material service areas shall be maintained in a clean and safe
                condition.
Response: Recy cling receptacles will be stored within the proposed recycling and
solid waste enclosure which is on -grade near the western emergency access point . The
individua l receptacles will be covered and insect -resistive material as provided by the
local hauler. This standard is met.

       4. Special wastes or recyclable materials.
            a. Environmentally hazardous wastes defined in ORS 466.005 shall be
                   located, prepared, stored, maintained, collected, transported, and
                   disposed in a manner acceptable to the Oregon Department of
                   Environmental Quality.
            b. Containers used to store cooking oils, grease or an imal renderings for
                   recycling or disposal shall not be located in the principal recyclable
                   materials or solid waste storage areas. These materials shall be stored
                   in a separate storage area designed for such purpose.
      Response: The proposed use will not gen erate special wast es or recyclable
      materials. This standard is not applicable.

     5. Screening and Buffering .
           a. Enclosures shall include a curbed landscape area at least three feet in
                width on the sides and rear. Landscaping shall include, at a minimum,
                a continuous hedge maintained at a height of 36 inches.
           b. Placement of enclosures adjacent to residentially zoned property and
                along street frontages is strongly discouraged. They shall be located so
                as to conceal them from public view to the maximum extent p ossible.
           c. All dumpsters and other trash containers shall be completely screened on
                all four sides with an enclosure that is comprised of a durable material
                such as masonry with a finish that is architecturally compatible with
                the project. Chain link fenc ing, with or without slats, will not be
                allowed.
Response: The placement of the proposed enclosure is located in line with the
proposed security fence associated with the police parking area, fully concealed from
public view. The enclosure will be construc ted of 6-foot CMU block with brick
accents on all sides except where the access gate is located (to the north). It is
separated from the abutting 13 th Street right -of-way by 11 feet , where new
landscaping is proposed between the wall and the right -of-way. A continuous band of
shrubs is proposed to be planted at the base of the new wall, along the western 13 th
Street facing side. The proposed opening of the enclosure is on the north side and will
be treated with a 6-foot corrugated metal panel access gate. L andscaping on the north
side of the emergency access drive will minimize visual access to the gate portion of

H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc       44
the enclosure. The remaining sides of the enclosure will only be viewable from within
the secure parking area. This standard is met.

     6. Litter receptacles.
          a. Location. Litter receptacles may not encroach upon the minimum required
                walkway widths.
          b. Litter receptacles may not be located within public rights -of-way except
                as permitted through an agreement with the City in a manner
                acceptable to the City Attorney or his/her designee.
          c. Number. The number and location of proposed litter receptacles shall be
                based on the type and size of the proposed uses. However, at a
                minimum, for non -residential uses, at least one external litter
                receptacle shall be provided for every 25 parking spaces for first 100
                spaces, plus one receptacle for every additional 100 spaces. (Ord.
                1547, 2007; Ord. 1604 § 52, 2011)
Response: Litter receptacles are proposed to be located near the building‟s public
entrance and within the parking area s as noted on the site and landscape plans. A total
of 3 receptacles are proposed as required based upon 65 parking spaces. This standard
is met.




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc     45
7.           CHAPTER 60 CONDITION AL USES

60.070 Approval Standards and conditions

A.        The Planning Co mmission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an
          application for a conditional use, except for a manufactured home subdivision in
          which case the approval standards and conditions shall be those specified in
          CDC36.030 , or to enlarge or alter a conditional use based on findings of fact
          with respect to each of the following criteria:

          1.
          The site size and dimensions provide:
          a.   Adequate area for the needs of the prop osed use; and
          b.   Adequate area for aesthetic design treatment to mitigate any possible
               adverse effect from the use on surrounding properties and uses.
Response: The combined site area provides adequate space to provide a new facility,
meeting the stringent sa fety and security requirements of the police. In addition, the
site allows required parking areas for the public and secured parking needs. The
proposed structure has been designed in order to respond to the site‟s dual zoning
designations and mix of chara cter between residential and commercial. The main
façade has been particularly focused on preserving the site‟s significant tree along 8 th
Avenue. The site area is adequate and the building design meet s this standard.

          2.
          The characteristics of the site are suitable for the proposed use considering
          size, shape, location, topography, and natural features.
Response: The site characteristics are suitable for the proposed use. In particular, the
specific program and security requirements are able to be met while preserving the
sites most predominant natural feature, the significant walnut tree along 8 th Avenue.

          3.
          The granting of the proposal will provide for a facility that is consistent
          with the overall needs of the community.
Response: As identified in this narr ative, the proposed public facility is needed to
protect the West Linn community including its future.

          4.
          Adequate public facilities will be available to provide service to the
          property at the time of occupancy.
Response: Public facilities (specific to infr astructure) currently exist or will be
constructed prior to occupancy of the new structure. Coordination with the city
engineer is ongoing specific to stormwater discharge.

          5.
          The applicable requirements of the zone are met, except as modified by this
          chapter.
Response: Public safety facilities have distinct program requirements that dictate the
internal function of the structure. In addition, there are safety and security
requirements that must be met in order to allow a certain level of public access, as a
civic use, while ensuring the safety of the officers and staff. The site contains two
separate zoning designations. The applicable requirements of the site‟s R -10 district
are met with the proposed development. However, there are two provisions within the
site‟s MU district that are unable to be met. These include the maximum building size
and maximum floor area ratio standard (CDC 59.070.A.6&7). Since the proposed use
requires conditional use approval, these two standards in the MU district are proposed
to be modified by this chapter. With the exception of the requested variance, all other
standards are met with the proposed development.



H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc        46
          The supplementary requirements set forth in Chapters 52 to 55 CDC, if
          6.
          applicable, are met.
Response: Applicable requirements of Chapters 52 and 55 have been addressed in the
preceding narrative.

    7.   The use will comply with the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
Response: Please see the following responses:

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN C OMPLIANCE

Goal 1 Citizen Involvement
Response: Policies 1 -7 are administered by the City and are not approval criterion for
individual applications. The project team has conducted numerous opportunities for
public involvement in addition to the required neighborhood associated meeting.
These include the Citizen Steering Committee, Citizen Design Committee, Willamette
Neighborhood Association, Art Selection Committee, Sustainability Committee as well
as citizen involvement at Design Team meetings.

Goal 2 Land Use Planning
Response: Goal 2 is implemented by the City‟s adopted Community Development
Code. This application demo nstrates compliance with applicable provisions herein,
and therefore demonstrate compliance with this Goal.

Goal 5 Open Spaces, Scenic and Historic Areas, and Natural Resources
Response: There are no Goal 5 resources located on the subject site, per revie w of the
City‟s adopted Goal 5 inventory maps. This goal does not apply.

Goal 6 Air, Water and Land Resources Quality
Response: Policies 1-8 of Section 2 (Water Quality) are applicable to the proposed
development ; however are imp lemented by the development standards for erosion,
wastewater, stormwater, etc. The proposed methods of handling the site‟s wastewater
and new impervious areas through natural vegetated swales meets applicable
development standards associated with this section.

Policies 1 and 3 of Section 3 [Land Resources (Solid Waste Management)] are
applicable. This policy is met by having areas for both solid waste and recy cling to
occur within a proposed enclosure .

Policies 1-3 of Section 4 (Noise Control) are applicable. Noise control is im plemented
by Chapter 55 and through WLMC 5.487 . The proposed use is not anticipated to
generate noise that will negatively affect the surrounding residential uses. Perimeter
walls and landscaping will assist in maintaining satisfactory levels of noise asso ciated
with the proposed public safety use.

Goal 7 Areas Subject to Natural Disasters and Hazards
Response: The site is note shown on any of the City‟s adopted natural hazards maps.
This goal does not apply.

Goal 8 Parks and Recreation
Response: This goal does not apply.


H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc      47
Goal 9 Economic Development
Response: Policies 5 and 11 apply. The 8th Street right -of-way will be upgraded in
accordance with City standards to facilitate economic activity in the commercial
district and Willamette District. In addition, abutting commercial areas will benefit
from the proposed users of the site.

Goal 10 Housing
Response: This application is for a new police facility . Therefore, this goal does not
apply.

Goal 11 Public Facilities and Services
Response: Necessary public facilities and services exist for the proposed public safety
facility as required in General Goals Policies 2 -5. Policy 7 under the General Goals is
also furthered with the proposed development as it converts land to a new public use.
Policy 10 will be review ed for compliance through the proposed design review process
and through implementation of Chapter 55 of the CDC. The proposed development
accepts responsibility to provide new infrastructure connections necessary to serve the
proposed facility (Policy 11) .

The Policies of Section 1 (Sewer Sy stem), Section 2 (Water System) and Section 3
(Storm Drainage) will be met through the review of construction permits for the
installation of new facilities to serve the proposed use.

Section 4 (Fire and Police), Po licy 5 will be met with the new police facility.

Goal 12 Transportation
Response: General Policy 1 (a -d) is applicable. This application includes a traffic
study, dedication of right -of-way and frontage improvements that address this policy.

General Poli cy 2 (ADA) is implemented through compliance with local, state and
federal standards.

General Policy 3 will be met with proposed frontage improvements.

Street Policy 3 requires a minimum level of service to meet or exceed LOS “D”. The
proposed use meets this requirement as determined by the traffic study. Policy 8 will
be met through new street lighting on abutting frontages.

Bicycles Policy 4 will be met with new bicy cle parking on the subject site. Policy 5
will be met following completion of the pro posed frontage improvements to City
standards as reviewed by the City Engineer.

Goal 13 Energy Conservation
Response: Policy 6 encourages the use of energy -conscience design and materials in
all public facilities. The proposed public facility meets this p olicy through design that
is intended to meet LEED Silver.

Policy 7 encourages maintenance of sidewalks and bike paths. This maintenance will
occur by the City.




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc       48
Goal 14 Urbanization
Response: Policy 9 requires that new development pay for needed new infr astructure
and impacts to existing infrastructure. The proposed facility will include extensions of
existing infrastructure to serve its demand.

Goal 15 Willamette Greenway
Response: The site is not located within the Willamette Greenway. This goal does not
apply.

B.    An approved conditional use or enlargement or alteration of an existing
     conditional use shall be subject to the development review provisions set forth in
     Chapter 55 CDC.
Response: The provisions of Chapter 55 are addressed in the narrative above. This
standard is met.
C. The Planning Commission may impose conditions on its approval of a conditional
     use which it finds are necessary to assure the use is com patible with other uses
     in the vicinity. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
     following:
     1.   Limiting the hours, days, place, and manner of operation.
     2.   Requiring design features which minimize environmental impacts such as
          noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, odor, and dust.
     3.   Requiring additional setback areas, lot area, or lot depth, or width.
     4.   Limiting the building height, size or lot coverage, or location on the site.
     5.   Designating the size, number, location and design of vehicle access points.
     6.   Requiring street right -of-way to be dedicated and the street to be improved
          including all steps necessary to address future street improvements
          identified in the adopted Transportation System Plan.
     7.   Requiring participation in making the intersection improvement or
          improvements identified in the Transportation System Plan when a traffic
          analysis (compiled as an element of a conditional use application for the
          property) indicates the application should contribute toward.
     8.   Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage, and surfacing of parking and
          loading areas.
     9.   Limiting the number, size, location, height, and lighting of signs.
     10. Limiting or setting standards for the location and intensity of outdoor
          lighting.
     11. Requiring berming, screening, or landscaping and the establishment of
          standards for their installation and maintenance.
     12. Requiring and designating the size, height, location, and materials for
          fences.
     13. Requiring the protection and preservation of existing t rees, soils,
          vegetation, watercourses, habitat areas, and drainage areas.
     Response: The applicant acknowledges that the Planning Commission may
          include conditions of approval in accordance with this standard.

D. Aggregate extraction uses shall also be su bject to the provisions of ORS 541.605 .
Response: This application does not propose aggregate extraction uses. This standard
does not apply.




H:\Projects\212018000\WP\121207- Design Review Narrative_Completeness Review.doc     49
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 13th St -- 8th Ave                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10805301
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Sep 11 2012
                        15          14                        Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                  6.7        0.0

                         4    0     11
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 9.1

       18    1                           13   27
                                                                                                               16.7   0.0                       0.0     11.1
             10              0.74        14
                                                                                                                      0.0                      21.4
       11    0                            0   21
                                                                                                               0.0    0.0                       0.0      4.8

                         0    0     0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                         0          0
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                              2                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                            0                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                              3                                                                                               0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                          NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count                    13th St                      13th St                  8th Ave                      8th Ave
     Period                  (Northbound)                 (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                        Totals
     7:00 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        0      2        0            3
     7:05 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       2   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            2
     7:10 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        0      6        0            7
     7:15 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        1      0        0            3
     7:20 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        1      2        0            4
     7:25 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       1   0     0      1      0      0     0        0      1        0            3
     7:30 AM        0           0       0    0       4       0       1   0     0      2      0      0     0        0      0        0            7
     7:35 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      2        0            2
     7:40 AM        0           0       0    0       1       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        2      0        0            4
     7:45 AM        0           0       0    0       1       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        1      6        0            8
     7:50 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       1   0     0      0      0      0     0        1      0        0            2
     7:55 AM        0           0       0    0       2       0       0   0     0      4      0      0     0        2      0        0            8              53
     8:00 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      1        0            1              51
     8:05 AM        0           0       0    0       2       0       0   0     1      1      0      0     0        3      0        0            7              56
     8:10 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      1        0            1              50
     8:15 AM        0           0       0    0       1       0       1   0     0      0      0      0     0        4      0        0            6              53
     8:20 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        3      0        0            5              54
     8:25 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        2      0        0            3              54
     8:30 AM        0           0       0    0       1       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            1              48
     8:35 AM        0           0       0    0       5       0       0   0     1      1      0      0     0        1      0        0            8              54
     8:40 AM        0           0       0    0       2       0       1   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            3              53
     8:45 AM        0           0       0    0       1       0       1   0     0      3      0      0     0        0      0        0            5              50
     8:50 AM        0           0       0    0       3       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     0        1      1        0            8              56
     8:55 AM        0           0       0    0       0       0       1   0     0      0      0      0     0        3      2        0            6              54
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                  Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles      0           0       0    0      12       0       4   0     0     16      0      0     0       16     24        0                   72
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0            0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
  Pedestrians                   0                            8                        0                            0                                    8
   Bicycles         0           0       0            0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/14/2012 1:40 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 12th St -- 8th Ave                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10805303
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Sep 11 2012
                         0          0                        Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                  0.0        0.0

                         0    0     0
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

       27    1                           0   33
                                                                                                              11.1   0.0                       0.0      9.1
             18              0.79       23
                                                                                                                     0.0                      13.0
       22    3                          10   23
                                                                                                              0.0    0.0                       0.0      0.0

                         3    0     5
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

                        13          8
                                                                                                                            0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                              0    0    0


                                                                                                                     0                          0

             1                           1                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                     1                          0


                              1                                                                                              0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                  NA




             NA                         NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count                    12th St                     12th St                  8th Ave                      8th Ave
     Period                  (Northbound)                (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U    Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                        Totals
     7:00 AM        1           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        1      0        0            3
     7:05 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            0
     7:10 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        6      0        0            7
     7:15 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     0        1      0        0            4
     7:20 AM        0           0       1    0      0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        3      0        0            6
     7:25 AM        0           0       1    0      0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     1        1      0        0            4
     7:30 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      6      0      0     0        0      0        0            6
     7:35 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        2      0        0            4
     7:40 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      0      2      0     0        1      0        0            3
     7:45 AM        1           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      0      1      0     1        6      0        0            9
     7:50 AM        1           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        1      0        0            3
     7:55 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      6      0      0     1        1      0        0            8              57
     8:00 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        2      0        0            3              57
     8:05 AM        1           0       1    0      0       0       0   0     0      2      0      1     1        2      0        0            8              65
     8:10 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      0        0            2              60
     8:15 AM        0           0       2    0      0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        4      0        0            7              63
     8:20 AM        0           0       1    0      0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     1        3      0        0            7              64
     8:25 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     1        2      0        0            4              64
     8:30 AM        0           0       1    0      0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     2        1      0        0            5              63
     8:35 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      6      0      0     3        1      0        0           10              69
     8:40 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      1      1      0     2        0      0        0            4              70
     8:45 AM        1           0       1    0      0       0       0   0     0      4      0      0     2        0      0        0            8              69
     8:50 AM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      6      0      0     3        1      0        0           10              76
     8:55 AM        0           0       2    0      0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     3        4      0        0            9              77
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                 Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U    Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles      8           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0     24      4      0    12       32      0        0                   80
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0           0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
  Pedestrians                   0                           0                        0                            0                                    0
   Bicycles         0           0       0           0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/14/2012 1:40 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 10th St -- 8th Ave                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10805305
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Sep 11 2012
                     503          543                          Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                 4.6        4.2

                        72 253 178
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                             1.4 7.1 2.2

       93    21                         203   258
                                                                                                                1.1   4.8                       2.0      1.9
             2             0.84           8
                                                                                                                      0.0                       0.0
       29    6                           47   274
                                                                                                                3.4   0.0                       2.1      1.5

                        13 319 94
                                                                                                                             0.0 5.6 0.0

                     306          426
                                                                                                                             6.2        4.2



                            0                                                                                                 0    2    0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

             2                            4                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                            5                                                                                                 0    1    0




                            NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                         NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                  10th St                         10th St                  8th Ave                      8th Ave
     Period                (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                  Left      Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     7:00 AM        0        16       3    0          9       9       1   0     0      1      0      0     2        0      7       0           48
     7:05 AM        0        23       3    0         18      10       1   0     1      0      0      0     1        0      9       0           66
     7:10 AM        0        32       5    0         14      11       1   0     0      1      0      0     3        1     15       0           83
     7:15 AM        3        22      10    0         14       6       4   0     3      0      1      0     4        0     14       0           81
     7:20 AM        0        20       9    0         20      13       7   0     1      0      1      0     4        2     18       0           95
     7:25 AM        1        27       8    0         12      21       6   0     3      0      1      0     4        1     21       0          105
     7:30 AM        0        25       6    0         16      17       0   0     3      0      2      0     4        1     19       0           93
     7:35 AM        2        25       5    0         11      24       6   0     0      0      0      0     6        2      9       0           90
     7:40 AM        1        29       6    0         15      37       6   0     0      0      0      0     1        0     16       0          111
     7:45 AM        0        47       5    0         19      27     12    0     1      0      0      0     3        0     17       0          131
     7:50 AM        2        39      10    0         16      22       8   0     0      0      0      0     2        1     13       0          113
     7:55 AM        4        32      13    0         17      23       5   0     3      1      1      0     6        0     13       0          118             1134
     8:00 AM        2        17       5    0         16      20       6   0     1      0      0      0     6        0     27       0          100             1186
     8:05 AM        1        18       6    0         16      17       8   0     6      1      1      0     2        1     15       0           92             1212
     8:10 AM        0        21      12    0         13      15       5   0     1      0      0      0     7        0     17       0           91             1220
     8:15 AM        0        19       9    0          7      17       3   0     2      0      0      0     2        0     18       0           77             1216
     8:20 AM        0        19       4    0         15      14     11    0     3      1      0      0     1        2     15       0           85             1206
     8:25 AM        0        19       9    0         15      19       7   0     2      0      1      0     2        1     15       0           90             1191
     8:30 AM        0        29       5    0         19      14       7   0     2      1      0      0     7        2     18       0          104             1202
     8:35 AM        2        18       3    0         13      10       4   0     5      0      0      0     2        1     17       0           75             1187
     8:40 AM        0        27       9    0         14      13       1   0     5      0      0      0     3        1     12       0           85             1161
     8:45 AM        1        31      12    0         13      23       7   0     4      0      0      0     4        1     15       0          111             1141
     8:50 AM        1        15       5    0         17      19     10    0    13      3      0      0     5        1     25       0          114             1142
     8:55 AM        2        13       5    0         12      17       9   0     6      0      1      0     1        2     17       0           85             1109
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates       Left      Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     24       472    112     0        208     288    100    0    16      4      4      0    44        4    172       0                  1448
 Heavy Trucks       0        28       0               4      12       4         0      0      0            0        0      4                           52
  Pedestrians                 4                               0                        0                            0                                   4
   Bicycles         0         0       0               0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/14/2012 1:40 PM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 12th St -- Willamette Falls Dr                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10805307
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Sep 11 2012
                         8          14                           Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                   0.0         7.1

                         3    2      3
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

       239   3                              9   340
                                                                                                                    2.1   0.0                       11.1      5.6
             249             0.82         222
                                                                                                                          3.6                        2.3
       284   32                           109   375
                                                                                                                    3.9   6.3                       11.9      4.8

                        14    2     123
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 7.3

                     143            139
                                                                                                                                 10.5        6.5



                              7                                                                                                   0     0    0


                                                                                                                          0                           0

             6                              0                                                                             0                           0

                                                                                                                          0                           0


                              6                                                                                                   0     0    0




                              NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                           NA                                                                              NA                         NA




                              NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count                    12th St                         12th St             Willamette Falls Dr           Willamette Falls Dr
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                   (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                       Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right           U   Left Thru Right           U                        Totals
     7:00 AM        0           0       3    0          0       0       0   0     0      16      0        0     4       9      1        0           33
     7:05 AM        0           0       5    0          0       0       0   0     0      18      1        0     4      10      0        0           38
     7:10 AM        1           0       5    0          0       0       0   0     0      25      1        0     4      12      0        0           48
     7:15 AM        0           0       3    0          0       0       0   0     0      21      0        0     6      17      0        0           47
     7:20 AM        0           0       8    0          0       0       0   0     1      21      2        0    11      11      0        0           54
     7:25 AM        0           0       6    0          0       0       0   0     0      19      2        0     6      22      1        0           56
     7:30 AM        1           0       4    0          0       0       0   0     0      15      0        0     7      14      0        0           41
     7:35 AM        0           0       8    0          1       0       0   0     0      16      4        0    11      24      2        0           66
     7:40 AM        2           0      18    0          1       1       0   0     0      20      6        0    16      18      1        0           83
     7:45 AM        1           0      21    0          0       1       1   0     0      26      6        0    19      17      1        0           93
     7:50 AM        5           1      19    0          0       0       0   0     0      24      4        0     8      15      0        0           76
     7:55 AM        1           0       8    0          0       0       1   0     0      21      2        0    11      23      0        0           67              702
     8:00 AM        4           0       6    0          0       0       1   0     0      17      3        0     8      28      1        0           68              737
     8:05 AM        0           1       8    0          1       0       0   0     0      23      1        0     2      16      1        0           53              752
     8:10 AM        0           0       7    0          0       0       0   0     0      24      1        0     7      13      2        0           54              758
     8:15 AM        0           0      10    0          0       0       0   0     2      23      1        0     3      21      0        0           60              771
     8:20 AM        1           0       6    0          0       0       1   0     0      14      0        0     5      19      2        0           48              765
     8:25 AM        1           0       5    0          0       0       0   0     0      20      0        0    14      20      0        0           60              769
     8:30 AM        1           0       6    0          0       0       1   0     0      16      0        0     8      18      1        0           51              779
     8:35 AM        0           0       7    0          0       1       1   0     0      14      1        0     4      11      0        0           39              752
     8:40 AM        0           1       5    0          2       0       0   0     0      28      1        0     3      15      0        0           55              724
     8:45 AM        0           0      13    0          0       0       0   0     1      22      1        0     3      25      0        0           65              696
     8:50 AM        1           0       3    0          0       0       0   0     0      19      0        0     5      23      0        0           51              671
     8:55 AM        1           0       3    0          2       1       0   0     0      13      1        0     3      17      2        0           43              647
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                     Westbound
                                                                                                                                                           Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right           U   Left Thru Right           U
  All Vehicles     28           4    192     0          0       4       8   0     0     284     48        0   152     220      4        0                  944
 Heavy Trucks       0           0      12               0       0       0         0      12      0             16       0      0                           40
  Pedestrians                   4                               8                         8                             0                                  20
   Bicycles         0           0       0               0       0       0         0       0      0              0       0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/14/2012 1:40 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 10th St -- Willamette Falls Dr                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10805309
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Sep 11 2012
                     306            426                          Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                   6.2        4.2

                     235      0     71
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                 5.1 0.0 9.9

       388   288                          138   291
                                                                                                                   4.6    3.5                       5.8      4.8
             121             0.80         153
                                                                                                                          5.8                       3.9
       409   0                              0   192
                                                                                                                   4.2    0.0                       0.0      7.3

                         0    0      0
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                         0           0
                                                                                                                                 0.0        0.0



                              6                                                                                                   0     0   0


                                                                                                                          0                          0

             4                              0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0


                              0                                                                                                   0     0   0




                              NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                           NA                                                                              NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                    10th St                         10th St             Willamette Falls Dr           Willamette Falls Dr
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                   (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                      Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right           U   Left Thru Right           U                     Totals
     7:00 AM        0           0       0    0          4       0       6   0    15       5      0        0     0      10      2        0          42
     7:05 AM        0           0       0    0          4       0       7   0    21       4      0        0     0       9      6        0          51
     7:10 AM        0           0       0    0          3       0     11    0    26       4      0        0     0       6     10        0          60
     7:15 AM        0           0       0    0          1       0       8   0    20       3      0        0     0      13     16        0          61
     7:20 AM        0           0       0    0          7       0     13    0    21       7      0        0     0      10      7        0          65
     7:25 AM        0           0       0    0          4       0     20    0    20       5      0        0     0      11     16        0          76
     7:30 AM        0           0       0    0          4       0     14    0    21       6      0        0     0      11     11        0          67
     7:35 AM        0           0       0    0          2       0     27    0    24       6      0        0     0      16      7        0          82
     7:40 AM        0           0       0    0          1       0     36    0    26       8      0        0     0      14     10        0          95
     7:45 AM        0           0       0    0          5       0     29    0    41      10      0        0     0      16     13        0         114
     7:50 AM        0           0       0    0          9       0     15    0    37      13      0        0     0      10     12        0          96
     7:55 AM        0           0       0    0          9       0     19    0    33       9      0        0     0      17     16        0         103              912
     8:00 AM        0           0       0    0          4       0     24    0    22      11      0        0     0      16      5        0          82              952
     8:05 AM        0           0       0    0         10       0     12    0    11      12      0        0     0       9     11        0          65              966
     8:10 AM        0           0       0    0          6       0     14    0    19      16      0        0     0      12     18        0          85              991
     8:15 AM        0           0       0    0         10       0     12    0    13      18      0        0     0      11     12        0          76             1006
     8:20 AM        0           0       0    0          4       0     12    0    15       6      0        0     0      15      8        0          60             1001
     8:25 AM        0           0       0    0          2       0     20    0    17       9      0        0     0      20      8        0          76             1001
     8:30 AM        0           0       0    0          3       0     15    0    16       7      0        0     0      14     18        0          73             1007
     8:35 AM        0           0       0    0          5       0       9   0    14       4      0        0     0       6      8        0          46              971
     8:40 AM        0           0       0    0          2       0     15    0    27      10      0        0     0       8      9        0          71              947
     8:45 AM        0           0       0    0          3       0     17    0    30       9      0        0     0      13     13        0          85              918
     8:50 AM        0           0       0    0          4       0     20    0    21       5      0        0     0      15      3        0          68              890
     8:55 AM        0           0       0    0          4       0     15    0    17       4      0        0     0       9      3        0          52              839
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                     Westbound
                                                                                                                                                          Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right           U   Left Thru Right           U
  All Vehicles      0           0       0    0         92       0    252    0   444     128      0        0     0     172    164        0                 1252
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0               8       0       8        16      12      0              0       8     12                           64
  Pedestrians                   0                               0                         0                             0                                   0
   Bicycles         0           0       0               0       0       0         0       0      0              0       0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/14/2012 1:40 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 13th St -- 8th Ave                                                                                             QC JOB #: 10805302
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Sep 11 2012
                         6          9                        Peak-Hour: 4:50 PM -- 5:50 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                         0    0     6
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.0 0.0

       31    3                           6   37
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0
             25              0.77       31
                                                                                                                    4.0                       0.0
       28    0                           0   31
                                                                                                              3.6   0.0                       0.0      3.2

                         0    0     0
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.0 0.0

                         0          0
                                                                                                                           0.0        0.0



                              4                                                                                             2    0    0


                                                                                                                    0                          0

             0                           0                                                                          2                          1

                                                                                                                    0                          0


                              4                                                                                             0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                 NA




             NA                         NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                 NA



 5-Min Count                    13th St                     13th St                  8th Ave                      8th Ave
     Period                  (Northbound)                (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U    Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     1      0      0      0     0        3      0       0            5
     4:05 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        1      1       0            2
     4:10 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     0        3      1       0            7
     4:15 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        2      1       0            4
     4:20 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     2      1      0      0     0        1      0       0            4
     4:25 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0       0            0
     4:30 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        1      1       0            4
     4:35 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        3      0       0            4
     4:40 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        4      0       0            5
     4:45 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     1      4      0      0     0        1      2       0            9
     4:50 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     0        3      1       0            8
     4:55 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        0      0       0            2              54
     5:00 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        5      0       0            6              55
     5:05 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     1      2      0      0     0        4      0       0            7              60
     5:10 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     0        4      2       0           10              63
     5:15 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        3      1       0            6              65
     5:20 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        3      0       0            5              66
     5:25 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     1      3      0      0     0        1      1       0            7              73
     5:30 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        3      0       0            5              74
     5:35 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      5      0      0     0        2      0       0            7              77
     5:40 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     1      1      0      0     0        1      0       0            3              75
     5:45 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        2      1       0            5              71
     5:50 PM        0           0       0    0      0       0       0   0     0      2      0      1     0        2      0       0            5              68
     5:55 PM        0           0       0    0      1       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        0      0       0            3              69
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                 Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U    Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      0           0       0    0      8       0       0   0     4     24      0      0     0       44     12       0                   92
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0           0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
  Pedestrians                   0                           4                        0                            0                                   4
   Bicycles         0           0       0           0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/14/2012 1:38 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 12th St -- 8th Ave                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10805304
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Sep 11 2012
                         0          0                         Peak-Hour: 4:50 PM -- 5:50 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                         0    0     0
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

       37    0                            0   49
                                                                                                               0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0
             28              0.88        32
                                                                                                                     3.6                       0.0
       31    3                           17   58
                                                                                                               3.2   0.0                       0.0      3.4

                         5    0     27
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 3.7

                        17          32
                                                                                                                            0.0        3.1



                              0                                                                                              0    0    0


                                                                                                                     0                          0

             1                            0                                                                          2                          1

                                                                                                                     0                          0


                              0                                                                                              1    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                  NA




             NA                          NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count                    12th St                      12th St                  8th Ave                      8th Ave
     Period                  (Northbound)                 (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     1        3      0       1            7
     4:05 PM        0           0       3    0       0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        2      0       1            7
     4:10 PM        0           0       5    0       0       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     1        5      0       0           14
     4:15 PM        1           0       2    0       0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     1        1      0       0            6
     4:20 PM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     5        1      0       0            7
     4:25 PM        0           0       0    0       0       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      0       0            2
     4:30 PM        0           0       2    0       0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        2      0       0            6
     4:35 PM        0           0       1    0       0       0       0   0     0      0      1      0     2        3      0       0            7
     4:40 PM        1           0       2    0       0       0       0   0     0      0      1      0     1        2      0       0            7
     4:45 PM        0           0       1    0       0       0       0   0     0      4      1      0     1        3      0       0           10
     4:50 PM        1           0       3    0       0       0       0   0     0      4      0      0     2        3      0       0           13
     4:55 PM        0           0       4    0       0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     2        0      0       0            8               94
     5:00 PM        0           0       3    0       0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     1        5      0       0           10               97
     5:05 PM        1           0       1    0       0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     1        3      0       1            9               99
     5:10 PM        0           0       3    0       0       0       0   0     0      3      1      0     0        6      0       0           13               98
     5:15 PM        1           0       1    0       0       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     3        3      0       1           10              102
     5:20 PM        1           0       2    0       0       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     2        2      0       0           10              105
     5:25 PM        0           0       2    0       0       0       0   0     0      3      1      0     0        2      0       1            9              112
     5:30 PM        0           0       4    0       0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        3      0       0            9              115
     5:35 PM        0           0       2    0       0       0       0   0     0      3      1      0     1        2      0       0            9              117
     5:40 PM        0           0       1    0       0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     1        1      0       0            5              115
     5:45 PM        1           0       1    0       0       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     1        2      0       0            7              112
     5:50 PM        0           0       1    0       0       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     0        2      0       0            6              105
     5:55 PM        0           0       1    0       0       0       0   0     0      2      1      0     0        0      0       0            4              101
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                  Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      8           0      20    0       0       0       0   0     0     24      4      0    16       48      0       8                  128
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0            0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                           0
  Pedestrians                   0                            0                        0                            0                                  0
   Bicycles         0           0       0            0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/14/2012 1:38 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 10th St -- 8th Ave                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10805306
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Sep 11 2012
                     530          746                          Peak-Hour: 4:50 PM -- 5:50 PM                                 1.1        0.9

                        75 345 110
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 1.4 0.9

       97    96                         138   181
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                       0.7      0.6
             7             0.90           6
                                                                                                                      0.0                       0.0
       123   20                          37   177
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.6

                        16 512 60
                                                                                                                             0.0 1.2 0.0

                     402          588
                                                                                                                             1.2        1.0



                            4                                                                                                 0    1    0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

             10                           0                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                            4                                                                                                 0    1    0




                            NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                         NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                  10th St                         10th St                  8th Ave                      8th Ave
     Period                (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                  Left      Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        0        34       7    0          6      27       8   0     4      0      1      0     3        1     15       0          106
     4:05 PM        3        27       4    0         14      24       6   0     8      0      1      0     1        0     17       0          105
     4:10 PM        2        35       1    0         14      19       7   0     5      1      2      0     2        0     13       0          101
     4:15 PM        2        28       7    0         12      19       6   0     8      1      4      0     1        0     13       0          101
     4:20 PM        2        32       8    0          9      25       5   0     2      1      3      0     5        0     17       0          109
     4:25 PM        0        42       6    0          7      17     11    0     7      1      1      0     4        1     14       0          111
     4:30 PM        0        36       3    0          9      18       4   0     9      3      1      0     2        1     11       0           97
     4:35 PM        1        42      10    0          9      24       8   0     4      0      2      0     2        0     17       0          119
     4:40 PM        3        27       5    0         12      18       4   0     3      1      1      0     4        0     12       0           90
     4:45 PM        1        35       2    0          5      30       8   0     7      2      0      0     3        0      7       0          100
     4:50 PM        0        36       4    0          7      34     11    0     8      1      2      0     4        0     15       0          122
     4:55 PM        1        37       6    0          4      39       4   0     8      0      3      0     0        1      8       0          111             1272
     5:00 PM        1        56       3    0          8      22       3   0     9      0      3      0     0        0      6       0          111             1277
     5:05 PM        2        52       4    0          6      27       4   0     9      0      2      0     4        0     11       0          121             1293
     5:10 PM        1        49       6    0         10      29     10    0    11      0      0      0     5        1     13       0          135             1327
     5:15 PM        1        52       6    0         10      33     10    0    14      0      1      0     5        0      7       0          139             1365
     5:20 PM        1        35       5    0         14      26       4   0     8      1      4      0     3        0     13       0          114             1370
     5:25 PM        2        34       5    0         12      27       8   0     9      0      1      0     3        2     10       0          113             1372
     5:30 PM        2        44       5    0         11      28       3   0     8      1      1      0     1        0     10       0          114             1389
     5:35 PM        1        40       6    0         10      21       7   0     6      1      2      0     3        0     18       0          115             1385
     5:40 PM        2        39       5    0          9      29       3   0     3      2      0      0     1        2     15       0          110             1405
     5:45 PM        2        38       5    0          9      30       8   0     3      1      1      0     8        0     12       0          117             1422
     5:50 PM        2        26       3    0          6      25       5   0     8      0      2      0     1        1     17       0           96             1396
     5:55 PM        1        32       2    0          9      35       8   0     6      0      0      0     2        0     12       0          107             1392
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates       Left      Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     16       612      64    0        104     356     96    0   136      0     12      0    56        4    124       0                  1580
 Heavy Trucks       0         8       0               0       8       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                           16
  Pedestrians                 8                               8                       12                            0                                  28
   Bicycles         0         0       0               0       1       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/14/2012 1:38 PM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 12th St -- Willamette Falls Dr                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10805308
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Sep 11 2012
                        17          25                           Peak-Hour: 4:50 PM -- 5:50 PM                                   0.0        0.0

                         4    4      9
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

       252   7                             13   419
                                                                                                                    0.4   0.0                       0.0      1.4
             792             0.95         238
                                                                                                                          1.9                       0.4
       834   35                           168   916
                                                                                                                    1.9   2.9                       3.0      1.7

                        10    5     115
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.9

                     207            130
                                                                                                                                 2.9        0.8



                              12                                                                                                  0     0   0


                                                                                                                          0                          1

             9                              0                                                                             1                          3

                                                                                                                          0                          0


                              9                                                                                                   0     0   0




                              NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                           NA                                                                              NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                    12th St                         12th St             Willamette Falls Dr           Willamette Falls Dr
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                   (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                      Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right           U   Left Thru Right           U                     Totals
     4:00 PM        0           0      11    0          0       0       0   0     1      56      1        0    10      21      0        0         100
     4:05 PM        0           0       9    0          0       0       0   0     2      42      3        0     6      12      0        0          74
     4:10 PM        0           0       6    0          0       0       1   0     0      47      5        0     6      17      3        0          85
     4:15 PM        0           0      10    0          0       0       1   0     0      41      1        0     6      11      1        0          71
     4:20 PM        1           0       9    0          0       0       1   0     0      87      0        0     5      13      0        0         116
     4:25 PM        1           0      10    0          1       0       0   0     0      72      4        0     8      17      0        0         113
     4:30 PM        1           1      10    0          1       0       0   0     0      75      0        0     5      14      1        0         108
     4:35 PM        1           0      10    0          0       1       0   0     1      57      3        0     5      19      3        0         100
     4:40 PM        0           0       9    0          0       1       2   0     0      58      2        0    11       4      4        0          91
     4:45 PM        1           0      11    0          1       1       1   0     1      55      4        0    12      19      1        0         107
     4:50 PM        2           1       6    0          0       0       0   0     0      53      7        0    17      18      2        0         106
     4:55 PM        2           1       9    0          1       0       0   0     0      63      5        0    27      22      2        0         132             1203
     5:00 PM        2           1      15    0          2       0       0   0     0      69      3        0     9      13      1        0         115             1218
     5:05 PM        0           0      13    0          1       0       1   0     1      65      6        0     9      22      2        0         120             1264
     5:10 PM        2           1       7    0          2       0       1   0     1      80      1        0    10      25      1        0         131             1310
     5:15 PM        0           0      14    0          0       1       0   0     2      68      0        0     7      27      0        0         119             1358
     5:20 PM        2           0      13    0          1       0       0   0     1      55      1        0    13      18      0        0         104             1346
     5:25 PM        0           0       5    0          0       0       0   0     1      68      2        0     9      16      0        0         101             1334
     5:30 PM        0           0       7    0          0       2       1   0     1      85      2        0    13      21      2        0         134             1360
     5:35 PM        0           0       8    0          0       0       1   0     0      66      2        0    14      24      1        0         116             1376
     5:40 PM        0           1      10    0          1       1       0   0     0      64      4        0    16      15      0        0         112             1397
     5:45 PM        0           0       8    0          1       0       0   0     0      56      2        0    24      17      2        0         110             1400
     5:50 PM        0           0      10    0          0       0       0   0     2      61      3        0    13      16      1        0         106             1400
     5:55 PM        1           0       7    0          1       0       1   0     1      64      4        0    19      12      1        0         111             1379
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                     Westbound
                                                                                                                                                          Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right           U   Left Thru Right           U
  All Vehicles      8           4    136     0         12       4       8   0    16     852     28        0   104     296     12        0                 1480
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       4               0       0       0         0      12      0              8       4      0                           28
  Pedestrians                   4                              12                        12                             0                                  28
   Bicycles         0           0       0               0       0       0         0       0      0              0       1      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/14/2012 1:38 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 10th St -- Willamette Falls Dr                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10805310
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Sep 11 2012
                     393            591                          Peak-Hour: 4:50 PM -- 5:50 PM                                   1.5        1.0

                     309      0     84
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                 1.6 0.0 1.2

       438   498                           93   222
                                                                                                                   1.6    1.0                       1.1      1.4
             441             0.93         129
                                                                                                                          2.5                       1.6
       939   0                              0   525
                                                                                                                   1.7    0.0                       0.0      2.3

                         0    0      0
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                         0           0
                                                                                                                                 0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                   0     0   1


                                                                                                                          0                          1

             1                              0                                                                             1                          4

                                                                                                                          0                          0


                              0                                                                                                   0     0   0




                              NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                           NA                                                                              NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                    10th St                         10th St             Willamette Falls Dr           Willamette Falls Dr
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                   (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                      Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right           U   Left Thru Right           U                     Totals
     4:00 PM        0           0       0    0          6       0     27    0    33      36      0        0     0       7      7        0         116
     4:05 PM        0           0       0    0         11       0     17    0    28      21      0        0     0       5      5        0          87
     4:10 PM        0           0       0    0          3       0     15    0    29      26      0        0     0       5     11        0          89
     4:15 PM        0           0       0    0         10       0     14    0    28      28      0        0     0       7      5        0          92
     4:20 PM        0           0       0    0         12       0     19    0    38      50      0        0     0       4      6        0         129
     4:25 PM        0           0       0    0          4       0     16    0    40      52      0        0     0       9     11        0         132
     4:30 PM        0           0       0    0          8       0     19    0    33      46      0        0     0       5      4        0         115
     4:35 PM        0           0       0    0          8       0     16    0    45      34      0        0     0      10      8        0         121
     4:40 PM        0           0       0    0         12       0     13    0    27      32      0        0     0       7      7        0          98
     4:45 PM        0           0       0    0          6       0     23    0    32      37      0        0     0       7      6        0         111
     4:50 PM        0           0       0    0          8       0     31    0    37      34      0        0     0      11      7        0         128
     4:55 PM        0           0       0    0          8       0     35    0    29      33      0        0     0      10     10        0         125             1343
     5:00 PM        0           0       0    0          4       0     20    0    50      26      0        0     0       9      9        0         118             1345
     5:05 PM        0           0       0    0          9       0     26    0    49      39      0        0     0       7     10        0         140             1398
     5:10 PM        0           0       0    0          8       0     22    0    50      40      0        0     0      13      6        0         139             1448
     5:15 PM        0           0       0    0          8       0     31    0    50      35      0        0     0       7      7        0         138             1494
     5:20 PM        0           0       0    0         11       0     22    0    36      42      0        0     0       8      6        0         125             1490
     5:25 PM        0           0       0    0          6       0     22    0    35      37      0        0     0       8      8        0         116             1474
     5:30 PM        0           0       0    0          5       0     26    0    46      43      0        0     0      12      6        0         138             1497
     5:35 PM        0           0       0    0          5       0     23    0    40      41      0        0     0      14      8        0         131             1507
     5:40 PM        0           0       0    0          3       0     24    0    43      34      0        0     0      15      5        0         124             1533
     5:45 PM        0           0       0    0          9       0     27    0    33      37      0        0     0      15     11        0         132             1554
     5:50 PM        0           0       0    0         12       0     21    0    28      35      0        0     0      10      2        0         108             1534
     5:55 PM        0           0       0    0          8       0     29    0    31      38      0        0     0       8      4        0         118             1527
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                     Westbound
                                                                                                                                                          Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right           U   Left Thru Right           U
  All Vehicles      0           0       0    0        100       0    316    0   596     456      0        0     0     108     92        0                 1668
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0               0       0     12          8       8      0              0       4      0                           32
  Pedestrians                   0                               0                         0                             0                                   0
   Bicycles         0           0       0               1       0       0         0       0      0              0       1      0                            2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/14/2012 1:38 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                           In        Out
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                            HV 1.3%
                                                                                                                           PHF 0.89
                                                                                                                                          470        546
                                                                                                                                          329         141
                                                                                                                                                                            HV 2.5%
                                                                                                                                                                           PHF 0.88
                                                                                                                                                2

                                                                                                                     441                                                   105
                   Clay Carney                                                                     Out 506                                                                           282 In
                                                                                                                     356                                                   177




                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                            2
                 (503) 833-2740
                                                                                                       In 797                                                                        497 Out


                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                 HV 1.8%
10th St & Willamette Falls Dr                                                                                   PHF 0.94




                                                                                                                                                                 HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                PHF 0.00
Wednesday, October 25, 2006                                                                                                               Out         In
                                                                                                                                           0           0
3:30 PM to 6:30 PM
                                                                                                                                Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                                4:45 PM to 5:45 PM
15-Minute Interval Summary
3:30 PM to 6:30 PM
 Interval           Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                           Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start              10th St                       10th St                  Willamette Falls Dr                 Willamette Falls Dr            Interval                     Crosswalk
   Time                            Bikes     L            R      Bikes     L      T             Bikes                 T      R      Bikes        Total          North       South East        West
 3:30 PM                             0      26            66       0      87      50              0                   38     32       0           299            1            0      0         1
 3:45 PM                             0      34            56       0      98      65              0                   30     23       0           306            0            0      0         0
 4:00 PM                             0      40            78       0     101      56              0                   48     34       0           357            0            0      0         0
 4:15 PM                             0      28            54       0      96      88              0                   28     23       0           317            0            0      1         0
 4:30 PM                             0      38            58       0     108      98              0                   38     26       0           366            2            0      0         0
 4:45 PM                             0      49            83       0      82     103              0                   44     27       0           388            0            0      0         0
 5:00 PM                             0      32            84       0     103      90              0                   44     25       0           378            0            0      0         0
 5:15 PM                             0      30            72       0     123      84              0                   51     29       0           389            1            0      1         1
 5:30 PM                             0      30            90       1     133      79              0                   38     24       0           394            1            0      1         0
 5:45 PM                             0      23            63       0     119      94              0                   44     33       0           376            1            0      2         0
 6:00 PM                             0      27            53       0      88      55              0                   76     56       0           355            1            0      0         0
 6:15 PM                             0      14            63       0      87      42              0                   79     59       0           344            0            0      0         0
   Total
                                     0     371           820       1     1,225    904              0                558       391         0         4,269         7              0    5        2
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
4:45 PM to 5:45 PM
                    Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                         Westbound                                                Pedestrians
   By
                      10th St                       10th St                  Willamette Falls Dr               Willamette Falls Dr                  Total                    Crosswalk
Approach
            In      Out    Total   Bikes    In     Out   Total   Bikes    In     Out    Total Bikes         In     Out    Total Bikes                           North       South East        West
 Volume      0       0       0       0     470    546 1,016        1     797     506 1,303       0         282     497    779      0                1,549        2            0      2         1
  %HV                  0.0%                          1.3%                           1.8%                              2.5%                          1.7%
  PHF                  0.00                           0.89                          0.94                              0.88                           0.98

                    Northbound                    Southbound                      Eastbound                       Westbound
   By
                      10th St                       10th St                   Willamette Falls Dr             Willamette Falls Dr                   Total
Movement
                                   Total     L             R     Total     L       T            Total              T      R     Total
 Volume                            0        141           329    470      441     356           797               177    105 282                    1,549
  %HV       NA       NA     NA     0.0%    2.1%    NA    0.9%    1.3%    2.0% 1.4%        NA 1.8%          NA    0.6% 5.7% 2.5%                     1.7%
  PHF                              0.00    0.72          0.91    0.89    0.83     0.86          0.94              0.87   0.91 0.88                   0.98



Rolling Hour Summary
3:30 PM to 6:30 PM
 Interval           Northbound                    Southbound                       Eastbound                         Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start              10th St                       10th St                    Willamette Falls Dr               Willamette Falls Dr            Interval                     Crosswalk
  Time                             Bikes     L            R      Bikes    L         T             Bikes               T      R      Bikes        Total          North       South East        West
 3:30 PM                             0     128           254       0     382       259              0                144    112       0          1,279           1            0      1         1
 3:45 PM                             0     140           246       0     403       307              0                144    106       0          1,346           2            0      1         0
 4:00 PM                             0     155           273       0     387       345              0                158    110       0          1,428           2            0      1         0
 4:15 PM                             0     147           279       0     389       379              0                154    101       0          1,449           2            0      1         0
 4:30 PM                             0     149           297       0     416       375              0                177    107       0          1,521           3            0      1         1
 4:45 PM                             0     141           329       1     441       356              0                177    105       0          1,549           2            0      2         1
 5:00 PM                             0     115           309       1     478       347              0                177    111       0          1,537           3            0      4         1
 5:15 PM                             0     110           278       1     463       312              0                209    142       0          1,514           4            0      4         1
 5:30 PM                             0      94           269       1     427       270              0                237    172       0          1,469           3            0      3         0
