                                                             Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                        Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                February 10, 2012
                                                                                      Page 2 of 34

Other improvements identified include the construction of a roundabout to the south at the
Brookswood Boulevard/Murphy Road intersection, associated with the proposed Murphy Road
Overcrossing improvements.




                             Figure1:BrookswoodBoulevardatPowersRoad



SystemContext
Identifying the system in which an intersection operates is important to determine the factors that
contribute to its overall function. The existing and future contexts of the study intersection are
discussed below, including factors related to the motor vehicle system, pedestrian system,
bicycle system, transit system, emergency response system, and surrounding land use.

MotorVehicleSystem
A field inventory was conducted on December 5, 2011 by DKS Associates staff to determine
characteristics of the study intersection. Data collected included posted speed limits, intersection
control, lane configurations, and pedestrian facilities. A summary of the existing study area
roadway characteristics is listed in Table 1.
                                                                             Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                        Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                                February 10, 2012
                                                                                                      Page 3 of 34

    Table1:ExistingStudyAreaRoadwayCharacteristics

                                                                                                Length
                                                   Posted                                       of Full
  Roadway
                              Functional           Speed         Traffic        Number          Width     Bike      Additional
(Intersection    Agency
                             Classification3       Limit         Control        of Lanes         Turn     Lane        Notes
    Leg)
                                                   (mph)                                        Lane*
                                                                                                  (ft)
                                                                                                 Right
Brookswood                                                                           3
                  City of                                                                        Turn
Blvd. (North                   City Arterial         35        Uncontrolled     (including                Yes            -
                   Bend                                                                          Lane
   Leg)                                                                         turn lane)
                                                                                                  (95)
                                                                                                  Left
                                                                                     3
 Powers Rd.       City of                                         Stop-                          Turn
                               City Arterial         35                         (including                Yes            -
 (East Leg)        Bend                                         Controlled                       Lane
                                                                                turn lane)
                                                                                                 (130)
                                                                                                                  Bus stops are
                                                                                                                 located on both
                                                                                                                   the west and
                                                                                                Right               east side of
Brookswood                                                                           3
                  City of                                                                       Turn               Brookswood
Blvd. (South                   City Arterial         35        Uncontrolled     (including                Yes
                   Bend                                                                         Lane                   Blvd.
   Leg)                                                                         turn lane)
                                                                                                (130)             approximately
                                                                                                                  60ft and 200ft
                                                                                                                   south of the
                                                                                                                    intersection
                                                                                                                  Elkhorn St. is
                                                                                                                      located
                                                                                                 Left
                                                                                     3                            approximately
 Powers Rd.       City of                                         Stop-                          Turn
                                City Local           25                         (including                No        140ft to the
 (West Leg)        Bend                                         Controlled                       Lane
                                                                                turn lane)                          west of the
                                                                                                 (20)
                                                                                                                       study
                                                                                                                    intersection
*Available length for vehicles to queue before blocking traffic in the adjacent through lane.
    

    NearbyTrafficControl
    The immediately adjacent intersections along Brookswood Boulevard and Powers Road are two-
    way stop controlled along the side streets. On the north leg of Brookswood Boulevard, the
    adjacent intersection is with Millbrook Lane located (approximately 600 feet north). To the east,
    Blakely Road intersects Powers Road (approximately 550 feet to the east). On the south leg of
    the intersection, Beth Avenue intersects Brookswood Boulevard (approximately 700 feet to the
    south). On the west leg of the intersection, Elkhorn Street intersects Powers Road approximately
    140 feet from the study intersection.



    3
     Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan. Updated 2006-06-21. https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/handle/1794/3223.
    Accessed December 13, 2011.
                                                                        Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                   Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                           February 10, 2012
                                                                                                 Page 4 of 34

Further from the study intersection, Brookswood Boulevard is controlled with a roundabout at
SE Reed Market Road. In addition, the Murphy Overcrossing Improvements will construct a
roundabout on Brookswood Boulevard south of Powers Road. Powers Road is currently traffic
signal controlled east of the intersection at US 97 and at 3rd Street. However, the Powers Road
corridor traffic control may change in the long-term with potential grade-separation
improvements at US 97.

PedestrianSystem
A curb tight concrete sidewalk exists on the west side of the north leg of Brookswood Boulevard.
On the east side of the north leg of Brookswood Boulevard, there are no sidewalks (along a
currently undeveloped parcel). The City's Transportation System Plan (TSP)4 identified this
location as needing sidewalk infill; however, it was not a priority need infill location and could
be completed as part of fronting development (or could be built as part of this improvement
project).

On the east leg of the intersection, a concrete sidewalk buffered by vegetation exists on the south
side of Powers Road. On the north side of the east leg of Powers Road, a sidewalk is not present
between Brookswood Boulevard and the west US 97 jug handle intersection, but was identified
in the TSP as an area needing sidewalk infill. This location is not identified as a priority need
infill location.

On the south leg of Brookswood Boulevard, both sides of the roadway have concrete sidewalks.
On the west side of the south leg of Brookswood Boulevard the sidewalk is curb tight, and on the
east side, the sidewalk is buffered by vegetation. On the west leg of Powers Road, both sides of
the roadway have sidewalks that are buffered by vegetation.

There are currently no striped crosswalks at the intersection and only the southeast corner
features ADA compliant curb ramps.

BicycleSystem
Striped bike lanes are present along Brookswood Boulevard and on the east leg of Powers Road.
Striping on the north side of Powers Road for the bike lane stops approximately 60 feet in
advance of the stop bar on the east leg. On the west leg of Powers Road, no bike lanes exist.
However, with low traffic volumes and speeds posted at 25mph, this leg of Powers Road
(designated as a local street) is likely adequate as a shared roadway for the cycling environment.

TransitSystem
Transit services in the City of Bend are provided by Cascade East Transit. The Brookswood 2
Route travels through the study intersection on both its inbound and outbound routes from
Hawthorne Station to near Elk Meadow Elementary School along Brookswood Boulevard.5

4
  Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan. Updated 2006-06-21.
https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/handle/1794/3223. Accessed December 13, 2011.
5
  Cascade East Transit, Bend Bus Service. Brookswood 2. http://www.cascadeseasttransit.com/bend-schedule.html Accessed
December 21, 2011.
                                                                          Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                     Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                             February 10, 2012
                                                                                                   Page 5 of 34

Buses operate Monday through Friday and have approximately 40 minute headways from
6:53am to 6:13pm. On Saturday the bus runs approximately every hour from 7:33am to 5:53pm.

Bus stops are located on the south leg of the intersection. On the west side (outbound service),
the stop is located approximately 60 feet from the intersection. On the east side (inbound
service), the stop is located is located approximately 200 feet from the intersection. The distance
of these stops from the intersection has been noted as a concern by City staff6 due to the potential
for mid-block pedestrian crossings (instead of using enhanced crossings constructed as part of
the intersection improvements). Therefore, both the outbound and inbound bus stops may need to
be relocated depending on the recommended future intersection control.

EmergencyResponseSystem
Two fire stations could potentially serve the study area on a regular basis. Station 303 (South
Station)7, is located at 61080 Country Club Drive. The station is approximately 2 miles south
east of the intersection and would take responders roughly five minutes to travel from the Station
to the study intersection. Station 301 is located northwest of the study intersection at 1212 SW
Simpson Avenue. This station is located closer to the study intersection, but it is a further driving
distance due to street connectivity limitations. Responders would need to travel approximately
three miles, which could take roughly seven minutes to get from the Station to the study
intersection. However, emergency calls to this area could come from any fire station within
Bend, as the nearest station could be responding to another call when an emergency occurs in the
study area. Therefore, the intersection design must accommodate EMS responses from all
approaches.

The main hospital in town is the St. Charles Medical Center. The medical center is located near
the corner of NE Neff Road and NE 27th Street, which is approximately five and a half miles
northeast of the study intersection.

The Bend Police Department is located on 555 NE 15th Street, which is east of US 97 and just off
of US 20 and approximately three and a half miles north east of the study intersection. The
Deschutes County Sheriff's office and the Oregon State Police Patrol office are located near the
north end of town where US 20 and US 97 converge approximately 6 miles north of the study
intersection.

LandUse
The existing zoning near the intersection of Brookswood Boulevard and Powers Road is
Residential Urban Medium Density, Residential Urban Standard Density, and Commercial
General, as illustrated in Figure 2. The southwest, northwest, and northeast corners of the study
intersection are designated residential urban standard density, which provides opportunities for a
wide variety of residential housing types at the most common residential densities in places
where community sewer and water services are available. The residential range in this district is


6
    Conversation with Robin Lewis, City of Bend, December 2011.
7
    City of Bend, Station Locations. http://www.bendoregon.gov/index.aspx?page=335. Accessed December 21, 2011.
                                                                    Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                               Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                       February 10, 2012
                                                                                             Page 6 of 34

2.0 to 7.3 dwelling units per gross acre.8 The southeast corner of the study intersection is zoned
as residential urban medium density, which is intended to provide primarily for the development
of multiple family residential housing in areas where sewer and water service are available. The
residential density range in the district is 7.3 to 21.7 units per gross acre to provide a transitional
use area between other residential districts and other less restrictive areas. Further east of the
study intersection (along the SE 3rd Street corridor) the zoning transitions from residential urban
standard density to commercial general. Commercial general provides a broad mixing of
commercial uses that have large site requirements, are oriented to the highway and provide
services to the traveling public.9

The parcel in the northeast quadrant of the intersection is currently vacant and could attribute to
traffic volume growth when it develops. In addition, there is significant development potential to
the south of the intersection along the Brookswood Road corridor (i.e., Traffic Analysis Zones
(TAZs) that could load traffic onto Brookswood Road from Powers Road to China Hat Road).
The year 2030 forecast10 for development in these TAZs includes a growth in over 1,500 new
homes and 180 new jobs (compared to base year 2003 conditions).




    LEGEND




                                     Figure2: ExistingLandUseZoning




8
  Bend Code ­ Chapter 10-10 Development Code, Section 2.1.100,
http://www.bendoregon.gov/modules/showdocument.aspx?documentid=4006 Accessed December 22, 2011.
9
  Bend Code ­ Chapter 10-10 Development Code, Section 2.2.200,
http://www.bendoregon.gov/modules/showdocument.aspx?documentid=4006 Accessed December 22, 2011.
10
   Based on the Bend MPO 2003 and 2030 regional travel demand model land use data.
                                                                        Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                   Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                           February 10, 2012
                                                                                                 Page 7 of 34

IntersectionUse
This section identifies the users of the study intersection and quantifies the existing motor
vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle use during the AM and PM peak hours. In addition, projected
motor vehicle volumes for the future year 2030 are provided.

ExistingVolumes
Intersection motor vehicle turn movements collected at
the study intersection during the AM (7:00-9:00) and
PM (4:00-6:00) peak periods are shown in Figure 3.11
The traffic counts are attached in Appendix A.

Traffic counts indicate a total of one pedestrian crossing
during the AM peak hour and four pedestrian crossings
during the PM peak hour. However, City staff has
observed school children regularly using the intersection
for crossing Brookswood Boulevard.12

Schools attended by students living on all four corners of
the study intersection include Pine Ridge Elementary,
Pilot Butte Middle School, and Summit High School.
Pine Ridge Elementary School13 is located
approximately 0.6 miles southwest of the study
intersection. According to district boundaries, children
located near the study intersection would also attend        Figure3:ExistingPeakHourVolumes
Pilot Butte Middle School14 (which is approximately
four and a half miles northeast of the study intersection)
and Summit High School15 (which is approximately five miles northwest of the study
intersection). Currently elementary students located on the east side of Brookswood Boulevard,
although within typical walking boundaries, are bused to school due to the busy nature of
Brookswood Boulevard. Students located on the west side of Brookswood Boulevard to the
River are within the walking boundaries and are expected to walk to school.16

11
   Intersection turn movement counts, Quality Counts, February 11, 2010.
12
   Conversation with Robin Lewis, City of Bend, December 2011.
13
   Elementary School Boundary Map 2008. Bend-La Pine School District.
http://www.bend.k12.or.us/education/page/download.php?fileinfo=YmxzMDhfZWxlbS5wZGY6Ojovd3d3L3NjaG9vbHMvc2MvYm
VuZC9pbWFnZXMvZG9jbWdyLzMxNV9maWxlXzM3NzdfbW9kXzEyMTcyNzgzNDAucGRm Updated in 2008. Accessed
January 17, 2012.
14
   Middle School Boundaries 2011. Bend-LaPine School District.
http://www.bend.k12.or.us/education/page/download.php?fileinfo=TVNfQm91bmRhcmllc18yMDExLnBkZjo6Oi93d3cvc2Nob29sc
y9zYy9iZW5kL2ltYWdlcy9kb2NtZ3IvNzE0ZmlsZTk1MTUucGRm Updated in 2011. Accessed January 17, 2012.
15
   High School Boundaries. Bend-La Pine School District.
http://www.bend.k12.or.us/education/page/download.php?fileinfo=YmxzMDhfaGlnaC5wZGY6Ojovd3d3L3NjaG9vbHMvc2MvYm
VuZC9pbWFnZXMvZG9jbWdyLzMxNV9maWxlXzM3NzhfbW9kXzEyMTcyNzg0NzQucGRm. Updated in 2008. Accessed
January 17, 2012.
16
   McAdam, Sue. Transportation Operations Manager at Bend-La Pine Public Schools. Phone call interview. 17 January 2012.
                                                                 Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                            Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                    February 10, 2012
                                                                                          Page 8 of 34


One bicyclist was observed during the AM peak hour and five bicyclists were observed during
the PM peak hour. The north, east, and south legs of the intersection currently feature bike lanes.

FutureVolumes
Future traffic demand for the intersection was forecasted to the year 2030 to analyze future
traffic operations at the study intersection. The future 2030 peak period turn movement volumes
were developed for two network scenarios (land use is consistent between the scenarios) using
the Bend MPO's regional travel demand model. The first scenario is based on the "Financially
Committed" network scenario. Near the intersection, the only significant future roadway project
included in this scenario is the extension of Badger Road to Brookswood Boulevard.

The second scenario is based on the adopted MPO Metropolitan Transportation Plan (MTP) as
adjusted for the Murphy Overcrossing Improvements (Full-Build Scenario), which takes into
account the upcoming interchange improvements and system connectivity modifications south of
Powers Road. These improvements include:

     x   Disconnecting Badger Road and Pinebrook Boulevard from US 97
     x   Constructing a frontage road to US 97 (west-side) extending south from Powers Road
     x   Constructing the Murphy Overcrossing and 3rd Street/US 97 interchange
     x   Widening Powers Road to 5 lanes from Brookswood Boulevard to 3rd Street
     x   Constructing an interchange at Powers Road/US 97

Traffic forecasts for each scenario were "post processed" following a methodology consistent
with NCHRP Report 25517. The post processing included a manual adjust to account for the
rapid growth that occurred south of the intersection along the Brookswood Boulevard corridor
between 2003 and 2011. As mentioned previously, over 1,500 new homes are projected in this
area between 2003 and 2030. Over 700 new homes were constructed between 2003 and 2011,
which exceed a straight-line growth rate of the 20-year growth forecast by approximately 340
units. Because these 340 additional homes were captured in the traffic counts conducted in
2011, a manual adjustment was made to reduce the 20-year travel demand model volume
projection by this amount.

The resulting future 2030 AM and PM peak hour turn movement volumes for the study
intersection are shown in Figures 4 and 5. As shown, the Murphy Overcrossing Scenario
(Figure 5) significantly increases volumes through the Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
intersection. This appears to be primarily due to the removal of the Badger Road and Pincbrook
Boulevard access to (and crossing of) US 97, which diverts traffic onto Brookswood Boulevard
and Powers Road.



17
  Highway Traffic Data for Urbanized Area Project Planning and Design - National Cooperative Highway
Research Program Report 255, Transportation Research Board, Washington D.C., 1982.
                                                                   Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                              Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                      February 10, 2012
                                                                                            Page 9 of 34




              Figure4:Future2030Financially              Figure5:Future2030Murphy
              CommittedScenarioPeakHour                  OvercrossingScenarioPeakHour
              Volumes                                    Volumes


DesignVehicle
Both Brookswood Boulevard and Powers Road are classified as minor arterials. Therefore, they
are subject to varying modes of traffic and vehicles. Although the intersection is not located
along a designated truck route (it is parallel to two major freight routes on US 97 and 3rd Street),
it is subject to large vehicles that would serve the surrounding residential area such as emergency
vehicles, garbage trucks, dump trucks, and school buses. To provide more detailed information
about the types of large vehicles that utilize the intersection, a detailed vehicle classification
study was conducted as part of the AM peak period count at the intersection utilizing the Federal
Highway Administration's 13 vehicle classes (see Appendix B). This classification found that
the typical vehicle using the intersection today is a class 3, which is equivalent to a single unit
two axle vehicle (similar to a Passenger Car-P, AASHTO design vehicle18). A small percentage
of larger class 4, 5, and 6 type vehicles, which is equivalent to a single unit three axle vehicle and
smaller, were counted (similar to a Single Unit Truck-SU, AASHTO design vehicle19). The
largest vehicle recorded was a class 7 vehicle making a southbound through movement. This
vehicle class is equivalent to a single unit four axle vehicle (similar to a Single Unit Truck-SU,
AASHTO design vehicle20).



18
   American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. Geometric Design of Highways and Streets
2011 Volume 5. Chapter 2 Design Controls and Criteria.
19
   Ibid.
20
   Ibid.
                                                                    Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                               Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                       February 10, 2012
                                                                                            Page 10 of 34

The City's base design vehicle is a WB-50; however, larger trucks such as a WB-67 should be
accommodated to allow for movement along the corridor if a larger vehicle happens to take this
route. In addition, if roundabout control is selected for this location, the City's design guidelines
require that emergency vehicles be accommodated at the intersection without the use of truck
aprons or mountable curbs.

BaselinePerformance
This section summarizes intersection safety and existing and baseline future year 2030
intersection operations. The purpose is to form a baseline for which future conditions can be
compared to.

Safety
To evaluate safety at the existing intersection, the most recent three years of collision records at
the Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road intersection was obtained from the Oregon Department
of Transportation (ODOT) and are attached in the Appendix C21. Using the proportionality of the
number of vehicles entering an intersection and the total number of collisions experienced, a
collision rate describing the frequency of collisions per million entering vehicles (MEV) was
calculated. This collision rate is used to determine if the number of collisions recorded is
significant enough to indicate that there may be a safety issue. A collision rate of 1.0 MEV or
greater typically warrants further investigation. As listed in Table 2, the collision rate at the study
intersection measured over the previous three years is 1.41, which exceeds the 1.0 threshold.
This warrants additional safety considerations to try and decrease the number (and/or severity) of
collisions occurring at this intersection location.

Table2:IntersectionCollisionSummary(20082010)
                                        Collisions By Year              Collision Severity
Intersection                                                 Total                             Collision Rateb
                                       2008   2009    2010           Fatal   Injury   PDOa

Brookswood Blvd./Powers Rd.             8       6       5      19      0        6       13          1.41
a
    PDO = Property damage only.
b
    Average annual collisions per million entering vehicles (MEV); MEV based on PM Peak Hour Volumes.

Of the 19 collisions that occurred between 2008 and 2010, 15 occurred when drivers either ran a
stop sign or proceeded into the intersection without the right-of-way. In addition, six of those
crashes had an attributing error as driving too fast. Six of the collisions occurred when either
snow or ice was present on the roadway (which would make stopping for a vehicle entering the
intersection without the right-of-way difficult for an oncoming driver).

In addition to the ODOT collision records, the City of Bend provided 2011 (January through
November) collision records22. Within this time frame, one additional collision has occurred at


21
     ODOT Collision Data for January 1, 2008 through December 31, 2010.
22
     City of Bend Police Department, 2011 Bend Crashes through November 2011.
                                                             Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                        Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                February 10, 2012
                                                                                     Page 11 of 34

the study intersection. The collision occurred on November 3rd, 2011 and occurred when the
driver disregarded a traffic sign. The collision record can be found in Appendix C. 

IntersectionOperations
The following sections outline the City of Bend's intersection performance measures and
intersection operational standards for various intersection control types.

MeasuresofEffectiveness
The City of Bend uses four measures of effectiveness (MOEs) to evaluate the operations of an
intersection. These measures include the volume-to-capacity ratio, queuing, level of service, and
delay. A combination of these four measures is used to evaluate two-way stop controlled
intersections, all-way stop controlled intersections, and signalized intersections. A summary of
each of the MOEs is given below.

VolumetoCapacityRatio
The volume-to-capacity ratio is a measure used to represent the level of saturation (i.e., the
portion of capacity that is being used). It is given as a decimal typically between 0.00 and 1.00
and is determined by dividing the peak hour traffic volume by the hourly capacity of a given
intersection or movement. A lower ratio indicates smoother operations and lower delays. As the
ratio approaches 1.00, congestion increases and performance is reduced. If the forecasted ratio is
greater than 1.00, the intersection, lane, or movement is oversaturated and usually results in
excessive queues and long delays.

Queuing
Queuing reports typically indicate the 95th percentile queue, defined to be the length of queue
which is exceeded five percent of the time during the analysis time period. The 95th percentile is
useful in determining the appropriate length of turn pockets, but is not representative of what an
average driver would experience during their commute.

LevelofService
The level of service (LOS) is a measure of effectiveness that is similar to a "report card" rating
and is based on average vehicle delay. Level of service A, B, and C indicate conditions where
traffic moves without significant delays over periods of peak hour travel demand. Level of
service D and E are progressively worse operating conditions. Level of service F represents
conditions where average vehicle delay has become excessive and demand is near capacity. The
average delay value (in seconds) corresponds to each level of service designations.

The unsignalized level of service calculation evaluates each movement separately to identify
problems (typically left turns from side streets). The calculation is based on the average total
delay per vehicle for stop-controlled movements (typically on the minor side street or left turn
movements). Level of service F indicates that there are insufficient gaps of suitable size to allow
minor street traffic to safely enter or cross the major street. This is generally evident by long
delays and queuing on the minor street.
                                                               Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                          Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                  February 10, 2012
                                                                                       Page 12 of 34

Delay
The City's operational performance standard for roundabouts is measured against a volume to
capacity ratio, but delay is used to compare alternative intersection forms to a roundabout.
Typically under the same traffic conditions, a roundabout will result in lower overall delay than
traffic signals and all-way stop control, but may result in higher overall delay than a two-way
stop controlled intersection.

AgencyIntersectionOperationalStandards
The City of Bend has established operation standards for two-way stop control intersections, all-
way stop control intersections, roundabouts, and signalized intersections under the jurisdiction of
the City of Bend. Below are the operational standards from the Bend Code ­ Chapter 10-10
Development Code.23

     x   Two-Way Stop Control ­ Approaches with greater than 100 peak hour trips; average
         delay for the critical lane group is less than or equal to 50 seconds during the Peak Hour.
     x   All-Way Stop Control ­ Average delay for the intersection as a whole is less than or
         equal to 80 seconds during the Peak Hour.
     x   Roundabout ­ Volume to capacity ratio (v/c) for the intersection as a whole is less than or
         equal to 1.0 during the Peak Hour. For this study, the intersection as a whole v/c ratio will
         be estimated by calculating a weighted average (by volume) using the critical lane for
         each approach. The intersection as a whole v/c ratio will be considered the minimum
         operational standard. For design considerations, this study will also identify the v/c ratio
         for each approach to a roundabout, as maintaining a v/c ratio of less than 1.0 for each
         approach would be an ideal design condition for a roundabout.
     x   Signalized Intersection under the jurisdiction of the City of Bend:
             o For intersections that are not constructed to the widths and infrastructure elements
                 of the Bend Urban Transportation System Plan or other approved master plan and
                 not located within or directly adjoining a historic district of Central Business
                 Zone, the volume to capacity ratio for the intersection as a whole is less than or
                 equal to 1.0 during the Peak Hour.
             o For intersections that are not constructed to the widths and infrastructure elements
                 of the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan or other approved master
                 plan and are located within or directly adjoining a historic district or Central
                 Business Zone, the volume to capacity ratio for the intersection as a whole is less
                 than or equal to 1.0 during the hour directly preceding and following the Peak
                 Hour.
             o For intersections that are already constructed to the widths and infrastructure
                 elements of the Bend Urban Area Transportation System Plan or other approved
                 master plan, the operation standard shall be a volume-to-capacity ratio less than or
                 equal to the 1.0 for the intersection as a whole during the hour directly preceding
                 and following the Peak Hour.

23
  Bend Code ­ Chapter 10-10 Development Code. Section 4.7.400 Part B.
http://www.ci.bend.or.us/modules/showdocument.aspx?documentid=4006 Accessed on December 12, 2011.
                                                                     Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                        February 10, 2012
                                                                                             Page 13 of 34


ExistingIntersectionOperations
Intersection traffic operations were analyzed at the study intersection using the Synchro 7TM
software, which employs the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual24 methodology for signalized and
unsignalized intersections. The following sections summarize existing and future peak hour
intersection operations at the study intersection. Table 3 summarizes the AM and PM peak hour
intersection operations at the Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road intersection. As indicated in
the table, the side street stop controlled approaches experience excessive delay while trying to
execute both through and left turns due to the relatively high volumes along Brookswood
Boulevard. The delays experienced along the side streets are simliar to LOS E conditions during
the AM peak hour and LOS F conditions during the PM peak hour. This intersection currently
meets the City's unsignalized operational standard during the AM peak hour (delay <50
seconds); however, it fails to meet the City's operational standard during the PM peak hour. The
operations output can be found in Appendix D.

Table3:Existing2011IntersectionOperatingConditions(AM/PMPeakHour)
                                                                         Existing 2011
Intersection Operations                               AM Peak Hour                        PM Peak Hour
                                                 Delay         LOS        V/C         Delay     LOS      V/C
                                            Unsignalized Intersections
Brookswood Blvd./Powers Rd.                       35.8          E/A       0.32        68.9       F/A     0.66
Unsignalized Intersections
Delay = Individual lane group stopped delay per vehicle (seconds) for the worst case approach
LOS = Minor Street/Major Street level-of-service
V/C = Side street individual lane group volume-to-capacity ratio

Future2030IntersectionOperations
Table 4 summarizes the future 2030 "Financially Committed Scenario" AM and PM peak hour
intersection operations at the Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road intersection. With the
additional traffic volumes associated with future background traffic growth this intersection
would fail to meet the City's unsignalized operational standard during the AM and PM peak
hours. Due to the large volumes along Brookswood Boulevard and the number of vehicles
wishing to make a wesbound left turn, this approach would experience excessive delays during
the PM peak hour. The operations output can be found in Appendix E.




24
     2000 Highway Capacity Manual, Transportation Research Board, Washington DC, 2000.
                                                                     Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                        February 10, 2012
                                                                                             Page 14 of 34



Table4:Future2030FinanciallyCommittedScenarioIntersectionOperatingConditions(AM/PMPeakHour)
                                                         Future 2030 Financially Committed Scenario
Intersection Operations                                 AM Peak Hour                      PM Peak Hour
                                                Delay         LOS        V/C         Delay      LOS      V/C
                                            Unsignalized Intersections
Brookswood Blvd./Powers Rd.                      61.8          F/A       0.39        >200.0     F/A      1.66
Unsignalized Intersections
Delay = Individual lane group stopped delay per vehicle (seconds) for the worst case approach
LOS = Minor Street/Major Street level-of-service
V/C = Side street individual lane group volume-to-capacity ratio

This intersection would also fail to meet the City's operational standard during the AM and PM
peak hours assuming future 2030 "Murphy Overcrossing Improvements Scenario" peak period
traffic volumes. The peak hour operations for this scenario are summarized in Table 5 and can be
found in Appendix F.

Table5:Future2030MurphyOvercrossingImprovementsScenarioIntersectionOperatingConditions(AM/PM
PeakHour)
                                                 Future 2030 Murphy Overcrossing Improvements Scenario
Intersection Operations                                 AM Peak Hour                      PM Peak Hour
                                                Delay         LOS        V/C         Delay      LOS      V/C
                                            Unsignalized Intersections
Brookswood Blvd./Powers Rd.                     >200.0         F/A       >2.00       >200.0     F/A      >2.00
Unsignalized Intersections
Delay = Individual lane group stopped delay per vehicle (seconds) for the worst case approach
LOS = Minor Street/Major Street level-of-service
V/C = Side street individual lane group volume-to-capacity ratio


PotentialSolutions
In order to reduce delays along the side streets at the study intersection and address the safety
issues with driver's failing to yield proper right-of-way, a preliminary alternative analysis was
conducted in order to determine the most appropriate intersection configuration to accommodate
future growth to the year 2030. The alternatives analysis focused on intersection improvements
such as all-way stop control, traffic signalization, and a roundabout.
                                                                  Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                             Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                     February 10, 2012
                                                                                          Page 15 of 34

Roundabout
The City currently implements a roundabout first policy25; therefore a roundabout will be
considered as a viable intersection control alternative and carried forward with the alternatives
analysis. The alternatives analysis will determine the required number of circulating lanes within
the roundabout and any other geometric modifications needed.

AllWayStop
All-way stop warrants were reviewed for the study intersection to determine the merit based on
the requirements outlined in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)26.

An all-way stop would likely be warranted at this intersection based on future 2030 traffic
volumes; however this intersection would fail to meet the City's intersection operational
standards for all way stop control (average delay greater than 80 seconds during the AM and PM
peak hour). Therefore, this intersection control was not considered for further analysis.

TrafficSignal
The peak hour traffic signal warrant as outlined in the MUTCD27 would be met based on the
future 2030 PM peak hour volumes at this intersection therefore, it was carried forward with the
alternatives analysis. The warrant computation is attached in the Appendix G. The alternatives
analysis will determine the preliminary signal operations and any other geometric modifications.

AlternativesEvaluation
Based on the preliminary potential solutions identified in the previous section, both a roundabout
and traffic signal were analyzed in more detail. Each alternative was evaluated using both future
year 2030 AM and PM peak hour traffic volume scenarios previously identified (Financially
Committed and Murphy Overcrossing Improvements). The following sections provide a
comparison of the traffic operations and queuing results for both intersection alternatives under
the two future year 2030 traffic volume scenarios described below:

     x   Scenario 1: Future Financially Committed ­ This scenario is based on the "financially
         committed" network scenario. The only significant future roadway project included in
         this scenario is the extension of Badger Road to Brookswood Boulevard.
     x   Scenario 2: Future Murphy Overcrossing Improvements ­ This scenario is based on
         the adopted MPO Metropolitan Transportation Plan as adjusted for the Murphy
         Overcrossing Improvements (Fully-Built Scenario) which takes into account the
         upcoming interchange improvements and system connectivity modifications south of
         Powers Road. These improvements include:
              Disconnecting Badger Road and Pinebrook Boulevard from US 97

25
   City of Bend Roundabout Evaluation and Design Guidelines, Kittelson & Associates, Inc., April 2010.
26
   2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Section 2B-07 Multi-Way Stop Applications, U.S. Department
of Transportation and Federal Highway Administration.
27
   2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Warrant 3 Peak Hour, U.S. Department of Transportation and
Federal Highway Administration.
                                                                      Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                 Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                         February 10, 2012
                                                                                              Page 16 of 34

                    Constructing a frontage Road to US 97 (west-side) extending south from Powers
                    Road
                    Constructing the Murphy Overcrossing and 3rd Street/US 97 interchange
                    Widening Powers Road to 5 lanes from Brookswood Boulevard to 3rd Street
                    Constructing an interchange at Powers Road/US97

Scenario1:FutureFinanciallyCommittedScenario2030AMandPM
PeakHourVolumes
This scenario evaluates future baseline 2030 AM and PM peak hour traffic volumes associated
with future traffic growth. Alternative 1A summarizes peak hour operating conditions at the
study intersection under a single lane roundabout control. Alternative 1B evaluates this
intersection under traffic signal control.

Alternative1A­RoundaboutOperations
This alternative assumes a single-lane roundabout at the study intersection, which was evaluated
per City of Bend guidelines.28 A summary of the roundabout operations and queuing results are
listed in Table 6 and can be found in Appendix H.




28
     Roundabout Operational Analysis Guidelines, City of Bend, April 2010.
                                                                         Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                    Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                            February 10, 2012
                                                                                                 Page 17 of 34


Table6:Alternative1AFuture2030FinanciallyCommittedScenarioSingleLaneRoundaboutOperationsand
QueuingResults(AM/PMPeakHour)
                                         Brookswood Blvd./Powers Rd.
                                                      Future 2030 Financially Committed Scenario
Single Lane                                           AM Peak                                PM Peak
Roundabout Operations
                                         North      East          South   West   North    East        South    West
                                          Leg       Leg            Leg    Leg     Leg     Leg          Leg     Leg

Peak 15 Minute Operations
Volume/Capacity                           0.27      0.26          0.90    0.08    0.88    0.25          0.58   0.07
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)          5.6       8.2          27.5     4.5    24.9     6.2          11.1   7.5

Intersection Volume/Capacity**
                                                           0.67                                  0.69
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                           20.1                                  17.9
Intersection Level of Service                               C                                     C
Peak 15 min. 95th Percentile Queuing
                                          50        50            375     25      350      50           125    20
Results (ft)*
Peak Hour Operations***
Volume/Capacity                           0.24     0.22           0.80    0.07    0.81    0.22          0.53   0.06
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)         5.2       7.3           18.2    4.3     18.3     5.8          9.7    6.9
Intersection Volume/Capacity**                             0.60                                  0.63
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                           13.8                                  13.8
Intersection Level of Service                               B                                     B
             th
Peak Hour 95 Percentile Queuing
                                           50       25            300      25     300      25           100     25
Results (ft)*

*Queue lengths are rounded to the nearest 25 feet.
**The intersection V/C was calculated using a weighted average based on the approach volumes.
***Peak hour conditions are based on hourly volumes without a peak hour factor (PHF). This scenario is not used to
determine compliance with the City's operating standard, but is used to provide additional information about the
magnitude of congestion and queuing.


The single-lane roundabout alternative would meet the City's operational standards without any
additional circulating lanes or right-turn by-pass lanes. Moderate queuing would be present along
the northbound approach during the AM peak hour and along the southbound approach during
the PM peak hour at the intersection. Queues would not impact adjacent intersections.
                               
                                                                      Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                 Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                         February 10, 2012
                                                                                              Page 18 of 34

Alternative1B­TrafficSignalOperations
This alternative includes traffic signal control at the study intersection. For efficient traffic signal
operations, geometric modifications along the northbound and southbound approaches would be
recommended. These geometric modifications include modifying the existing left/through travel
lanes to exclusive left turn lanes and modifying the exclusive right turn lanes to through/right
travel lanes. Traffic signal operations under this configuration were evaluated using Synchro 7TM
and queuing estimates were made using SimTrafficTM. Estimates of 95th percentile queue lengths
were determined using an average of five simulation runs of the SimTrafficTM model. The results
of the traffic operations and queuing results are summarized in Table 7 and can be found in
Appendix I.

Table7:Alternative1BFuture2030FinanciallyCommittedScenarioTrafficSignalOperationsandQueuing
Results(AM/PMPeakHour)
                                          Brookswood Blvd./Powers Rd.
                                                      Future 2030 Financially Committed Scenario
Traffic Signal Operations
                                                      AM Peak                            PM Peak
Volume/Capacity                                          0.77                              0.64
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                         10.3                              7.1
Intersection Level of Service                             B                                 A
                     th
Queuing Results (95 Percentile Queues)*
                                L                       100 ft                            125 ft
Southbound
                                T/R                      75 ft                            200 ft
                                L                        75 ft                             75 ft
Westbound
                                T/R                     100 ft                            100 ft
                                L                        25 ft                             25 ft
Northbound
                                T/R                     275 ft                            175 ft
                                L                        50 ft                             25 ft
Eastbound
                                T/R                     100 ft                             75 ft
L = Left; T = Through; R = Right
*Queue lengths are rounded to the nearest 25 feet.


A traffic signal would operate within City standards with the recommended geometric
modifications during the AM and PM peak hour.
                                                                Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                           Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                   February 10, 2012
                                                                                        Page 19 of 34


Scenario1:AlternativesEvaluation
Per the City's Tier 1 Table from the Intersection Form Evaluation Framework, a comparison
between Alternative 1A (roundabout) and Alternative 1B (traffic signal) was performed to
determine the preferred intersection control alternative under the Financially Committed scenario
conditions. The comparison is summarized in Table 8. Based on this comparison, a roundabout
would be the recommended intersection control, primarily due to the significant safety benefits.

Table8:Tier1IntersectionFormSelectionCriteria(Scenario1)
  Category               Criteria               Evaluation Comments                     Conclusion
                                                Safety
Motor Vehicle    Conflict points        Conflict Points:
Safety           (exposure)             Traffic signal w/four approaches = 32      Roundabout
                 Severity (speed)       Single lane roundabout w/four
                                        approaches = 8

                                        Posted Speed:
                                        Brookswood Boulevard = 35mph
                                        Powers Road = 25/35 mph

                                        A single lane roundabout has fewer
                                        motor vehicle conflict points therefore
                                        reducing the exposure to potential
                                        collisions. A single lane roundabout
                                        would have less severe collisions than a
                                        traffic signal due to the geometry and
                                        slower entry/circulating speeds.
Non-             Conflict points        Conflict Points:                           Roundabout
Motorized        (exposure)             Traffic signal w/four approaches = 24
Vehicle Safety   Severity (speed)       Single lane roundabout w/four
                                        approaches = 8

                                        Posted Speed:
                                        Brookswood Boulevard = 35mph
                                        Powers Road = 25/35 mph

                                        A single lane roundabout has fewer
                                        pedestrian conflict points therefore
                                        reducing the exposure to potential
                                        accidents. A single lane roundabout
                                        would provide a shorter pedestrian
                                        crossing distance than a traffic signal;
                                        however each leg would require two
                                        crossings (two stages).

                                        A traffic signal would provide a
                                        protected pedestrian movement along
                                        all legs of the intersection.
                                         Traffic Operations
                                                                   Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                              Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                      February 10, 2012
                                                                                           Page 20 of 34

Peak-Hour        Volume-to-capacity ratio   Both a single lane roundabout and           Traffic Signal
Traffic          Average delay              traffic signal would meet the City of
Operations       LOS                        Bend's operational standards during the
                 Queue lengths              AM and PM peak hours for each
                                            respective intersection control.

                                            A traffic signal would result in lower
                                            intersection delays during the AM and
                                            PM peak hours. Moderate queues along
                                            the northbound and southbound
                                            approaches would be present under
                                            both single lane roundabout and traffic
                                            signal control.
                                             Anticipated Users
Design Vehicle   Appropriate heavy          Both a traffic signal and single lane       Neutral
                 vehicle                    roundabout would be designed using
                 Buses                      the same design/accommodated
                 Emergency vehicles         vehicle(s).

                                            It is assumed that the intersection
                                            would be designed for a WB-50 and a
                                            WB-67 would be accommodated for all
                                            movements.
Special User     School children            Both a traffic signal and single lane       Neutral
Needs            Elderly                    roundabout would be designed to
                 Visually impaired          accommodate the same special user
                 ADA compliance             needs at the intersection. A traffic
                                            signal would be easier to navigate for
                                            the visually impaired; however it is
                                            assumed that there would be no special
                                            users other than typical pedestrians and
                                            bicyclists at the intersection due to the
                                            surrounding land use zoning.
                                              System Context
System Effects   Adjacent traffic control   There are two existing traffic signals      Neutral
                 Railroad crossing          located to the east of Brookswood
                                            Boulevard along Powers Road at US 97
                                            (Bend Parkway) and NE 3rd Street.
                                            However, there is potential that those
                                            could be removed or replaced with
                                            roundabout control in the future.

                                            There is one existing roundabout north
                                            of the intersection on Brookswood
                                            Boulevard and one planned roundabout
                                            south of the intersection.

                                            Based on the spacing between the study
                                            intersection and the nearest traffic
                                            signal along Powers Road to the east, it
                                            is assumed that under traffic
                                                                   Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                              Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                      February 10, 2012
                                                                                           Page 21 of 34

                                            signalization this intersection would
                                            operate in isolation therefore would not
                                            be part of a coordinated signal system.

                                            There are no surrounding system
                                            effects that would significantly favor
                                            either a roundabout or traffic signal.
Environmental    Land use context           The land use zoning surrounding the        Neutral
Impacts                                     intersection is standard and medium
                                            density residential. Neither a traffic
                                            signal nor roundabout is anticipated to
                                            have significant environmental impacts
                                            to the surrounding residential land use.

                                            Due to lower intersection delays and
                                            shorter queue lengths during non-peak
                                            periods, a roundabout could reduce the
                                            number of stops, therefore reducing
                                            noise and emissions associated with
                                            stop and go driving.
Emergency        Response time/control      A traffic signal would yield shorter       Neutral
Response         delay                      intersection delays and would also be
                                            equipped with emergency vehicle
                                            preemption along all approaches.
                                            Emergency vehicles would be able to
                                            use the left turn lanes and opposing
                                            traffic lanes to maneuver through the
                                            intersection if necessary.

                                            The City's roundabout standards
                                            require a 20 foot wide entrance and exit
                                            lane in order to allow emergency
                                            vehicles to enter around and pass
                                            vehicles stopped within the roundabout.

                                            Both a traffic signal and single lane
                                            roundabout would yield similar
                                            response times.
                                           Context at Intersection
Intersection     Intersection proper        A traffic signal would require             Neutral
Footprint        (physical & operational    realignment of the northbound and
                 influence area)            southbound approaches along
                                            Brookswood Boulevard to
                                            accommodate an exclusive left turn
                                            lane and shared through-right travel
                                            lane. This could require minor ROW
                                            acquisition.

                                            A single lane roundabout could also
                                            require minor ROW acquisition.
Intersection     Driveway closures or       There are currently no accesses along      Neutral
Influence Area   impacts                    Brookswood Boulevard or Powers
                                                                       Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                  Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                          February 10, 2012
                                                                                               Page 22 of 34

                                                Road near the study intersection that
                                                would be impacted by a traffic signal or
                                                single lane roundabout.

                                                The intersection of Elkhorn Street with
                                                Powers Road is located approximately
                                                140 feet east of the intersection and
                                                would be outside of the queuing area
                                                under either control type.

Based on Table 8, a roundabout would perform better than a traffic signal based on the safety
criteria. The roundabout is safer for both motorized and non-motorized vehicles. However, the
traffic signal operates slightly better with lower intersection delays. Both the traffic signal and
single lane roundabout would meet the City's operation standards in 2030 under the proposed
configurations. All other selection criteria categories were deemed neutral between a traffic
signal and roundabout.

Scenario2:FutureMurphyOvercrossingImprovementsScenario2030
AMandPMPeakHourVolumes
Similar to Scenario 1, both a roundabout and traffic signal were analyzed under future 2030
Murphy Overcrossing Full-Build traffic volumes. Alternative 2A summarizes peak hour
operating conditions at the study intersection under partial multi-lane roundabout control, while
Alternative 2B evaluates this intersection under traffic signal control.

Alternative2A­RoundaboutOperations
Scenario 2 resulted in increased volumes at the study intersection, as was indicated in Figure 5.
This increase in traffic volumes required that the roundabout be modified from a single-lane
roundabout to a partial multi-lane roundabout (with an two-lane approach northbound to
accommodate a right turn lane and a two-lane approach southbound to accommodate a left turn
lane) in order to meet the City's ideal operational standards (i.e., v/c ratio below 1.0 for each
approach) during the AM and PM peak hours.

The partial multi-lane roundabout was then evaluated per City of Bend guidelines29. The traffic
operations and queuing results are listed in Table 9 and can be found in Appendix J. Concept
sketches showing the proposed roundabout layouts are included in the Appendix K.

                                     




29
     Roundabout Operational Analysis Guidelines, City of Bend, April 2010.
                                                                          Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                     Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                             February 10, 2012
                                                                                                  Page 23 of 34

Table9:Alternative2AFuture2030MurphyOvercrossingImprovementsScenarioPartialMultiLane
RoundaboutOperationsandQueuingResults(AM/PMPeakHour)
                                         Brookswood Blvd./Powers Rd.
                                                 Future 2030 Murphy Overcrossing Improvements Scenario
Partial Multi-Lane                                    AM Peak                                PM Peak
Roundabout Operations
                                         North       East          South   West   North    East        South    West
                                          Leg        Leg            Leg    Leg     Leg     Leg          Leg     Leg
Peak 15 Minute Operations
Volume/Capacity                           0.23       0.62          0.71    0.09    0.82    0.63          0.40   0.09
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)          5.5       17.3          14.0     5.5    21.9    13.4          7.9    9.6
Intersection Volume/Capacity**                              0.58                                  0.65
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                            13.1                                  15.8
Intersection Level of Service                                B                                     C
Peak 15 min. 95th Percentile Queuing
                                          25        125            175     25      250     125           75     25
Results (ft)*
Peak Hour Operations***
Volume/Capacity                           0.21       0.52          0.64    0.08    0.74    0.57          0.36   0.08
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)          5.2       13.3          11.4    5.2     16.6    11.4          7.2    8.7
Intersection Volume/Capacity**                              0.51                                  0.59
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                            10.6                                  12.7
Intersection Level of Service                                B                                     B
             th
Peak Hour 95 Percentile Queuing
                                           25        100           125      25     200     100           50      25
Results (ft)*
*Queue lengths are rounded to the nearest 25 feet.
**The intersection V/C was calculated using a weighted average based on the approach volumes.
***Peak hour conditions are based on hourly volumes without a peak hour factor (PHF). This scenario is not used to
determine compliance with the City's operating standard, but is used to provide additional information about the
magnitude of congestion and queuing.


With the increase in traffic volumes under this scenario, the study intersection would operate
within City standards assuming a partial multi-lane roundabout. Queuing would not be
anticipated to impact adjacent intersections or accesses.

Alternative2B­TrafficSignalOperations
Due to the increased volumes of the Murphy Overcrossing Improvements, the traffic signal
configuration proposed in Scenario 1B would fail; during the AM peak with a v/c ratio of 1.07
(See Appendix L). To achieve the City's mobility standards, Alternative 2B includes a
northbound right turn lane to accommodate the large number of right turns. The results of the
traffic operations and queuing results are summarized in Table 10 and can be found in Appendix
M and a sketch of the traffic signal alternatives can be seen in Appendix N.
                                                                      Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                 Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                         February 10, 2012
                                                                                              Page 24 of 34


Table10:Alternative2Future2030MurphyOvercrossingImprovementsScenarioTrafficSignalOperationsand
QueuingResults(AM/PMPeakHour)
                                          Brookswood Blvd./Powers Rd.
                                                 Future 2030 Murphy Overcrossing Improvements Scenario
       Traffic Signal Operations
                                                       AM Peak                           PM Peak
Volume/Capacity                                           0.70                             0.79
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                          9.6                              12.3
Intersection Level of Service                              A                                B
Queuing Results (95th Percentile Queues)*
                                L                        75 ft                            175 ft
Southbound
                                T/R                      100 ft                           300 ft
                                L                        125 ft                           200 ft
Westbound
                                T/R                      150 ft                           175 ft
                                L                        25 ft                             25 ft
Northbound                      T                        275 ft                           200 ft
                                R                        125 ft                            75 ft
                                L                        50 ft                             25 ft
Eastbound
                                T/R                      75 ft                             75 ft
L = Left; T = Through; R = Right
*Queue lengths are rounded to the nearest 25 feet.


The traffic signal would meet the City's operational standards during the AM and PM peak hours
under this alternative. Traffic signal operations would be characterized as LOS B or better
conditions.
                                      
                                                                Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                           Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                   February 10, 2012
                                                                                        Page 25 of 34

Scenario2:AlternativesEvaluation
Per the City's Tier 1 Table from the Intersection Form Evaluation Framework, a comparison
between Alternative 2A (Partial Multi-Lane Roundabout) and Alternative 2B (Traffic Signal
with northbound right turn lane) was performed to determine the preferred alternative. The
comparison is summarized in Table 11. Based on this comparison, a roundabout would be the
recommended intersection control, primarily due to the significant safety benefits for motor
vehicle traffic.

Table11:Tier1IntersectionFormSelectionCriteria(Scenario2)
  Category               Criteria               Evaluation Comments                         Conclusion
                                                Safety
Motor Vehicle    Conflict points        Conflict Points:                              Roundabout
Safety           (exposure)             Traffic signal w/four approaches = 32
                 Severity (speed)       Partial multi-lane roundabout w/four
                                        approaches = 11

                                        Posted Speed:
                                        Brookswood Boulevard = 35mph
                                        Powers Road = 25/35 mph

                                        A partial multi-lane roundabout has
                                        fewer motor vehicle conflict points
                                        therefore reducing the exposure to
                                        potential collisions. A partial multi-lane
                                        roundabout would have less severe
                                        collisions than a traffic signal due to the
                                        geometry and lower entry/circulating
                                        speeds.
Non-             Conflict points        Conflict Points:                              Neutral
Motorized        (exposure)             Traffic signal w/four approaches = 24
Vehicle Safety   Severity (speed)       Partial multi-lane roundabout w/four
                                        approaches = 10

                                        Posted Speed:
                                        Brookswood Boulevard = 35mph
                                        Powers Road = 25/35 mph

                                        A traffic signal provides a protected
                                        pedestrian movement along all legs of
                                        the intersection.

                                        A partial multi-lane roundabout has
                                        fewer pedestrian conflict points
                                        therefore reducing the overall exposure
                                        to potential accidents. However, it
                                        requires pedestrians to cross two travel
                                        lanes at a time on some legs of the
                                        intersection. This would require
                                        pedestrians to select larger gaps in the
                                                                   Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                              Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                      February 10, 2012
                                                                                           Page 26 of 34

                                            traffic stream while crossing
                                            unprotected. Additionally a roundabout
                                            would require two crossings (two
                                            stages) for each leg.
                                            Traffic Operations
Peak-Hour        Volume-to-capacity ratio   Both a partial multi-lane roundabout       Roundabout
Traffic          Average delay              and a traffic signal with a northbound
Operations       LOS                        right turn lane would meet the City of
                 Queue lengths              Bend's operational standards during the
                                            AM and PM peak hours for each
                                            respective intersection control.

                                            A traffic signal would result in lower
                                            intersection delays during the AM and
                                            PM peak hours. However, queue
                                            lengths would be shorter under a partial
                                            multi-lane roundabout.
                                             Anticipated Users
Design Vehicle   Appropriate heavy          Both a traffic signal and single lane      Neutral
                 vehicle                    roundabout would be designed using
                 Buses                      the same design/accommodated
                 Emergency vehicles         vehicle(s).

                                            It is assumed that the intersection
                                            would be designed for a WB-50 and a
                                            WB-67 would be accommodated for all
                                            movements.
Special User     School children            Both a traffic signal and partial multi-   Neutral
Needs            Elderly                    lane roundabout would be designed to
                 Visually impaired          accommodate the same special user
                 ADA compliance             needs at the intersection.
                                              System Context
System Effects   Adjacent traffic control   There are two existing traffic signals     Neutral
                 Railroad crossing          located to the east of Brookswood
                                            Boulevard along Powers Road at US 97
                                            (Bend Parkway) and NE 3rd Street.
                                            However, there is potential that those
                                            could be removed or replaced with
                                            roundabout control in the future.

                                            There is one existing roundabout north
                                            of the intersection on Brookswood
                                            Boulevard and one planned roundabout
                                            south of the intersection.

                                            Based on signalized intersection
                                            spacing along Powers Road. It is
                                            assumed that this intersection would
                                            operate in isolation.
Environmental    Land use context           The land use zoning surrounding the        Neutral
                                                                   Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                              Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                      February 10, 2012
                                                                                           Page 27 of 34

Impacts                                     intersection is standard and medium
                                            density residential. Neither a traffic
                                            signal nor roundabout is anticipated to
                                            have significant environmental impacts
                                            to the surrounding residential land use.

                                            Due to lower intersection delays and
                                            shorter queue lengths during non-peak
                                            periods, a roundabout could reduce the
                                            number of stops, therefore reducing
                                            noise and emissions associated with
                                            stop and go driving.
Emergency        Response time/control      A traffic signal would yield shorter       Neutral
Response         delay                      intersection delays and would also be
                                            equipped with emergency vehicle
                                            preemption along all approaches.
                                            Emergency vehicles would be able to
                                            use the left turn lanes and opposing
                                            traffic lanes to maneuver through the
                                            intersection if necessary.

                                            The City's roundabout standards
                                            require a 20 foot wide entrance and exit
                                            lane in order to allow emergency
                                            vehicles to enter around and pass
                                            vehicles stopped within the roundabout.

                                            Both a traffic signal and single lane
                                            roundabout would yield similar
                                            response times.
                                           Context at Intersection
Intersection     Intersection proper        A traffic signal would require             Neutral
Footprint        (physical & operational    realignment of the northbound and
                 influence area)            southbound approaches on Brookswood
                                            Boulevard to accommodate a left turn
                                            lane and shared through-right travel
                                            lane. Additionally a northbound right
                                            turn lane would be required at the
                                            intersection. These geometric could
                                            require ROW acquisition.

                                            A partial multi-lane roundabout would
                                            require two approaching lanes along the
                                            north and south legs. This could also
                                            require ROW acquisition.
Intersection     Driveway closures or       There are currently no accesses along      Neutral
Influence Area   impacts                    Brookswood Boulevard or Powers
                                            Road near the study intersection that
                                            would be impacted by a traffic signal or
                                            single lane roundabout.

                                            The intersection of Elkhorn Street with
                                                              Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                         Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                 February 10, 2012
                                                                                      Page 28 of 34

                                        Powers Road is located approximately
                                        140 feet east of the intersection and
                                        would be outside of the queuing area
                                        under either control type.

As listed in Table 11, several of the criteria result in neutral conclusions not favoring a traffic
signal or a roundabout. However, a roundabout ultimately out performs a traffic signal based on
the criteria for both Motor Vehicle Safety and Operations.

AdditionalConsiderations
Additional factors that could influence the design of the recommended roundabout were
evaluated. These considerations include evaluation of the Single Lane Roundabout performance
analyzed under the Murphy Overcrossing Improvement Scenario, multimodal system
considerations, interactions with nearby intersections, and opening day operations.

SingleLaneRoundaboutPerformancewithMurphyOvercrossing
ImprovementsScenario
Due to the right of way and built environment constraints around the intersection, a single lane
roundabout was evaluated under the Murphy Overcrossing Improvements Scenario to document
its performance with traffic volumes that would cause peak hour operations to exceed the City's
ideal design standards (i.e., v/c ratio below 1.0 for each approach). The operations results are
summarized in Table 12 and included Appendix O. As can be seen in Table 12, under peak 15
minute volume conditions the v/c ratio would reach 1.13 for the northbound approach and 1.08
for the southbound approach during the AM peak and PM peak period, respectively. The overall
intersection v/c ratio would be below 1.0 in each period, which meets the City's minimum
operations standard.

During overall peak hour conditions, all approaches are below a v/c ratio of 1.0 except for the
northbound approach during the AM peak hour, which would reach a v/c ratio of 1.01. The
overall intersection v/c ratios are below 1.0 in each peak period, which meets the City's
minimum design standards.

As listed in Table 12, the queue lengths under the hourly volume scenarios exceed the peak 15-
minute queue lengths for the northbound and southbound approach. This is due to the peak 15-
minute periods being overcapacity, which would result in queue spillback outside of the 15-
minute periods. The 95th-percentile queue lengths for the northbound approach would extend
approximately 1,000 feet, which would extend through unsignalized intersections along
Brookdwood Boulevard at Beth Avenue and Cliffrose Drive.
                                                                         Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                    Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                            February 10, 2012
                                                                                                 Page 29 of 34



Table12:Alternative2AFuture2030MurphyOvercrossingImprovementsScenarioSingleLaneRoundabout
OperationsandQueuingResults(AM/PMPeakHour)
                                         Brookswood Blvd./Powers Rd.
                                                 Future 2030 Murphy Overcrossing Improvements Scenario
Single Lane                                           AM Peak                                PM Peak
Roundabout Operations
                                         North       East         South   West   North    East        South    West
                                          Leg        Leg           Leg    Leg     Leg     Leg          Leg     Leg
Peak 15 Minute Operations
Volume/Capacity                           0.30       0.62         1.13    0.08    1.08    0.63          0.77   0.09
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)          6.3       17.3         87.8    14.9    71.8    13.4          18.1   9.3
Intersection Volume/Capacity**                             0.87                                  0.86
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                           59.2                                  40.0
Intersection Level of Service                               F                                     E
Peak 15 min. 95th Percentile Queuing
                                          50        125           900     25      675     125           225    25
Results (ft)*
Peak Hour Operations***
Volume/Capacity                           0.27      0.52          1.01    0.07    0.97    0.57          0.70   0.07
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)         5.8       13.3          47.2    4.6     41.7    11.4          14.4   8.4
Intersection Volume/Capacity**                             0.77                                  0.77
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                           33.1                                  25.4
Intersection Level of Service                               D                                     D
             th
Peak Hour 95 Percentile Queuing
                                           50        100          1175     25     825      100          175     25
Results (ft)*
*Queue lengths are rounded to the nearest 25 feet.
**The intersection V/C was calculated using a weighted average based on the approach volumes.
***Peak hour conditions are based on hourly volumes without a peak hour factor (PHF). This scenario is not used to
determine compliance with the City's operating standard, but is used to provide additional information about the
magnitude of congestion and queuing.



MultimodalSystemConsiderations
As described in the system context, there are transit and pedestrian facilities near the intersection
that should be considered during the design, including:
    x Coordinate with Cascade East Transit to relocate bus stops, if possible, to the approaches
        of the north and south legs of the study intersection. The stops should be prior to the
        pedestrian crossings at the splitter islands. This location encourages use of pedestrian
        facilities at the roundabout and avoids queuing of vehicles (behind a bus that is
        boarding/alighting) through the roundabout.
                                                           Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                      Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                              February 10, 2012
                                                                                   Page 30 of 34

   x   Consider extending the improvement (or identifying a future phase) to construct a
       sidewalk on the north side of Powers Road between Brookswood Boulevard and the west
       US 97 jug handle. This connection would provide a pedestrian facility connecting the
       residential area near the intersection to the commercial area along 3rd Street.

InteractionwithNearbyIntersections
Due to the nearby intersections along the Powers Road corridor, additional considerations should
be given to interaction with operations at Elkhorn Street and US 97. These considerations
include:
    x Elkhorn Street is located approximately 100 feet from the exit of the roundabout for
       westbound vehicles. While the westbound volumes approaching Elkhorn Street are low,
       vehicles slowing or stopping to turn could conflict with vehicles exiting the roundabout.
       The roundabout design should include evaluation of adequate stopping sight distance for
       exiting vehicle to react to a vehicle stopped at Elkhorn Street, as well as adequate
       intersection sight distance for turning movements from Elkhorn Street to see vehicles
       exiting the roundabout.
    x If conflicts at Elkhorn Street become problematic in the future (e.g., if eastbound queues
       extend into the Elkhorn Street intersection and block westbound left turning vehicles on
       Powers Road), a median treatment that restricts the intersection of Powers Road/Elkhorn
       Street to right-in/right-out movements may be needed.
    x Future traffic growth along Powers Road could increase queuing from US 97 towards
       Brookswood Boulevard. The potential for this queue to reach Brookswood Boulevard
       (impacting operations and safety at the roundabout) was evaluated for both future year
       scenarios. In both scenarios, the peak hour 95th percentile queue lengths from US 97
       were found to be less than 300 feet, which would not reach back to Brookswood
       Boulevard.

YearofOpeningOperations
A single lane roundabout would operate well within the City's operational standards under
opening day (year 2012) traffic conditions (in addition to meeting long-term year 2030 growth
forecasts under the Financially Committed Scenario). A single lane roundabout may need to be
modified into a partial multi-lane roundabout sometime in the future to accommodate future
2030 traffic growth related to the Murphy Overcrossing Scenario, which results in additional
traffic on Brookswood Boulevard and Powers Road due to restricted access to US 97. This could
be accommodated by widening the roundabout in the future if the volumes under that scenario
are realized, as opposed to building a larger diameter roundabout now and adding lanes to the
inside when needed. Table 13 shows the expected day of opening single-lane roundabout traffic
operations and queuing which can also be found in Appendix P.

                             
                                                                         Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                                    Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                            February 10, 2012
                                                                                                 Page 31 of 34

Table13:Alternative1­2012YearofOpeningSingleLaneRoundaboutOperationsandQueuingResults
(AM/PMPeakHour)
                                         Brookswood Blvd./Powers Rd.
                                                                         2012 Year of Opening

Single Lane                                          AM Peak                                      PM Peak
Roundabout Operations
                                         North      East          South     West    North       East         South   West
                                          Leg       Leg            Leg      Leg      Leg        Leg           Leg    Leg

Peak 15 Minute Operations
Volume/Capacity                           0.23      0.24          0.74       0.07    0.64       0.23          0.39   0.05
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)          5.1       7.8          14.8       4.2     11.7       5.8           6.9    5.8
Intersection Volume/Capacity**                             0.55                                        0.48
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                           11.7                                        9.1
Intersection Level of Service                               B                                           A
                th
Peak 15 min. 95 Percentile Queuing
                                           25        25            200       25      150        25            50      25
Results (ft)*
Peak Hour Operations***
Volume/Capacity                           0.18     0.17           0.59      0.05     0.58       0.21          0.35   0.04
Critical Lane Average Delay (sec)         4.6       6.3           9.9        3.9     10.2       5.4           6.5    5.5
Intersection Volume/Capacity**                             0.43                                        0.43
Intersection Control Delay (sec)                           8.2                                         8.2
Intersection Level of Service                               A                                           A
                th
Peak 15 min. 95 Percentile Queuing
                                          25        25            125        25      125        25            50      25
Results (ft)*
*Queue lengths are rounded to the nearest 25 feet.
**The intersection V/C was calculated using a weighted average based on the approach volumes.
***Peak hour conditions are based on hourly volumes without a peak hour factor (PHF). This scenario is not used to
determine compliance with the City's operating standard, but is used to provide additional information about the
magnitude of congestion and queuing.


                                    
                                                            Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                       Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                               February 10, 2012
                                                                                    Page 32 of 34

SummaryofFindings
Based on the Tier 1 Selection Criteria for each future forecast scenario, a roundabout would be
recommended compared to traffic signal control. Based on the volume increase forecasted under
the Murphy Overcrossing Improvement Scenario, a partial multi-lane roundabout would be
needed to meet the City's ideal operations standard (i.e., v/c ratios below 1.0 for each approach),
as listed in Table 14. In choosing which configuration to design and construct at this time (single
lane vs. multi-lane), the following should be considered:

   x   A single lane roundabout would meet both minimum and ideal operational standards
       under the 2030 Financially Committed Scenario.
   x   A single lane roundabout would meet minimum, but not ideal, operational standards
       under the 2030 Murphy Overcrossing Scenario. However, this scenario assumes that full
       access (and interchange improvements) would be maintained at US 97/Powers Road in
       the long-term. This assumption may be difficult to achieve after the interchange
       improvements are constructed at US 97/3rd Street, as interchange spacing between 3rd
       Street and Reed Market Road may not be adequate to allow another interchange at
       Powers Road. If full access is not maintained at US 97/Powers Road, the traffic volumes
       at Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road would likely decrease and a single lane
       roundabout would likely meet the ideal operational standards.
   x   If the volumes forecasted under the Murphy Overcrossing Improvements Scenario are
       realized, a single lane roundabout would have peak hour queuing on the south leg that
       extends into two unsignalized intersections to the south.
   x   If the Murphy Overcrossing Improvements are constructed in the near future, including
       the removal of access to US 97 at Badger Road and Pinebrook Boulevard, a single-lane
       roundabout configuration would likely meet ideal operational standards for a significant
       period (e.g., 15 years) before the need for multi-lane approaches would be triggered.
   x   The volume increase forecasted under the Murphy Overcrossing Improvements Scenario
       appears to be due to the removal of access to US 97 at Badger Road and Pinebrook
       Boulevard. The City may consider mitigation as part of those access removals that would
       either construct multi-lane roundabout improvements or identify other system
       improvements that would offset the traffic diversion effect at Brookswood
       Boulevard/Powers Road.
   x   Pedestrian crossing safety would likely be improved with a single lane configuration
       compared to multi-lane approaches (which could have second-car coming conflicts with
       dual-lane entries).
                                                                   Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                              Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                                      February 10, 2012
                                                                                           Page 33 of 34

Table 14: 2030 Roundabout Operational Summary
                                                             Roundabout Configuration
                                             Scenario 1 ­ 2030
                                                                  Scenario 2 ­ 2030 Murphy Overcrossing
                                          Financially Committed
Operational Criteria                                                       Improvement Scenario
                                                 Scenario
                                                                                      Partial Multi-Lane
                                             Single Lane RAB       Single Lane RAB
                                                                                             RAB
                                                                         1.13*
                                                    0.90                                      0.82
2030 Peak 15 Minute v/c Ratio (Max                                    (Northbound
                                           (Northbound approach                          (Southbound
Approach Value)                                                     approach during
                                             during AM Peak)                               approach)
                                                                       AM Peak)
2030 Peak 15 Minute v/c ratio (Overall
                                                     0.69                    0.87                 0.65
Intersection Value)
2030 Queuing Impact (Does max queue
                                                      No                      Yes                  No
block adjacent intersections?)
*This approach exceeds 1.0 during the peak 15 minutes of the AM peak on the northbound approach. During the
peak 15 minutes of the PM peak the southbound approach also exceeds 1.0 and is reported at 1.08.

Under either a single lane or multi-lane configuration, the following items should be considered
when designing a roundabout at the Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road intersection:

    x   Design vehicle of a WB-50, as well as a WB-50 with "pup" trailer (allowing the truck
        cab to stay in-lane with the trailer potentially tracking onto the truck apron)
    x   Design for allowing emergency response vehicles (ambulance and a hook/ladder fire
        truck) to stay in-lane.
    x   Accommodate a WB-67 for all movements (with use of an inner apron if necessary).
    x   Elkhorn Street is located approximately 100 feet from the exit of the roundabout for
        westbound vehicles. While the westbound volumes approaching Elkhorn Street are low,
        vehicles slowing or stopping to turn could conflict with vehicles exiting the roundabout.
        The roundabout design should provide adequate stopping sight distance for exiting
        vehicle to react to a vehicle stopped at Elkhorn Street, as well as adequate intersection
        sight distance for turning movements from Elkhorn Street to see vehicles exiting the
        roundabout.
    x   If conflicts at Elkhorn Street become problematic in the future (e.g., if eastbound queues
        extend into the Elkhorn Street intersection and block westbound left turning vehicles on
        Powers Road), a median treatment that restricts the intersection of Powers Road/Elkhorn
        Street to right-in/right-out movements may be needed.
    x   Consider extending the improvements (or identifying a future phase) to construct a
        sidewalk on the north side of Powers Road between Brookswood Boulevard and the west
        US 97 jug handle. This connection would provide a pedestrian facility connecting the
        residential area near the intersection to the commercial area along 3rd Street.
    x   Coordinate with Cascade East Transit to relocate bus stops, if possible, to the approaches
        of the north and south legs of the study intersection. The stops should be prior to the
        pedestrian crossings at the splitter islands. This location would encourage use of
        pedestrian facilities at the roundabout for crossings to the transit stops and would avoid
                                                      Brookswood Boulevard/Powers Road
                                                 Intersection Traffic Control Determination
                                                                         February 10, 2012
                                                                              Page 34 of 34

   queuing of vehicles (behind a bus that is boarding/alighting downtown of the roundabout)
   that could back up through the roundabout.


                               AppendixA
   ExistingIntersectionTurnMovementCounts(AM/PM)





Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Brookswood Blvd -- Powers Rd                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10675709
 CITY/STATE: Bend, OR                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, Nov 01 2011
                    209          653                        Peak-Hour: 7:10 AM -- 8:10 AM                                 7.7        1.4
                     15 168 26
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                          0.0 9.5 0.0

       30    14                        78   135
                                                                                                             0.0   7.1                       3.8      3.7
             34           0.80         13
                                                                                                                   2.9                       0.0
       52    4                         44   217
                                                                                                             3.8   0.0                       4.5      1.8

                     2    561 157
                                                                                                                          0.0 0.9 1.9

                    216          720
                                                                                                                          8.3        1.1



                           0                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                   0                          1

             1                          0                                                                          0                          0

                                                                                                                   0                          0


                           0                                                                                               0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                        NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count          Brookswood Blvd                 Brookswood Blvd              Powers Rd                   Powers Rd
     Period             (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                  Left Thru Right       U         Left Thru Right      U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     7:00 AM        0     29       9    0           0      4     0     0     0      1      1      0     1        1      6       0           52
     7:05 AM        0     31      10    0           4      5     0     0     2      2      0      0     2        1      1       0           58
     7:10 AM        1     44      13    0           3      5     0     0     0      1      1      0     2        0      5       0           75
     7:15 AM        0     37       7    0           1      6     0     0     3      2      0      0     2        0      8       0           66
     7:20 AM        1     44       8    0           1      6     1     0     1      2      0      0     1        2      4       0           71
     7:25 AM        0     66      11    0           3      7     3     0     2      2      0      0     2        0      5       0          101
     7:30 AM        0     39      18    0           2     15     1     0     3      2      1      0     4        0      6       0           91
     7:35 AM        0     51      18    0           4     20     0     0     0      4      1      0     7        3      8       0          116
     7:40 AM        0     37      12    0           1     13     3     0     0      6      0      0     3        2      2       0           79
     7:45 AM        0     51       9    0           4     33     4     0     1      1      0      0     5        0      5       0          113
     7:50 AM        0     60      23    0           2     15     0     0     3      5      1      0     4        2      8       0          123
     7:55 AM        0     60      10    0           1     17     0     0     0      5      0      0     5        1     14       0          113             1058
     8:00 AM        0     36      11    0           2     18     2     0     1      2      0      0     6        2      9       0           89             1095
     8:05 AM        0     36      17    0           2     13     1     0     0      2      0      0     3        1      4       0           79             1116
     8:10 AM        0     32      10    0           3      6     0     0     0      1      0      0     1        1      2       0           56             1097
     8:15 AM        0     36       6    0           0     10     0     0     3      0      1      0     6        0     10       0           72             1103
     8:20 AM        0     42       6    0           6     14     0     0     0      1      0      0     7        0      4       0           80             1112
     8:25 AM        0     41      12    0           2      9     0     0     0      0      0      0     2        1      0       0           67             1078
     8:30 AM        0     42      10    0           1     16     1     0     1      2      0      0     1        2      6       0           82             1069
     8:35 AM        0     34      18    0           4     21     1     0     1      1      1      0     2        0      3       0           86             1039
     8:40 AM        0     54      21    0           2     16     0     0     0      1      0      0     6        2      3       0          105             1065
     8:45 AM        0     48      17    0           4     22     0     0     2      2      0      0     4        0      3       0          102             1054
     8:50 AM        0     56      17    0           6     19     0     0     1      8      1      0     3        0      2       0          113             1044
     8:55 AM        0     43      18    0           4     18     0     0     1      1      0      0     4        0      3       0           92             1023
 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right       U         Left Thru Right      U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      0    684    168     0          28    260    16     0    16     44      4      0    56       12   108        0                  1396
 Heavy Trucks       0      0       0                0     20     0           0      0      0            0        0      8                           28
  Pedestrians              0                               0                        4                            0                                   4
   Bicycles         0      0       0                0      0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/20/2011 2:51 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Brookswood Blvd -- Powers Rd                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10675710
 CITY/STATE: Bend, OR                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, Nov 01 2011
                    682          368                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                 1.6        1.9
                     36 557 89
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 1.8 1.1

       86    3                         77   211
                                                                                                             1.2   0.0                       1.3      1.4
             23           0.92         47
                                                                                                                   0.0                       2.1
       31    5                         87   235
                                                                                                             0.0   0.0                       1.1      3.4

                     3    288 123
                                                                                                                          0.0 2.1 5.7

                    649          414
                                                                                                                          1.7        3.1



                           0                                                                                               1    1    0


                                                                                                                   0                          0

             0                          1                                                                          0                          0

                                                                                                                   0                          0


                           3                                                                                               0    3    0




                          NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                        NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count          Brookswood Blvd                 Brookswood Blvd              Powers Rd                   Powers Rd
     Period             (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                  Left Thru Right       U         Left Thru Right      U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        0     35       7    0          11     30     4     0     0      2      0      0     8        3      6       0          106
     4:05 PM        0     23      12    0           8     34     2     0     1      2      0      0     5        1      4       0           92
     4:10 PM        1     35      17    0           8     34     1     0     2      3      0      0     5        3      3       0          112
     4:15 PM        0     24       9    0           3     47     3     0     0      1      0      0     7        3      7       0          104
     4:20 PM        0     17      11    0          11     41     3     0     0      1      1      0     7        4      4       0          100
     4:25 PM        0     23      10    0           7     38     1     0     0      4      1      0     4        2     10       0          100
     4:30 PM        1     17       6    0           6     33     4     0     0      4      0      0     8        3     10       0           92
     4:35 PM        1     18      16    0           8     32     4     0     1      2      0      0     3        7      4       0           96
     4:40 PM        0     25      14    0           7     29     2     0     0      2      0      0     6        4      5       0           94
     4:45 PM        0     26      12    0           5     40     3     0     0      0      1      0    10        5      8       0          110
     4:50 PM        0     21      13    0           7     41     1     0     0      3      0      0     5        2      9       0          102
     4:55 PM        0     26      13    0           8     47     4     0     1      0      2      0     7        2      4       0          114             1222
     5:00 PM        0     23      10    0           8     32     5     0     0      2      0      0     7        2      5       0           94             1210
     5:05 PM        1     20      12    0           9     39     2     0     0      4      0      0    11        3     12       0          113             1231
     5:10 PM        0     22       6    0          11     55     0     0     0      2      0      0     3        4      4       0          107             1226
     5:15 PM        2     28      12    0           5     52     4     0     0      2      0      0     8        5      4       0          122             1244
     5:20 PM        0     25      10    0          11     56     6     0     1      2      0      0     7        2      3       0          123             1267
     5:25 PM        0     31      10    0           6     47     2     0     0      0      0      0    10        7      4       0          117             1284
     5:30 PM        0     15       9    0           4     48     4     0     1      3      0      0     7        8      9       0          108             1300
     5:35 PM        0     24       8    0          11     53     2     0     0      2      2      0     6        3      7       0          118             1322
     5:40 PM        0     27       8    0           4     47     3     0     0      3      0      0     6        4      8       0          110             1338
     5:45 PM        1     29      10    0           4     34     3     0     1      3      1      0    10        4      4       0          104             1332
     5:50 PM        0     35      13    0           5     21     5     0     0      6      0      0    12        2      2       0          101             1331
     5:55 PM        1     17       6    0           9     45     2     0     0      3      0      0     9        4      4       0          100             1317
 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right       U         Left Thru Right      U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      8    336    128     0          88    620    48     0     4     16      0      0   100       56     44       0                  1448
 Heavy Trucks       0      8       4                4      8     0           0      0      0            0        4      0                           28
  Pedestrians              0                               0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles         0      0       0                0      1     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/20/2011 2:51 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                     




                                   AppendixB
   ExistingIntersectionVehicleClassificationCounts(AM)





                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          SBT

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Southbound Thru

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              3                1           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
7:05 AM        0              2                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
7:10 AM        0              2                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
7:15 AM        0              3                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
7:20 AM        0              1                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
7:25 AM        0              4                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                7
7:30 AM        0              3                8           0            1               2               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                14
7:35 AM        0              6                8           3            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                17
7:40 AM        0              6                9           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                15
7:45 AM        0              10               23          0            1               0               1                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                35
7:50 AM        0              5                8           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                14
7:55 AM        0              6                9           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                16
8:00 AM        0              7                9           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                17
8:05 AM        0              4                7           0            2               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                13
8:10 AM        0              2                5           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                8
8:15 AM        0              4                6           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                10
8:20 AM        0              4                9           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                13
8:25 AM        0              4                4           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
8:30 AM        0              3                12          1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                16
8:35 AM        0              9                11          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                20
8:40 AM        0              3                11          0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                15
8:45 AM        0              7                14          1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                22
8:50 AM        0              7                12          0            0               0               1                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                20
8:55 AM        0              6                10          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                16
Total          0             111              193         11            5               2               2                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     324
 %          0.00%          34.26%           59.57%      3.40%        1.54%           0.62%           0.62%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          SBL

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Southbound Left

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:05 AM        0              0                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:10 AM        0              0                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:15 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:20 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:25 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:30 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:35 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:40 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:45 AM        0              0                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:50 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:55 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:00 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:05 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:10 AM        0              0                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:15 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:20 AM        0              2                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
8:25 AM        0              1                1           0            0               1               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:30 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:35 AM        0              2                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:40 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:45 AM        0              0                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:50 AM        0              1                6           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                7
8:55 AM        0              2                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
Total          0              21              42           0            0               1               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      64
 %          0.00%          32.81%           65.63%      0.00%        0.00%           1.56%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          SBR

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Southbound Right

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:05 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:10 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:15 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:20 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:25 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:30 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:35 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:40 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:45 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:50 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:55 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:00 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:05 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:10 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:15 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:20 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:25 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:30 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:35 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:40 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:45 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:50 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:55 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
Total          0              4               12           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
 %          0.00%          25.00%           75.00%      0.00%        0.00%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          NBT

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Northbound Thru

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              6                24          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                30
7:05 AM        0              13               15          2            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                31
7:10 AM        0              16               19          2            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                37
7:15 AM        2              23               19          2            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                46
7:20 AM        0              19               25          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                44
7:25 AM        4              30               33          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                67
7:30 AM        0              12               26          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                38
7:35 AM        0              18               25          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                43
7:40 AM        0              22               22          1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                45
7:45 AM        0              22               29          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                51
7:50 AM        0              30               32          0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                63
7:55 AM        0              30               30          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                60
8:00 AM        0              15               22          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                37
8:05 AM        0              11               22          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                33
8:10 AM        0              10               20          2            0               1               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                33
8:15 AM        0              14               22          0            0               2               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                38
8:20 AM        0              23               17          0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                41
8:25 AM        0              18               23          1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                42
8:30 AM        0              12               30          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                42
8:35 AM        0              13               18          5            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                36
8:40 AM        0              24               23          4            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                51
8:45 AM        0              19               29          1            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                50
8:50 AM        0              21               32          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                53
8:55 AM        0              26               20          0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                46
Total          6             447              577         20            4               3               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1057
 %          0.57%          42.29%           54.59%      1.89%        0.38%           0.28%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          NBL

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Northbound Left

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:05 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:10 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:15 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:20 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:25 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:30 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:35 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:40 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:45 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:50 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:55 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:00 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:05 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:10 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:15 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:20 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:25 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:30 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:35 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:40 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:45 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:50 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:55 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
Total          0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
 %          0.00%          50.00%           50.00%      0.00%        0.00%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          NBR

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Northbound Right

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              5                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
7:05 AM        0              3                6           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                10
7:10 AM        0              6                6           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                12
7:15 AM        0              4                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                8
7:20 AM        0              1                7           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                8
7:25 AM        0              2                9           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                11
7:30 AM        0              3               12           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                16
7:35 AM        0              4                9           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                14
7:40 AM        0              9               11           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                20
7:45 AM        0              4                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
7:50 AM        0              4               19           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                23
7:55 AM        0              4                6           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                10
8:00 AM        0              4                7           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                11
8:05 AM        0              4               11           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                16
8:10 AM        0              2                9           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                11
8:15 AM        0              1                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
8:20 AM        0              2                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:25 AM        0              7                8           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                15
8:30 AM        0              3                6           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
8:35 AM        0              7               12           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                19
8:40 AM        0              7               15           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                22
8:45 AM        0              10               7           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                17
8:50 AM        0              7               10           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                17
8:55 AM        0              5               14           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                19
Total          0             108              204          3            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     316
 %          0.00%          34.18%           64.56%      0.95%        0.32%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          EBT

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Eastbound Thru

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:05 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:10 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:15 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:20 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:25 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:30 AM        0              1                0           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:35 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:40 AM        0              2                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
7:45 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:50 AM        0              1                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:55 AM        0              2                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
8:00 AM        1              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:05 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:10 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:15 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:20 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:25 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:30 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:35 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:40 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:45 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:50 AM        1              3                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                8
8:55 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
Total          2              20              30           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      53
 %          3.77%          37.74%           56.60%      0.00%        1.89%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          EBL

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Eastbound Left

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:05 AM        0              0                1           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:10 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:15 AM        0              1                1           0            0               1               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:20 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:25 AM        0              0                1           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:30 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:35 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:40 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:45 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:50 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:55 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:00 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:05 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:10 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:15 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:20 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:25 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:30 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:35 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:40 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:45 AM        0              3                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:50 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:55 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
Total          0              9               13           2            0               1               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25
 %          0.00%          36.00%           52.00%      8.00%        0.00%           4.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          EBR

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Eastbound Right

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:05 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:10 AM       0               0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:15 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:20 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:25 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:30 AM       0               1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:35 AM       0               0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:40 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:45 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:50 AM       0               0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:55 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:00 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:05 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:10 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:15 AM       0               0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:20 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:25 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:30 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:35 AM       0               0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:40 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:45 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:50 AM       1               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:55 AM       0               0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
Total         1               1                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7
 %         14.29%          14.29%           71.43%      0.00%        0.00%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          WBT

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Westbound Thru

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:05 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:10 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:15 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:20 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:25 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:30 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
7:35 AM        0              1                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:40 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:45 AM        0              1                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:50 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:55 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:00 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:05 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:10 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:15 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:20 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:25 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:30 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:35 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:40 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:45 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:50 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:55 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
Total          0              9               16           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25
 %          0.00%          36.00%           64.00%      0.00%        0.00%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          WBL

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Westbound Left

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:05 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:10 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:15 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:20 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:25 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
7:30 AM        0              3                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:35 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
7:40 AM        0              2                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
7:45 AM        0              1                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
7:50 AM        0              0                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
7:55 AM        0              2                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                5
8:00 AM        0              2                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
8:05 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:10 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:15 AM        0              2                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
8:20 AM        0              3                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
8:25 AM        0              0                2           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:30 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
8:35 AM        0              1                0           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:40 AM        0              0                6           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
8:45 AM        0              1                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:50 AM        0              3                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:55 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
Total          0              26              53           1            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      81
 %          0.00%          32.10%           65.43%      1.23%        1.23%           0.00%           0.00%            0.00%         0.00%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
                                                                                                  10690701 - Brookswood Blvd - Powers Rd                                                                                                          WBR

                                                                                          Date Counted: 11/1/11
                                                                                   Location/Intersection: Brookswood Blvd & Powers Rd
                                                                                     Direction Counted: Westbound Right

          16285 SW 85th Ave, Ste 302
              Tigard, OR 97224
               Ph:503-620-4242

           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
          Motorcycles   Cars & Trailers   2 Axle Long   Buses     2 Axle 6 Tire   3 Axle Single   4 Axle Single   <5 Axle Double 5 Axle Double >6 Axle Double   <6 Axle Multi   6 Axle Multi   >6 Axle Multi   Low Boy Trailer   Interval Total
7:00 AM        0              3                2           0            0               0               0                0             1              0               0              0               0                0                6
7:05 AM        0              0                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                1
7:10 AM        0              0                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:15 AM        0              6                2           0            0               1               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
7:20 AM        0              2                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:25 AM        0              4                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
7:30 AM        0              3                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                7
7:35 AM        0              1                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:40 AM        0              1                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
7:45 AM        0              3                4           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                7
7:50 AM        0              1                4           0            1               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
7:55 AM        0              7                6           1            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                14
8:00 AM        0              3                6           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                9
8:05 AM        0              1                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:10 AM        0              0                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:15 AM        0              5                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                10
8:20 AM        0              2                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                4
8:25 AM        0              0                0           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                0
8:30 AM        0              1                5           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                6
8:35 AM        0              0                3           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:40 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:45 AM        0              1                2           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
8:50 AM        0              1                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                2
8:55 AM        0              2                1           0            0               0               0                0             0              0               0              0               0                0                3
Total          0              49              68           1            1               1               0                0             1              0               0              0               0                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     121
 %          0.00%          40.50%           56.20%      0.83%        0.83%           0.83%           0.00%            0.00%         0.83%          0.00%           0.00%          0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
           Class 1         Class 2          Class 3     Class 4     Class 5          Class 6         Class 7         Class 8        Class 9       Class 10        Class 11       Class 12        Class 13         Class 14
