           


                                           TUALATIN CITY COUNCIL
                                              Monday, February 10, 2014
                                                CITY COUNCIL CHAMBERS
                                                18880 SW Martinazzi Avenue
                                                   Tualatin, OR 97062
                                            BUSINESS MEETING begins at 7:00 p.m.
                                                                  


                                                         Mayor   Lou Ogden

                                             Council President Monique Beikman

                           Councilor Wade Brooksby                   Councilor Frank Bubenik

                           Councilor Joelle Davis                    Councilor Nancy Grimes

                                                     Councilor Ed Truax
                                                                  
Welcome! By your presence in the City Council Chambers, you are participating in the process
of representative government. To encourage that participation, the City Council has specified a
time for citizen comments on its agenda - Item C, following Announcements, at which time
citizens may address the Council concerning any item not on the agenda with each speaker
limited to three minutes,  unless the time limit is extended by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council.

Copies of staff reports or other written documentation relating to each item of business referred
to on this agenda are available for review on the City website at 
www.tualatinoregon.gov/meetings, the Library located at 18878 SW Martinazzi Avenue, and on
file in the Office of the City Manager for public inspection. Any person with a question
concerning any agenda item may call Administration at 503.691.3011 to make an inquiry
concerning the nature of the item described on the agenda.

In compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, if you need special assistance to
participate in this meeting, you should contact Administration at 503.691.3011. Notification
thirty-six (36) hours prior to the meeting will enable the City to make reasonable arrangements to
assure accessibility to this meeting.

Council meetings are televised live the day of the meeting through Washington County Cable
Access Channel 28. The replay schedule for Council meetings can be found at www.tvctv.org.
Council meetings can also be viewed by live streaming video on the day of the meeting at 
www.tualatinoregon.gov/meetings.

Your City government welcomes your interest and hopes you will attend the City of Tualatin
Council meetings often.
                       PROCESS FOR LEGISLATIVE PUBLIC HEARINGS
                        PROCESS     FOR LEGISLATIVE PUBLIC HEARINGS
A legislative public hearing is typically held on matters which affect the general welfare of the
entire City rather than a specific piece of property.
      1. Mayor opens the public hearing and identifies the subject.
      2. A staff member presents the staff report.
      3. Public testimony is taken.
      4. Council then asks questions of staff, the applicant, or any member of the
          public who testified.
      5. When the Council has finished questions, the Mayor closes the public
          hearing.
      6. When the public hearing is closed, Council will then deliberate to a decision
          and a motion will be made to either approve, deny, or continue the public
          hearing.
      
                       PROCESS FOR QUASI-JUDICIAL PUBLIC HEARINGS
A quasi-judicial public hearing is typically held for annexations, planning district changes,
conditional use permits, comprehensive plan changes, and appeals from subdivisions,
partititions and architectural review.
       1. Mayor opens the public hearing and identifies the case to be considered.
       2. A staff member presents the staff report.
       3. Public testimony is taken:
             a) In support of the application
             b) In opposition or neutral
       4. Council then asks questions of staff, the applicant, or any member of the
           public who testified.
       5. When Council has finished its questions, the Mayor closes the public
           hearing.
       6. When the public hearing is closed, Council will then deliberate to a decision
           and a motion will be made to either approve, approve with conditions, or
           deny the application, or continue the public hearing. 
      
                             TIME LIMITS FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS
The purpose of time limits on public hearing testimony is to provide all provided all interested
persons with an adequate opportunity to present and respond to testimony. All persons providing
testimony shall be limited to 3 minutes, subject to the right of the Mayor to amend or waive the
time limits.
                             EXECUTIVE SESSION INFORMATION
An Executive Session is a meeting of the City Council that is closed to the public to allow the City
Council to discuss certain confidential matters. An Executive Session may be conducted as a
separate meeting or as a portion of the regular Council meeting. No final decisions or actions
may be made in Executive Session. In many, but not all, circumstances, members of the news
media may attend an Executive Session.

The City Council may go into Executive Session for certain reasons specified by Oregon law.
These reasons include, but are not limited to: ORS 192.660(2)(a) employment of personnel;
ORS 192.660(2)(b) dismissal or discipline of personnel; ORS 192.660(2)(d) labor relations; ORS
192.660(2)(e) real property transactions; ORS 192.660(2)(f) information or records exempt by
law from public inspection; ORS 192.660(2)(h) current litigation or litigation likely to be filed; and
ORS 192.660(2)(i) employee performance of chief executive officer.
                       
                      OFFICIAL AGENDA OF THE TUALATIN CITY COUNCIL MEETING FOR FEBRUARY 10, 2014




                                                                                                                                

A.                CALL TO ORDER
                  Pledge of Allegiance
 

B.                ANNOUNCEMENTS
 

               
     1.           Tualatin Youth Advisory Council update for February, 2014
 

     2.           New Employee Introduction- Stephanie Marcinkiewicz, Permit Technician
 

C.                CITIZEN COMMENTS
                  This section of the agenda allows citizens to address the Council regarding any issue not on the
                  agenda. The duration for each individual speaking is limited to 3 minutes. Matters requiring further
                  investigation or detailed answers will be referred to City staff for follow-up and report at a future meeting.
 

D.                CONSENT AGENDA
                  The Consent Agenda will be enacted with one vote. The Mayor will first ask staff, the public and
                  Councilors if there is anyone who wishes to remove any item from the Consent Agenda for discussion
                  and consideration. The matters removed from the Consent Agenda will be considered individually at the
                  end of this Agenda under, I) Items Removed from the Consent Agenda. The entire Consent Agenda,
                  with the exception of items removed from the Consent Agenda to be discussed, is then voted upon by
                  roll call under one motion.
 

               
     1.           Consideration of Approval of the Minutes for the City Council Work Session and
                  Regular Meeting of January 27, 2014
 

               
     2.           Consideration of the 2013 Tualatin Development Commission Annual Financial
                  Report
 

               
     3.           Consideration of Resolution No. 5180-14 Approving with Conditions, the
                  Architectural Review Application for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center Located at
                  7455-7925 SW Nyberg Street  (Tax Map 2S1 24A, Tax Lots 1601, 1602, 1900, 2502,
                  2506, 2507, 2508, and 2700; Tax Map 2S1 24B, Tax Lots 2000, 2001, and 2100
                  (AR-13-07)
 

               
     4.           Consideration of Resolution No. 5179-14 Approving with Conditions, a Public
                  Utilities Decision for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center Development Located at
                  7455-7925 SW Nyberg Street (Tax Map 2S1 24A, Tax Lots 1601, 1602, 1900, 2502,
                  2506, 2507, 2508, and 1700; Tax Map 2S1 24B, Tax Lots 2000, 2001, and 2100)
 

               
     5.           Consideration of Approval of a New Liquor License Application for Gallardo Inc.
                  d.b.a. Super Mercado la Montana 3
 

               
     6.           Consideration of Resolution No. 5183-14 Authorizing the City Manager to Sign
           
     6.       Consideration of Resolution No. 5183-14 Authorizing the City Manager to Sign
              a Contract for Community Development Software with CRW Systems, Inc.
 

E.            SPECIAL REPORTS
 

           
     1.       2013 Annual Report of the Tualatin Park Advisory Committee
 

     2.       Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue Annual State of the District Presentation
 

F.            PUBLIC HEARINGS – Legislative or Other
 

           
     2.       Consideration of Ordinance No. 1367-14 to Modify the Transportation System Plan
              to Comply with the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA) Opinion and Order
 

G.            PUBLIC HEARINGS – Quasi-Judicial
 

           
     1.       Consideration of a Conditional Use Permit to Allow Rental and Leasing of Autos and
              Light Trucks in the Light Manufacturing (ML) Planning District for U-Haul at 7100 SW
              McEwan Road (Tax Map 2S1 13DD, Tax Lots 900, 1000, 1100, 1200, 1600, and
              1700, and Tax Map 2S1 24AA, Tax Lot 5500) (CUP-13-05)
 

H.            GENERAL BUSINESS
 

           
     1.       Consideration of Ordinance No. 1367-14 An Ordinance Relating to the
              Transportation System Plan; Amending the Tualatin Development Code (TDC)
              11.650 and the 2012 Tualatin Transportation System Plan Adopted February 25,
              2013
 

           
     2.       Consideration of Ordinance No. 1368-14 Relating to Medical Marijuana Facilities;
              Establishing New Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 9-08; and Declaring an
              Emergency.
 

I.            ITEMS REMOVED FROM CONSENT AGENDA 
              Items removed from the Consent Agenda will be discussed individually at this time. The Mayor may
              impose a time limit on speakers addressing these issues.
 

J.            COMMUNICATIONS FROM COUNCILORS
 

K.            ADJOURNMENT
 
                     
City Council Meeting                                        B. 1.
Meeting Date:       02/10/2014                   
ANNOUNCEMENTS: Tualatin Youth Advisory Council Update

ANNOUNCEMENTS
Tualatin Youth Advisory Council update for February, 2014


A. YAC Update
Council Update February 10, 2014

TUALATIN YOUTH ADVISORY 
COUNCIL
  Project F.R.I.E.N.D.S
 Day long anti‐
  bullying workshop 
  for Tualatin 5th
  graders
 Bridgeport, Byrom, 
  and Tualatin 
  Elementary
 All curriculum is 
  currently being 
  revised and updated
 Hope to hold 
  workshop in April/ 
  May 2014

  Tualatin YAC – Youth Participating in Governance
 Other Upcoming Projects
      Youth/Elected Leader Social
      Teen Extravaganza
      Crawfish Festival 
      Summer Movie planning
      Tualatin TRYathlon




Tualatin YAC – Youth Participating in Governance
TO:            Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council

THROUGH:       Sherilyn Lombos

FROM:          Nicole Morris, Deputy City Recorder

DATE:          02/10/2014

SUBJECT:       Consideration of Approval of the Minutes for the City Council Work Session and
               Regular Meeting of January 27, 2014


ISSUE BEFORE THE COUNCIL:
The issue before the Council is to approve the minutes for the City Council Work Session and
Regular Meeting of January 27, 2014.

RECOMMENDATION:
Staff respectfully recommends that the Council adopt the attached minutes.


Attachments:      City Council Work Session Minutes for Janauary 27, 2014
                  City Council Regular Meeting Minutes of January 27, 2014
                 OFFICIAL MINUTES OF TUALATIN CITY COUNCIL WORK SESSION FOR
                 JANUARY 27, 2014


    Present: Mayor Lou Ogden; Council President Monique Beikman; Councilor Wade Brooksby;
             Councilor Frank Bubenik; Councilor Joelle Davis; Councilor Nancy Grimes; Councilor
             Ed Truax
    Staff    City Manager Sherilyn Lombos; City Attorney Sean Brady; Police Chief Kent Barker;
    Present: Assistant City Manager Alice Cannon; Community Services Director Paul Hennon;
             Finance Director Don Hudson; Deputy City Manager Sara Singer; Deputy City
             Recorder Nicole Morris; Information Services Manager Lance Harris
 


CALL TO ORDER


Mayor Ogden called the meeting to order at 6:30 p.m.
 

                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
1.         Comcast Franchise Renewal Update.
 
 
           City Manager Lombos introduced Metropolitan Area Communications Commission
           (MACC) Administrator Bruce Crest. She also noted that Council President Beikman
           serves as the cities representative on MACC. Mr. Crest presented information
           regarding the need for extending the current Comcast franchise agreement for one
           year to allow more time to negotiate a renewal. MACC began working with
           Comcast in February of last year and have not been able to reach an agreement at
           this time. MACC will begin the formal negotiation process while continuing to
           negotiate informally. Mr. Crest and Council President Beikman discussed several
           of the issues of the negotiation with Comcast including franchise fee revenue and
           policing powers.

           Councilor Bubenik asked if a year was a reasonable time frame to complete
           negotiations. Mr. Crest expects to have negotiations completed in the next six
           months but wants to be sure to have ample time to visit all fourteen cities.

           Councilor Bubenik asked when the last time the franchise agreement was
           negotiated. Mr. Crest noted the last agreement was established fifteen years ago.

           Councilor Davis asked if there was a difference between a new agreement and a
           renewal. Mr. Crest stated there are two separate processes and explained both
           noting that this negotiation is for a renewal of the current franchise agreement.

           Mayor Ogden asked if Council President Beikman had heard from Comcast during
           the negotiations. Mr. Crest stated Comcast has been present at all the MACC
           meetings and have testified and made themselves available to answer questions.
 

2.         Council Meeting Agenda Review, Communications & Roundtable.
 

January 27, 2014
1 of 2
 
 
         Councilor Grimes requested information regarding permitted parking. She would
         like the Council to look into having permitted parking put in place in the Fox Hills
         neighborhood. She has received several complaints about Stafford Hills Racquet
         Club employees parking in the area. Councilor Truax stated he would also like this
         information. Council directed staff to bring back information regarding permitted
         parking at a future Council work session.

         Councilor Bubenik announced the Community Development Block Grant had
         finished rating applications and tentatively announced that the Juanita Pohl Center
         will receive full funding for their request for a sprinkler system.

         Councilor Bubenik noted that he attended the Clackamas Cities Association Dinner
         and listened to Ted Wheeler talk on Economic Viability for Cities.

         Council President Beikman reminded the Council about the Tualatin Together
         Breakfast on January 28 th at 7:30 a.m. and encouraged the Council to attend.
 

 


ADJOURNMENT

The work session adjourned at 6:57 p.m.


Sherilyn Lombos, City Manager

____________________________ / Nicole Morris, Recording Secretary


____________________________ / Lou Ogden, Mayor




January 27, 2014
2 of 2
  


   
                     OFFICIAL MINUTES OF THE TUALATIN CITY COUNCIL MEETING FOR
                     JANUARY 27, 2013 


 


    Present: Mayor Lou Ogden; Council President Monique Beikman; Councilor Wade Brooksby;
             Councilor Frank Bubenik; Councilor Joelle Davis; Councilor Nancy Grimes; Councilor
             Ed Truax 
    Staff    City Manager Sherilyn Lombos; City Attorney Sean Brady; Police Chief Kent Barker;
    Present: Assistant City Manager Alice Cannon; Community Services Director Paul Hennon;
             Finance Director Don Hudson; Deputy City Manager Sara Singer; Planning Manager
             Aquilla Hurd-Ravich; Deputy City Recorder Nicole Morris; Information Services
             Manager Lance Harris; Engineering Manager Kaaren Hofmann; Engineer Associate
             Tony Doran; Management Analyst Ben Bryant; Senior Planner Clare Fuchs 
 

                                                                                                      

A.             CALL TO ORDER
               Pledge of Allegiance
 
 
               Mayor Ogden called the meeting to order at 7:05 p.m.
 

B.             ANNOUNCEMENTS
 
                                                                                                           
      1.       Introduction of City of Tualatin Police K-9 Zoey
 
 
               Police Chief Kent Barker introduced the departments new narcotic detection canine
               Zoey and her handler Police Officer Nick Barkley. The pair became certified as
               a Canine Unit for narcotic detection on January 21, 2014.
 

                                                                                                           
      2.       TriMet's Southwest Service Enhancement Plan Open House
 
 
               Management Analyst Ben Bryant announced the open house for TriMet's Southwest
               Service Enhancement Plan. The open house will be held on Thursday, February
               13th, 6:30 p.m., at the Tualatin Public Library.

               Mayor Ogden stressed the importance of public involvement with this plan and
               encouraged all citizens to attend.
 

                                                                                                           
      3.       State of the City and Tualatin Tomorrow Vision Plan Update


 
 
               Deputy City Manager Sara Singer announced the State of the City Event to be held



January 27, 2014
1 of 9 
  
 
           Deputy City Manager Sara Singer announced the State of the City Event to be held
           Wednesday, January 29th, 5:00 p.m., at the Grand Hotel at Bridgeport. The event
           will also feature the results of the community outreach for the Tualatin Tomorrow
           Vision Plan Update. For more information and to RSVP please visit the cities
           website.
 

C.         CITIZEN COMMENTS
           This section of the agenda allows citizens to address the Council regarding any issue not on the
           agenda. The duration for each individual speaking is limited to 3 minutes. Matters requiring further
           investigation or detailed answers will be referred to City staff for follow-up and report at a future
           meeting.
 
 
           Tim Goodman, Comcast Government Affairs, requested that consent agenda item 5
           regarding Resolution No. 5181-14 authorization to extend the term of the cable
           television services agreement with Comcast of Oregon II, Inc. be removed for
           further discussion.
 

D.         CONSENT AGENDA
           The Consent Agenda will be enacted with one vote. The Mayor will first ask staff, the public and
           Councilors if there is anyone who wishes to remove any item from the Consent Agenda for discussion
           and consideration. The matters removed from the Consent Agenda will be considered individually at
           the end of this Agenda under, I) Items Removed from the Consent Agenda. The entire Consent
           Agenda, with the exception of items removed from the Consent Agenda to be discussed, is then voted
           upon by roll call under one motion.
 
 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Joelle
           Davis to remove item D.5, Resolution No. 5181-14 authorization to extend the term of
           the cable television services agreement with Comcast of Oregon II, Inc., from the
           consent agenda. 
 
           Vote: 7 - 0 MOTION CARRIED
 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Nancy
           Grimes to approve the consent agenda as amended.
 
           Vote: 7 - 0 MOTION CARRIED
                                                                                                                     
     1.    Consideration of Approval of the Minutes for the City Council Work Session and
           Regular Meeting of January 13, 2014
 
                                                                                                                     
     2.    Consideration of Recommendations from the Council Committee on Advisory
           Appointments
 
                                                                                                                     
     3.    Consideration of Resolution No. 5178-14 Authorizing a Personal Services
           Agreement for Concept Planning for the Basalt Creek / West Railroad Areas
 
                                                                                                                     
     4.    Consideration of an Intergovernmental Agreement between the City of Portland and
           the City of Tualatin for Access to the Regional Justice Information Network [RegJIN]
 

E.         SPECIAL REPORTS
 

F.         PUBLIC HEARINGS- Legislative or other
 


January 27, 2014
2 of 9 
  

G.         PUBLIC HEARINGS – Quasi-Judicial
 
                                                                                                     
     1.    Request for Review of the Architectural Review Board Decision Approving the Nyberg
           Rivers Shopping Center Project Located at 7455-7925 SW Nyberg Street (AR-13-07)
 
 
           Mayor Ogden opened the public hearing for review of the Architectural Review
           Board (ARB) decision approving the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center Project located
           at 7455-7925 SW Nyberg Street. He read the rules of the hearing in accordance
           with ORS 197.763(5) and (6) and ORS 197.796(3)(b).

           Senior Planner Clare Fuchs and Planning Manager Aquilla Hurd-Ravich presented
           the staff report. Planner Fuchs summarized the application for the Nyberg Rivers
           Shopping Center. She stated the request for review was filed by Zian Properties on
           January 3, 2014. The issues presented by Zian were control of a parcel of ODOT
           property and the traffic impacts to the area. Planner Fuchs noted that a lot line
           adjustment was made between ODOT and CenterCal and is waiting to be recorded
           with the County. She stated that the ARB met on December 3 rd and 16th and
           significant progress was made on the design since the master plan was approved.

           Christy White, Land Use Council for CenterCal, stated on behalf of the applicant
           they endorse the information provided in the staff report and have submitted a
           written rebuttal to the appeal. She noted that the issue presented regarding the
           ODOT property is being resolved and a lot line adjustment has been signed and
           was approved by the city today.

           Gibb Masters, attorney for Cabela’s, stated the company is very supportive of this
           project and hope to have the store open this fall.

           CITIZEN COMMENT
           In Support
           Arne Nyberg spoke in support of the development and what it will bring to the
           downtown area.

           In Opposition
           Seth King, on behalf of Zian Limited Partnership, stated since the time of the appeal
           new information regarding the property in question has been brought forward. He
           expressed concern that CenterCal has not fully demonstrated control over the
           property at this time and does not meet the standards set forth by the City. He
           requested Council impose a condition stating CenterCal must have control over the
           property in question.

           APPLICANT REBUTTAL
           Christy White stated the ODOT property transfer will occur this week and they are
           willing to accept a condition of approval knowing this will be completed.

           COUNCIL DISCUSSION
           Councilor Davis would like to put this condition in place to ensure that transfer of
           property is complete.

           Councilor Truax thanked the ARB for committing themselves to this process and the
           decisions they made to get the design of the development to the place it is today.
January 27, 2014
3 of 9 
  
 

 
           MOTION by Councilor Ed Truax, SECONDED by Council President Monique
           Beikman to approve the decision from the Architectural Review Board and the
           conditions as they were originally outlined. 
 
           Vote: 7 - 0 MOTION CARRIED
                                                                                                      
     2.    Request for Review of the Public Facilities Decision Approving the Nyberg Rivers
           Shopping Center Project Located at 7455-7925 SW Nyberg Street (AR-13-07)
 
 
           Mayor Ogden opened the public hearing for review of the Public Facilities Decision
           approving the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center Project located at 7455-7925 SW
           Nyberg Street. He read the rules of the hearing in accordance with ORS 197.763(5)
           and (6) and ORS 197.796(3)(b).

           Engineering Manager Kaaren Hofmann and Engineering Associate Tony Doran
           presented the staff report. Manager Hofmann summarized the application for the
           Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center. She stated the request for review was filed by Zian
           Properties on January 3, 2014. The issues presented for review by Zian were
           in conformance with the Master Plan and Tualatin Development Code, construction
           timing of Seneca Street, control of the ODOT property, and traffic impacts to the
           area. Manager Hofmann addressed the conformance issue stating that CenterCal is
           in compliance and the decision is still valid.  She noted the ODOT property should
           be in their control shortly as a lot line adjustment was signed today. Other traffic
           impacts to the area are being mitigated by CenterCal at this time. Manager
           Hofmann presented proposed language changes to the Public Facilities Condition
           (PFR) 70 that would address the issue regarding the timing of Seneca Street
           construction.

           Christy White, Land Use Council for CenterCal, stated on behalf of the applicant
           they are willing to accept the condition of approval as long as the right-of-way is
           turned over in time and it is clear that occupancy of the shopping center is not based
           on the timing of completion of Seneca Street. She noted in the master plan Seneca
           Street is not needed to mitigate impacts to traffic to the area, yet it will preserve
           optimal function instead.

           CITIZEN COMMENT
           In Support
           None

           In Opposition
           Seth King, on behalf of Zian Limited Partnership, stated the primary concern is in
           relation to Seneca Street construction. He requested that a condition be imposed to
           require the construction of Seneca Street prior to occupancy certificates being
           issued.

           Arne Nyberg expressed concerns regarding the right-of-way in question and the
           vacation of the property.

           APPLICANT REBUTTAL
           Ms. White stated according to the master plan CenterCal had to show compliance
           with Central Urban Renewal District (CURD) Goal 5. She stated CenterCal has met
January 27, 2014
4 of 9 
  

           this goal and emphasized the goal does not suggest that Seneca Street is required
           to mitigate traffic impacts and therefore should not be tied to the occupancy of the
           development.

           COUNCIL QUESTIONS
           Councilor Truax asked about the timing of the transfer of the right-of-way and what
           would happen if the city is not able to meet that deadline. Manager Hofmann stated
           that condition currently states that CenterCal would have to pay the city $360,000 in
           lieu of construction of the street.

           Mayor Ogden asked what would happen if there are issues that cannot be mitigated
           in relation to the right-of-way and the property is not turned over before April 1st,
           2014. Manager Hofmann stated CenterCal would then have to make the in lieu of
           payment.

           Councilor Grimes asked if clarifying language regarding the closing of the driveways
           could be added to the conditions. Assistant City Manager Alice Cannon recited
           language that could be used to clarify the condition in question.

           A recess was taken from 9:56 to 10:05 p.m.

           Assistant City Manager Cannon stated during the recess she confirmed with the
           applicant that they can comply with the condition as it stands and adding the
           clarifying language regarding the closing of the driveways is acceptable with
           CenterCal.

           Councilor Bubenik asked questions about the April 1st date as he thought the intent
           was to have Seneca  Street completed with the opening on the center. Ms. White
           stated that it is CenterCal’s intent to have Seneca Street completed before final
           occupancy is issued and that they can comply with the condition as it stands.
 

 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Joelle
           Davis to approve the Public Facilities Decision with existing conditions and add
           clarifying language to PFR 71.

           Discussion
           Mayor Ogden asked a clarifying question regarding the closing of the driveways in
           the development along Martinazzi. Assistant City Manager Cannon stated that
           language in the motion would guarantee the closing of these driveways. 
 
           Vote: 7 - 0 MOTION CARRIED
H.         GENERAL BUSINESS
 
                                                                                                     
     1.    Resolution No. 5182-14 Declaring the City Council's Intent to Construct an
           Extension of Seneca Street and a Traffic Signal at the Intersection of Seneca Street
           and Martinazzi Avenue

 
 
           PRECEED ITEM G.1


January 27, 2014
5 of 9 
  
 
           PRECEED ITEM G.1

           City Manager Lombos presented the staff report. She noted the City Council
           directed staff to prepare this resolution at the January 13th work session. The
           Council began discussion on this back in March 2013 and has met seven times
           since then to discuss this issue. The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan was approved on
           August 26, 2013 and showed the extension of Seneca Street per the City’s
           Transportation System Plan (TSP) to improve circulation, pedestrian safety and
           enhance the access to the adjacent development site. The extension of the street
           would require the demolition of the existing Council Building. 

           CITIZEN COMMENTS
           In Support
           Brett Hamilton expressed concerns regarding pedestrian safety in the area. He
           stated that the intersection needs upgrades including a traffic signal and crosswalk.
           He urged the Council to approve the resolution extending Seneca Street.

           In Opposition
           Robert Kellogg presented concerns with the lack of improvement in the levels of
           service, financial impacts, and public opinion not being in favor of the extension. He
           asked that Council wait and see the impacts to the area before making this decision.

           Tom Beall expressed concerns with the cost of the Seneca Street extension and
           constructing a new building. He would like to see monies instead directed towards
           the Blake Street curves.

           Kathy Newcomb made a recommendation to Council to add signage to the
           crosswalks near the library and generally spoke in opposition of the extension.

           Neutral
           Steve Titus asked the Council for a financial summary of how the tax revenues from
           the development would offset the costs of constructing a new building.

           COUNCIL QUESTIONS
           Council President Beikman asked if there would be a increase in tax revenue from
           the development. City Manager Lombos stated the information had been analyzed
           to determine the increased assessed value from the development in the past year
           but  does not have current information.

           Councilor Bubenik asked about a plan to relocate staff  if Seneca Street were to go
           through. Deputy City Manager Singer shared the information that was presented at
           a previous work session outlining the relocation of staff.

           Council President Beikman addressed comments regarding funding sources for a
           new building stating Urban Renewal dollars were one of the sources and those
           funds are limited to where they can be spent based on location.

           Council President Beikman asked about earmarking dollars for the street if it is not
           constructed. City Manager Lombos stated it was a possibility.

           Councilor Bubenik and Mayor Ogden asked questions related to the time frame of

January 27, 2014
6 of 9 
  

           earmarked dollars for a extension of Seneca Street. City Attorney Brady stated that
           if the intent was to build Seneca Street the dollars could be earmarked for a period
           of time.

           Mayor Ogden asked questions centered on the Transportation Development Tax
           (TDT) credits associated with the development and how that money could be spent.

           Council President Beikman asked what CenterCal’s obligations are in constructing
           the street. Manager Hofmann stated CenterCal would be responsible for design and
           construction of the street, design and construction of the parking lot, and demolition
           of the building.

           Mayor Ogden asked if a parking plan had been developed if the street goes through.
           Deputy City Manager Singer provided information related to parking on the site.

           Councilor Davis asked if the City could direct CenterCal to maximize parking when
           designing the lot. Manager Hofmann stated that they would design the lot to
           maximize safety and parking based on the city's construction code.

           Council President Beikman asked about the property designated for A Street. City
           Manager Lombos noted that the transaction for this piece of property has not been
           completed and the street has not been designed.

           Councilor Grimes asked questions related to the Neighborhood Traffic Solutions
           Program and concerns presented from citizens about funds being better used for the
           Blake Street Curves. Manager Hofmann stated the monies for that program comes
           from the Gas Tax fund. City Manager Lombos noted that it is in the Capital
           Improvement Plan to study solutions for that area.
 

 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Nancy
           Grimes to adopt Resolution No. 5182-14 declaring the City Council's intent to
           construct an extension of Seneca Street and a traffic signal at the intersection of
           Seneca Street and Martinazzi Avenue.

           COUNCIL DISCUSSION
           Council President Beikman stated that the extension should go through now as it will
           maintain the quality of living at a high level that has become expected from the City’s
           residents. She believes that it is the right thing to do for the businesses, traffic, and
           library.

           Councilor Grimes believes that this is an opportunity to take care of a lot of traffic
           problems with one solution. She wants to make sure the city is spending money
           where safety is concerned.

           Councilor Truax wants to make the downtown well connected and as safe and
           accessible for pedestrians as possible. He feels that the community benefit from
           putting the extension through outweighs the unknowns.

           Councilor Bubenik stated that the information gathered from the CIO meetings clearly
           established that there are two separate issues to address, the street extension and a
           City Hall building. He would ideally like to see a facilities study completed that shows
January 27, 2014
7 of 9 
  

           all city staff in one building allowing the library to expand. He urged the Council to
           take action as they may never get back to addressing this issue.

           Councilor Davis expressed concerns with the driveway as it currently stands and is in
           favor of the extension as it will increase safety in the area for pedestrians.

           Mayor Ogden stated that the Seneca Street extension would be nice to have but the
           facts are that it creates more problems than it solves. He noted that his biggest
           concerns are related to the financial implications of the extension. He feels that there
           are more cost effective solutions to solve the traffic issues and pedestrian safety in
           the area. He urged Council to defer the decision.

           Councilor Brooksby stated that he is not opposed to the Seneca Street extension but
           would like to take time to evaluate the information further and have a cohesive plan in
           place before moving forward. 
 
           Vote: 4 - 3 MOTION CARRIED
 
           Nay:  Mayor Lou Ogden 
            
                 Councilor Wade Brooksby 
            
                 Councilor Frank Bubenik 

I.         ITEMS REMOVED FROM CONSENT AGENDA 
           Items removed from the Consent Agenda will be discussed individually at this time. The Mayor may
           impose a time limit on speakers addressing these issues.
 
                                                                                                                
     1.    Consideration of Resolution No. 5181-14 Authorizing the Extension of the Term of
           the Cable Television Services Agreement with Comcast of Oregon II, Inc.
 
 
           Citizen Comments
           Tim Goodman, Comcast Governmental Affairs, stated Comcast’s issue is not
           related to the issue of the extension of the contract but with Metropolitan Area
           Communications Commissions (MACC) decision to enter the formal negotiation
           process. Comcast is concerned with the financial implications for both parties upon
           entering into the formal process and they feel that an agreement can be reached
           using the informal process.

           Council Discussion
           Council President Beikman stated she hopes both parties can come to an
           agreement a civil fashion.

           Mayor Ogden stated he sensed from MACC that since no progress was being made
           and that there were issues that were sticking points it was necessary for them to
           enter into the formal process.

           Mr. Goodman stated that he feels that those issues can be worked through in an
           informal way.

           Councilor Davis expressed her dissatisfaction with Mr. Goodman’s statements and
           knows that MACC will continue to look out for the City’s best interests.
 

 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Joelle
January 27, 2014
8 of 9 
  
 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Joelle
           Davis to approve Resolution No. 5181-14 authorizing  the extension of the terms of
           the Cable Television Services Agreement with Comcast of Oregon II, Inc. 
 
           Vote: 7 - 0 MOTION CARRIED
J.         COMMUNICATIONS FROM COUNCILORS
 
 
           Council President Beikman asked when information regarding the facilities study for
           the Council Building would be coming back to Council. City Manager Lombos
           stated discussion would start at an upcoming work session. 
 

K.         ADJOURNMENT
 
 
           Mayor Ogden adjourned the meeting at 10:32 p.m.
 

 


Sherilyn Lombos, City Manager

____________________________ / Nicole Morris, Recording Secretary


____________________________ / Lou Ogden, Mayor
 




January 27, 2014
9 of 9 
               
City Council Meeting                                                             D. 2.
Meeting Date: 02/10/2014                         
CONSENT       Consideration of the 2013 Tualatin Development Commission Annual Financial
AGENDA:       Report

CONSENT AGENDA
Consideration of the 2013 Tualatin Development Commission Annual Financial Report

SUMMARY

Annual Financial Report Contents

In accordance with Oregon Revised Statute 457.460, the City of Tualatin's Urban Renewal
Agency must file an annual financial report with the Tualatin Development Commission and City
of Tualatin prior to January 31st.  Once the report is filed, it will be published
in  The Tigard-Tualatin Times. 

The Central Urban Renewal District (CURD) and the Leveton Tax Increment District (LTID)
stopped collecting revenue on June 30, 2010.  The annual financial report (Attachment A)
outlines: 
     the remaining revenues and expenditures as expected in the Fiscal Year 2013-14 Adopted
     Budget; and,
     the year-end actual revenues and expenditures from Fiscal Year 2012-13.

Since both urban renewal districts stopped collecting revenue, no taxes were forgone by other
taxing jurisdictions in the districts.

Behind the Numbers

For more detail behind the numbers in the report, below is a summary of the highlights in both
districts this past year and the goals for the current year, as reflected in the 2012-13 Adopted
Budget

CURD 2012-13 Highlights 
   Finished the Tualatin-Sherwood Road Landscaping Enhancement Project
CURD 2013-14 Goals 
     Work with the TDC to prioritize remaining CURD funds

LTID 2011-12 Highlights 
     Completed construction of the Leveton Drive extension project
     Continued wetland monitoring and reporting for SW 124th Avenue and Herman Road

LTID 2013-14 Goals 
     Work with the TDC to prioritize remaining LTID funds
     Continue wetland monitoring and reporting for SW 124th Avenue and Herman Road


Attachment A: 2013 Financial Report
                                               NOTICE

 TUALATIN URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY – ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT FOR 2013
In accordance with ORS 457.460, notice is given that the annual financial statement of the City of
Tualatin’s Urban Renewal Agency has been filed with the Tualatin Development Commission and the
City of Tualatin. Below is a summary of the two urban renewal districts in Tualatin, the Central Urban
Renewal District and the Leveton Tax Increment District. A complete copy of the report is available at
the City of Tualatin.

                                                  TABLE 1

             TUALATIN URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY - ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT FOR 2013
           CENTRAL URBAN RENEWAL DISTRICT         FY 13/14         FY 12/13
                           BOND FUND
           Revenue
           Beginning Balance                    $             - $               -
           Tax Increment, Current & Prior Years $             - $               -
           Interest                             $             - $               -
           Expenditures
           Materials & Services                 $             - $               -
           Debt Service                         $             - $               -
           Contingency and Reserves             $             - $               -
                          PROJECT FUND
           Revenues
           Beginning Balance                    $      868,460  $     1,115,183
           Interest                             $         3,945 $          6,907
           Sale of Bonds                        $             - $               -
           Expenditures
           Materials & Services                 $             - $               -
           Transfers & Reimbursements           $        61,925 $        32,035
           Capital Outlay                       $        79,300 $        36,001
           Contingency & Reserves               $      731,180  $     1,054,054

           LEVETON TAX INCREMENT DISTRICT
                           BOND FUND
           Revenue
           Beginning Balance                           $               -    $               -
           Tax Increment, Current & Prior Years        $               -    $               -
           Interest                                    $               -    $               -
           Expenditures
           Materials & Services                        $               -    $               -
           Debt Service                                $               -    $               -
           Contingency and Reserves                    $               -    $               -
                          PROJECT FUND
           Revenues
           Beginning Balance                           $       4,054,600    $      5,661,131
           Interest                                    $          20,275    $          28,608
           Sale of Bonds                               $               -    $               -
           Transfers & Reimbursements                  $               -    $          48,890
           Expenditures
           Materials & Services                        $               -    $               -
           Transfers and Reimbursements                $         104,595    $         156,410
           Capital Outlay                              $          50,000    $       1,440,596
           Contingency & Reserves                      $       3,920,280    $       4,141,623



Both urban renewal districts stopped collecting revenue on June 30, 2010. Accordingly, no taxes were
forgone by other taxing jurisdictions in the districts.
TO:            Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council

THROUGH:       Sherilyn Lombos

FROM:          Linda Odermott, Paralegal
               Sean Brady, City Attorney

DATE:          02/10/2014

SUBJECT:       Consideration of Resolution No. 5180-14 Approving with Conditions, the
               Architectural Review Application for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center Located
               at 7455-7925 SW Nyberg Street (Tax Map 2S1 24A, Tax Lots 1601, 1602, 1900,
               2502, 2506, 2507, 2508, and 2700; Tax Map 2S1 24B, Tax Lots 2000, 2001, and
               2100 (AR-13-07)


ISSUE BEFORE THE COUNCIL:
Council will consider Resolution No. 5180-14 Approving with Conditions, the Architectural
Review Application for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center Located at 7455-7925 SW Nyberg
Street.

RECOMMENDATION:
Staff recommends that Council adopt Resolution No. 5180-14 approving with conditions, the
Architectural Review application for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
CenterCal Properties LLC (CenterCal) submitted an Architectural Review application. The
Architectural Review Board (ARB) conducted a public hearing on December 3, 2013, and
December 16, 2013, to consider the application. The ARB evaluated the architectural features of
the application in accordance with the Community Design Standards of TDC Chapter 73 and the
Council’s decision on MP-13-01 and CUP-13-04 and approved the application with conditions.
The ARB decision was appealed to City Council by Zian Limited Partnership, a neighboring
shopping center, for a de novo hearing. On January 27, 2014, City Council held a quasi-judicial
hearing on the Architectural Review application. The City Council considered the information
and testimony presented at the hearing and deliberated to a decision. The City Council voted
7-0 to approve with conditions the Architectural Review application for the Nyberg Rivers
Shopping Center. Resolution No. 5180-14 will be the final written order of the City Council on
the Architectural Review application.


Attachments:      Resolution No. 5180-14
                  Reso No 5180-14 Exhibits
                             RESOLUTION NO. 5180-14

      RESOLUTION APPROVING WITH CONDITIONS THE ARCHITECTURAL
      REVIEW APPLICATION FOR THE NYBERG RIVERS SHOPPING CENTER
      LOCATED AT 7455-7925 SW NYBERG STREET (TAX MAP 2S1 24 A, TAX
      LOTS 1601, 1602, 1900, 2502, 2506, 2507, 2508, AND 2700; TAX MAP 2S1
      24B, TAX LOTS 2000, 2001, AND 2100 (AR-13-07)


       WHEREAS, Center Cal Properties LLC submitted an Architectural Review
application for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center; and

      WHEREAS, the application was considered by the Architectural Review Board
and a decision issued; and

        WHEREAS, a request for review of the Architectural Review Board decision was
filed; and

       WHEREAS, a public hearing was held before the City Council of the City of
Tualatin on January 27, 2014, to consider the request for review; and

      WHEREAS, notice of public hearing was given as required by Tualatin
Development Code 1.031; and

       WHEREAS, the City Council heard and considered the testimony and information
presented by the City staff, the applicant, the appellant, and those appearing at the
public hearing; and

       WHEREAS, the City Council finds that with the conditions imposed, the applicant
has provided sufficient evidence to demonstrate that all of the architectural review
features requirements of the Tualatin Development Code relative to the decision have
been satisfied; and

      WHEREAS, after the conclusion of the public hearing, the Council voted
unanimously to approve the application with conditions.


     NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY
OF TUALATIN, OREGON, that:

      Section 1. The application for Architectural Review for the Nyberg Rivers
Shopping Center, which is attached as “Exhibit 1” and incorporated by reference, is
approved with the following conditions:

       AR-1 Prior to issuance of any grading permits or other on-site work on the
            entirety of the subject site per CWS, TVF&R and ODOT:



Resolution No. 5180-14                                                    Page 1
          A. CWS: Submit to the City of Tualatin Planning Division a copy of the
             Clean Water Services Site Development Permit to show compliance
             with the following:

              A Clean Water Services (the District) Storm Water Connection
              Permit Authorization must be obtained. Application for the District's
              Permit Authorization must be in accordance with the requirements of
              the Design and Construction Standards, Resolution and Order No.
              07-20, (or current R&O in effect at time of Engineering plan
              submittal), and is to include:

              1. Detailed plans prepared in accordance with Chapter 2, Section
                 2.04.2.b-l.
              2. Detailed grading and erosion control plan. An Erosion Control
                 Permit will be required.
              3. Area of Disturbance must be clearly identified on submitted
                 construction plans. If site area and any offsite improvements
                 required for this development exceed one-acre of disturbance,
                 project will require a 1200-CN Erosion Control Permit. If site area
                 and any offsite improvements required for this development
                 exceed five-acres of disturbance, project will require a 1200-C
                 Erosion Control Permit.
              4. Detailed plans showing the development having direct access by
                 gravity to public storm and sanitary sewer.
              5. Provisions for water quality in accordance with the requirements of
                 the above named design standards. Water Quality is required for all
                 new development and redevelopment areas per R&O 07-20,
                 Section 4.05.5, Table 4-1. Access shall be provided for
                 maintenance of facility per R&O 07-20, Section 4.02.4.
              6. If use of an existing offsite or regional Water Quality Facility is
                 proposed, it must be clearly identified on plans, showing its location,
                 condition, capacity to treat this site and, any additional
                 improvements and/or upgrades that may be needed to utilize that
                 facility.
              7. If private lot LIDA systems proposed, must comply with the current
                 CWS Design and Construction Standards. A private maintenance
                 agreement, for the proposed private lot LIDA systems, needs to be
                 provided to the City for review and acceptance.
              8. Show all existing and proposed easements on plans. Any required
                 storm sewer, sanitary sewer, and water quality related easements



Resolution No. 5180-14                                                    Page 2
                 must be granted to the City.
              9. Application may require additional permitting and plan review from
                 the District's Source Control Program. For any questions or
                 additional information, please contact Source Control at (503) 681-
                 5175.
              10. Site contains a "Sensitive Area." Applicant shall comply with the
                  conditions as set forth in the Service Provider Letter No. 13-000801,
                  dated April 4, 2013.
              11. Clean Water Services shall require an easement over the Vegetated
                  Corridor conveying storm and surface water management to Clean
                  Water Services that would prevent the owner of the Vegetated
                  Corridor from activities and uses inconsistent with the purpose of the
                  corridor and any easements therein.
              12. Detailed plans showing the sensitive area and corridor delineated,
                  along with restoration and enhancement of the corridor.
              13. Provide DSL and Corps of Engineers permits for any work in the
                  wetlands or creek prior to any on site work, including grading and
                  erosion control. Include permit number on cover sheet of plans or
                  provide concurrence with the delineation.
              14. Any proposed offsite construction activities will require an update or
                  amendment to the current Service Provider Letter for this project.

          This Land Use Review does not constitute the District's approval of storm
          or sanitary sewer compliance to the NPDES permit held by the District. The
          District, prior to issuance of any connection permits, must approve final
          construction plans and drainage calculations.

          B. Fire: Provide the City of Tualatin Planning Division
             evidence/documentation that the following has been reviewed and
             approved. Submit plans to TVF&R for review and approval showing the
             following.

              1. Parking lots and drive aisles able to sustain 60,000 pounds GVW and
                 12,500 pounds point load.
              2. Please provide a full size scaled drawing at a scale of 1 “= 40’ or 1 =
                 50’ for verification of turning radius.

          C. ODOT: The applicant shall obtain an ODOT Permit for construction of
             the bike lane, right turn lane, planter strip, sidewalk, landscape buffer,
             retaining wall and drainage within the state highway right of way. Tree
             placement and design shall be consistent with the ODOT Highway
             Design Manual or a design exception shall be obtained. The types of


Resolution No. 5180-14                                                     Page 3
              trees to be approved by ODOT. Applicant shall enter into a Cooperative
              Improvement Agreement with ODOT to address ODOT permit
              requirements, providing graffiti removal and maintenance of the retaining
              wall including and the transfer of ownership of the improvement to
              ODOT. The agreement shall address the work standards that must be
              followed, maintenance responsibilities, and compliance with ORS
              276.071, which includes State of Oregon prevailing wage requirements.

              To facilitate the closure of SW 75th Ave (private), the applicant shall:

              1. Ensure that a permanent access easement is recorded to provide
                 access to a public roadway (Nyberg Rd) for tax lots 2508, 2502,
                 2506, 2100, 2507, and 2700.

              2. Record a 15ft maintenance easement adjacent to the retaining wall
                 and a maintenance vehicle access easement through the
                 development with ODOT.

              Illumination within the ODOT right of way must be in accordance with
              AASHTO illumination standards and the ODOT Lighting Policy and
              Guidelines, January 2003, which states that local jurisdictions must
              enter into an intergovernmental agreement (IGA) with ODOT wherein
              the local jurisdiction is responsible for installation, maintenance,
              operation, and energy costs.

Noise Advisory:
       The applicant is advised that outdoor activity areas on the proposed site
       may be exposed to traffic noise levels that exceed federal noise
       guidelines. Builders should take appropriate measures to mitigate this
       impact. It is generally not the State’s responsibility to provide mitigation
       for receptors that are built after the noise source is in place.

   AR-2   No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official for the City of
          Tualatin for the erection, construction, conversion or alteration of any
          building or structure or use of land unless the Community Development
          Director or designee has first determined that such land use, building or
          structure, as proposed, would comply with the Tualatin Community Plan and
          Development Code (TDC 31.114).

   AR-3   Prior to Issuance of the Building Permit for construction of any of the
          buildings on the entirety of the subject site, the applicant shall submit a
          revised plan set inclusive of the following for review and approval. Provide
          evidence or documentation to the City of Tualatin Planning Division that all
          items have been completed prior to Planning signing off on any building
          construction permit:




Resolution No. 5180-14                                                       Page 4
          A. Architecture

              1. All roof top equipment on all buildings shall be entirely screened from
                 view from all sides and from all public sidewalk vantage points 6-feet
                 above grade (TDC 73.150 (18)).
              2. On the west side of Cabela’s, the entirety of the load dock screen
                 wall as shown on plan sheet A3.10a shall be at least 15-feet high and
                 opaque to fully screen a semi-trailer truck (TDC 73.390(3).
              3. On the north side of Michael’s (building D-110) install a 15-foot high
                 wall to screen, a semi-trail truck parked at the loading dock to meet
                 Condition N of Resolution 5163-13.
              4. Add manufactured stone veneer columns and the trellis architectural
                 features to the west side of Cabela’s to match the north and east
                 elevations to meet Condition M of Resolution 5163-13.
              5. The applicant shall construct the west elevation (along the pedestrian
                 walkway) of Cabela’s including the stone veneer and wood screen
                 wall with the architecture proposed on page 5.3 and 5.4 of the
                 December 9th submittal booklet. The applicant shall also add the
                 architectural features shown in the picture below to all sides and all
                 corners of the building as proposed during the master plan. The
                 applicant shall also add all architectural features shown on page 30
                 of the December 3rd presentation to the Architectural Review Board.
                 In addition the Cabela’s building shall also add the trellises shown on
                 the north side of Cabela’s on page A3.10a of the complete plan set
                 intake stamped date November 12, 2013 to the south side of the
                 building. These trellises shall be 62-feet wide, 18-feet in height, and
                 have three stone veneer columns exactly like the trellises shown on
                 the north side of the building. The applicant shall also screen the
                 trash compacter with the exact same treatment as the proposed
                 Cabela’s loading dock screen wall shown on page 5.3 and 5.4 of the
                 December 9th submittal booklet.




              6. The northwest and northeast elevation of building N-100 shall be
                 upgraded with architectural features that match the quantity and
                 quality of the features shown on the southwest and southeast
                 elevation of the building to meet Condition L of Resolution 5163-13.




Resolution No. 5180-14                                                    Page 5
              7. Elevations and building permit application shall be revised to show
                 building N-100 (LA Fitness) to have a 45-foot building height
                 inclusive of any architectural features (TDC 53.090).
              8. The north side of New Seasons, Michaels, and Home Goods shall be
                 upgraded with the same quantity and quality of architecture shown in
                 the front of the buildings. This includes showing more reliefs, more
                 changes in color, and more material changes and other elements to
                 break up large massing to improve pedestrian scale over what was
                 proposed with the December 9th submittal packet.
              9. The entirety of the east side of Restaurant 1030 shall be upgraded to
                 have the same quality and quantity of architectural features as shown
                 on the front façade. This includes showing reliefs, changes in color,
                 and material changes. The upgrade shall also show the windows and
                 awnings proposed with the December 9th submittal.
              10. The south side of the Home Goods architecture shall be enhanced to
                  provide a change in roof line, more changes in color, more reliefs,
                  and more material changes. The south elevation of Home Goods
                  shall be further explored, developed, enhanced to create a stronger
                  focal point and entry for the site.
              11. The applicant shall install the lighting fixtures along the entirety of the
                  plaza area shown on page 5.4 of the December 9th submittal booklet.
              12. Any retaining walls shall be decorative like the right image on sheet
                  9.0 of the December 9th submittal booklet. Plain retaining walls as
                  shown on the left image on sheet 9.0 are not acceptable, and shall
                  be upgraded with a stone veneer. The architectural treatment on the
                  retaining wall for the Nyberg Street right turn lane shall be approved
                  by ODOT in coordination with the City of Tualatin.

          B. Civil:

              1. On the revised grading plan show all preserved trees protected with
                 sturdy fencing (chain link fence) during the construction process.
              2. A note shall be placed on the grading plans that states, “No grading
                 activities will allow preserved tree roots to remain exposed per TDC
                 73.250(2)(f).”
              3. Provide for required vanpool and carpool spaces on the striping and
                 signage plan.
              4. All site plan amendments shall reflect required revised and approved
                 planning site plan.

          C. Landscaping and Irrigation




Resolution No. 5180-14                                                        Page 6
              1. Fill in the street tree gaps along all public and public-like streets to
                 match the City standard of 30-feet on center (TDC 74.765 and Map
                 74-1) (landscape plan sheet L1.0-L1.2)
              2. Choose from the City’s street tree list for SW Nyberg Street frontage
                 and the main entrance frontage (TDC 74.765 and Map 74-1).
                 Unapproved trees such as Beach Plum, Quaking Aspen, and
                 Serviceberry are shown (landscape plan sheet L1.0-L1.2). Street
                 Tree List: http://www.tualatinoregon.gov/developmentcode/tdc-
                 chapter-74-public-improvement-requirements#74.765
              3. Replace all “Central Oregon” species with either “Coast Range” or
                 “Tualatin River” species (landscape plan sheets L1.0-L1.9) to meet
                 Condition T of Resolution 5163-13.
              4. An irrigation system is required pursuant to TDC 73.280. Supply an
                 irrigation plan. The future irrigation plan shall relocate all City
                 irrigation lines and install a water meter with doublecheck to assure
                 continued service (TDC 73.280). The irrigation plan shall also supply
                 lines to the ODOT frontage. The irrigation plan shall be approved by
                 ODOT for the ODOT frontage. A permit from ODOT shall be
                 obtained for installation of the irrigation system.
              5. On the south side of the trail between the west end of building D-130
                 and the east end of building 1010, plant 2 canopy trees and 4
                 understory trees per 100 lineal feet. No Central Oregon plant species
                 allowed per 73.020.
              6. Add six more Vine Maples to the northwest side of LA Fitness
                 (building N-100) or other similar tall growing shrub or small tree in the
                 planter strip to break up the massing of the building per 73.020.
              7. Add two more Vine Maples to the northeast side of LA Fitness
                 (building N-100) or other similar tall growing shrub or small tree in the
                 planter strip to break up the massing of the building per 73.020.
              8. Move trees and shrubs to appropriate locations from the edge of the
                 shared pathway shy area so routine pruning to prevent
                 branches/plants from encroaching over shy or path when full grown is
                 not required. This does not include tree that can have branches
                 pruned to maintain an eight to ten foot clearance above shared paths
                 (73.160(3)(e) and 73.260(5)).
              9. Provide a note on the revised landscaping plans that shrubs in all
                 parking areas will be maintained to not exceed 30-inches in height
                 and that all trees will be maintained to not extend below 8-feet
                 measured from grade pursuant to TDC 73.160(3)(e).
              10. Show all trees preserved in the C2 series of preliminary plans
                  protected with chain link fence or other sturdy fencing through the
                  duration of the construction process per 73.250(2)(6).




Resolution No. 5180-14                                                      Page 7
              11. The applicant shall plant all coniferous to at least 8-feet in height as
                  proposed.
              12. The applicant shall plant deciduous trees to at least 2-inches in
                  caliper at breast height as proposed.
              13. Pursuant to TDC 73.290(1) the revised site and grading plans shall
                  include a specification for replanting areas where existing vegetation
                  or landscaping has been removed or damaged through grading and
                  construction activities.
              14. Add or demarcate where 15 additional Douglas Fir, Western Red
                  Cedar, or other tall-maturing conifer trees were placed on tax lot
                  2502 pursuant to Condition T of Resolution 5163-13. Add an
                  additional landscaping sheet in the revised landscaping plans that
                  show specific compliance with Condition T of Resolution 5163-13.
              15. Add or demarcate where the replacement trees pursuant to Condition
                  S of Resolution 5163-13 are shown. Deciduous replacement trees
                  shall be at least 3-inches in caliper at breast height and coniferous
                  trees shall be at least 10 feet in height at time of planting. Add an
                  additional landscaping sheet that shows specific compliance with
                  Condition S of Resolution 5163-13.
              16. Add the bike parking plans to the site and landscaping plans. Show
                  revised landscaping based on placement of bike racks and covered
                  bike storage. Show a 5-foot clear concrete or asphalt walkway
                  around all bike parking per 73.370(1)(p).
              17. Show that planting around trash enclosure walls will be evergreen
                  exclusive of the bike rack pursuant to TDC 73.227(6)(b)(iii).
              18. Show how the proposed ground cover will fully cover the ground in 3
                  years pursuant to TDC 73.240(11).
              19. Provide evidence and/or documentation that the trees proposed for
                  the diamond planters will meet Condition P of Resolution 5163-13.
              20. Landscaping abutting I-5 shall be consistent with the ODOT
                  approved list.

          D. Lighting

              1. Provide elevations and/or spec sheets of all proposed lighting to
                 determine if cut-offs meet TDC 73.160(3)(c) and 73.380(6).
              2. Provide a lighting plan that shows all light measurements down to .1
                 foot candles as it passes over the property line per 73.380 (6).
              3. Light poles shall be LED with pedestrian scale lighting at the entries
                 to the subject site as proposed.
              4. Show how lights without full cut-off will not cause light pollution.




Resolution No. 5180-14                                                       Page 8
          E. Fire (See TVF&R full comment letter for explanation).

              1. New buildings shall have full NFPA 13 fire sprinklers.
              2. Identify aerial apparatus access lanes on each building in excess of
                 30 feet in height.
              3. A parking restriction sign plan (OFC D103.6).
              4. A fire lane curb marking plan (OFC 503.3).
              5. Any proposed gates with approved Fire District lock mechanisms.
              6. A current fire flow test of the nearest fire hydrant demonstrating
                 available flow at 20 psi residual pressure as well as fire flow
                 calculation worksheets. Please forward copies to both TVF&R as
                 well as local building department. Fire flow calculation worksheets as
                 well as instructions are available at www.tvfr.com. Please provide
                 fire flow calculation worksheets for each new building on the campus.
              7. A fire hydrant distribution plan based on fire flow calculations.
              8. Bollards at each new fire hydrant and fire department connection.
              9. Fire sprinkler Fire Department connections shall be plumbed to the
                 fire sprinkler riser downstream of all control valves.
              10. Each new building is to be afforded with a Knox box.
              11. Pursuant to TDC 73.160(3)(d), provide an identification system which
                  clearly locates buildings and their entries emergency services.

          F. Planning

              1. All crosswalks shown to be striped on sheet C1.0 of the plan set shall
                 be made of different raised material such as solid colored thermal
                 plastic. Crosswalks made with paint only are not allowed per
                 73.160(1)(a)(iii).
              2. All crosswalks shown to be a brick or paver pattern shall be created
                 of raised brick or pavers of a significantly different color than the
                 underlying asphalt or cement per 73.160(1)(a)(iii). Raised and
                 scored colored concrete is acceptable.
              3. The accessway proposed on plan set sheet C1.3 from northeast side
                 of building 1040 to the edge of the sensitive area containing the
                 Tualatin River Greenway shall be at least 8-feet wide and
                 constructed of Portland Concrete Cement pursuant to TDC
                 73.160(1)(d).
              4. The 14-foot wide accessway from the rear of building 1010 on tax lot
                 1601 to the Tualatin River Greenway shall be constructed of Portland
                 Concrete Cement pursuant to TDC 73.160(1)(d).



Resolution No. 5180-14                                                     Page 9
              5. Show all mechanical and electrical equipment on site. Show that all
                 electrical and mechanical equipment will be fully screen with
                 landscaping, fencing, or a wall pursuant to TDC 73.160(4)(a).
              6. Refine the site plan to show refuse and recycling storage areas for
                 building A, B, C, E-100, D-130, D-125, D-120, and D-110 that meet
                 Section 73.227. These include the existing recycling and refuse
                 storage areas that exist and are not shown on the site plan. In
                 addition building 1005 shows a trash compactor and bicycle parking
                 in the same area. This conflict shall be rectified through a revised
                 site and refuse plan.
              7. Place a note on the grading, landscaping, and tree preservation plan
                 that neither top soil storage nor construction material storage shall be
                 located within the drip line of trees designated to be preserved
                 pursuant to TDC 73.250(2)(d).
              8. Pursuant to 73.370(1)(a), show designated carpool and vanpool
                 spaces on the revised site plan.
              9. Pursuant to 73.370(1)(u) a bike parking signage plans shall be
                 submitted in the revised plan set and through the sign plan package
                 for site signage. Bike parking directional signage shall be placed at
                 the main pedestrian entrance for each building if bike parking is not
                 within 50-feet and viewable from the pedestrian main entrance.
              10. 53 carpool or vanpool spaces shall be indicated in a revised site plan
                  and signed or otherwise designated in the parking lot per
                  73.370(1)(x).
              11. All internal walk ways, access ways, crosswalks, and sidewalks shall
                  be at least 6-feet in width pursuant to TDC 73.160(1)(a)(ii). A
                  reduction may be requested if existing sidewalk.
              12. Show where recycling will be located on a revised trash enclosure
                  and site plan to meet TDC 73.226(5).
              13. Show that trash enclosure doors can open wider than a 90-degree
                  angle, that there will be no center pole between the trash enclosure
                  doors, and that the doors can be lockable in this open position as
                  requested by the trash hauler.
              14. Show how trash and site plan meet TDC 73.227.
              15. Provide for required vanpool and carpool spaces on the striping and
                  signage plan.
              16. The elevation for building J-100 (BJ’s restaurant), do not match the
                  footprint of the site plan, please revise.
              17. Revise the west side of the main entrance to be a City standard 5-
                  foot tree well and 9-foot wide pathway.
              18. All dog kennels shall be fully screened with the same material used
                  to build Cabela’s, (no chain link fencing with slats).


Resolution No. 5180-14                                                   Page 10
              19. All dumpsters and trash cans on the north side of Building A shall be
                  fully screened in an enclosure that matches the building materials of
                  Building A.

          G. Parks

              1. An additional crosswalk from east of Street A sidewalk to building D-
                 130.
              2. Access path to Tualatin River Greenway at Building 1040 needs to
                 be the same width as the main path, 16-feet: a 12-foot path with a 2-
                 foot shy, with a 2-foot shy on either side through the sensitive area.
              3. Affirm that access path to Tualatin River Greenway from building N-
                 100 has been eliminated (it is shown on Exhibit M).
              4. The connection to the west along the Tualatin River shall be shown
                 within the outer 40-feet from top of bank at the northwest corner of N-
                 100.

          H. Artwalk Signage

              1. Create a sign plan that shows route to art and location of wayfinding
                 and all other Artwalk signs.

   AR-4   The following shall be performed for Washington County prior to the
          issuance of any City of Tualatin building permit for any and all buildings on
          the entirety of the subject site. Provide evidence/documentation to the City of
          Tualatin Planning Division that all items have been completed prior to
          Planning signing off on any building permit for building construction:

      NOTE: Any work within County-maintained right-of-way requires a permit from
            the Washington County Operations Division (503.846.7623). No private
            infrastructure can be located within the right-of-way.

          A. The following shall be recorded (contact appropriate jurisdiction for
             recordation of prepared documents):

              1. All public improvements identified in Washington County’s Traffic Staff
                 report dated May 21, 2013 shall be located within public right-of-way
                 and/or easements.

          B. Submit to Washington County Public Assurance Staff, 503-846-3843:

              1. Completed "Design Option" form (a form that states who will be
                 building the improvements and submitting to the Washington County
                 Road Standards).



Resolution No. 5180-14                                                   Page 11
              2. $15,000.00 Administration Deposit.

      NOTE: The Administration Deposit is a cost-recovery account used to pay for
            County services provided to the developer, including plan review and
            approval, field inspections, as-built approval, and project administration.
            The Administration Deposit amount noted above is an estimate of what it
            will cost to provide these services. If, during the course of the project, the
            Administration Deposit account is running low, additional funds will be
            requested to cover the estimated time left on the project (at then-current
            rates per the adopted Washington County Fee Schedule). If there are
            any unspent funds at project close out, they will be refunded to the
            applicant. PLEASE NOTE: Any point of contact with County staff can be
            a chargeable cost. If project plans are not complete or do not comply
            with County standards and codes, costs will be higher. There is a charge
            to cover the cost of every field inspection. Costs for enforcement actions
            will also be charged to the applicant.

              3. A copy of the City’s Land Use Approval with Conditions, signed and
                 dated.
              4. Three (3) sets of complete engineering plans for construction of the
                 following public improvements (refer to attached Traffic Staff Report
                 dated May 21, 2013):

                  a. A westbound right-turn lane on SW Nyberg Road.
                  b. Two (2) southbound left-turn lanes and a shared through/right-turn
                     lane from the site’s access on SW Nyberg Road and two (2)
                     inbound receiving lanes.
                  c. Modify the traffic signal to accommodate the widening of the
                     driveway and the westbound right turn movement.

          C. Obtain a Washington County Facility Permit upon completion of the
             following:

              1. Obtain Engineering Division approval and provide a financial
                 assurance for the construction of the public improvements listed
                 in condition AR-3.B.4.

      NOTE: The Washington County Public Assurance staff (503-846-3843) will send
            the required forms to the applicant's representative after submittal and
            approval of items listed under AR-3.B.4.

                  The Facility Permit allows construction work within County rights-of-
                  way and permits site access only after the developer first submits
                  plans and obtains Washington County Engineering approval, obtains



Resolution No. 5180-14                                                    Page 12
                  required grading and erosion control permits, and satisfies various
                  other requirements of Washington County’s Assurances Section
                  including but not limited to execution of financial and contractual
                  agreements. This process ensures that the developer accepts
                  responsibility for construction of public improvements, and that
                  improvements are closely monitored, inspected, and built to standard
                  in a timely manner. Access will only be permitted under the required
                  Washington County Facility Permit, and only following submittal and
                  County acceptance of all materials required under the facility permit
                  process.

          D. Pay a lump sum of $10,000 to the County for field visit and retiming of the
             existing corridor signal system with the recommended traffic signal
             phasing change at main entrance intersection into the subject site.

   AR-5   Prior to Occupancy of any building on the entirety of the subject site:

          A. Obtain a finaled Washington County Facility Permit, contingent upon the
             following:

              1. The road improvements required in condition AR-3.B.4 above shall be
                 completed and accepted by Washington County.
          B. The applicant shall show evidence to City of Tualatin staff that the
             diamond planter trees were installed consistent with the approved AR
             planting specifications.

          C. Provide a copy of the subject site’s landscape and maintenance manual
             as required by Condition R of Resolution 5163-13.

          D. Survey and stake area of easements in areas not to be constructed at this
             time. The City shall approve the location of the easement prior to its
             acceptance per 74.310(1). (Please see Public Facilities Report for more
             information)

          E. Submit a tree maintenance plan as required by Condition R of
             Resolution 5163-13.

          F. Provide an arborist’s report that the trees in the diamond planters
             have been planted properly and according to Condition Q of Resolution
             5163-13.

   AR-6   All conditions of approval, except where otherwise stated, shall be subject to
          field inspection prior to Certificate of Occupancy.

   AR-7   No trees shall be removed associated with Seneca Street until the Seneca
          extension is approved.


Resolution No. 5180-14                                                     Page 13
   AR-8   Trees along the shared pathways will be maintained to have an 8-foot
          vertical clearance per TMC 74.725(2).

   AR-9   To meet the requirement of 73.100(2), all building exterior improvements
          approved through the Architectural Review Process shall be continually
          maintained including necessary painting and repair so as to remain
          substantially similar to original approval through the Architectural Review
          Process, unless subsequently altered with Community Development Director
          approval, as a condition of approval.
   AR-10 To meet the requirement of 73.100(1), all landscaping approved through
         architectural review (AR) shall be continually maintained, including
         necessary watering, weeding, pruning and replacement, in a manner
         substantially similar to that originally approved by the AR decision, unless
         subsequently altered through AR.
   AR-11 The applicant shall separately from this AR submit sign permit applications
         for any proposed signage. Pursuant to TDC 73.160(3)(d), provide an
         identification system which clearly locates buildings and their entries for
         patrons and emergency services.
   AR -12 Encroachment upon any identified preserved trees must occur under the
          direction of a qualified arborist to assure the health needs of trees within the
          preserved area per TDC 73.250(2)(e).
   AR-13 Except as allowed by Subsection (2), all landscaping and exterior
         improvements required as part of the Community Development Director's,
         Architectural Review Board's or City Council's approval shall be completed in
         addition to Fire and Life Safety, and Engineering/Building Department
         requirements prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy (TDC
         73.095).


   AR-14 The subject site shall comply with all ADA standards.




Resolution No. 5180-14                                                     Page 14
        Section 2. The City Council adopts as its Findings and Analysis the findings set
forth in “Exhibit 2,” which is attached and incorporated by reference.


      Section 3. This Resolution is effective upon adoption.


      Adopted by the City Council this ____ Day of ______________, 2014.


                                             CITY OF TUALATIN, OREGON

                                             BY _______________________
                                                       Mayor

APPROVED AS TO FORM                          ATTEST:

BY _______________________                   BY _______________________
        City Attorney                                 City Recorder




Resolution No. 5180-14                                                   Page 15
Exhibits to Resolution No. 5180-14 are available
upon request in the Administration
Department.
18861 SW Martinazzi Ave, Suite 200
Tualatin, OR 97062
503.691.3011
TO:             Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council

THROUGH:        Sherilyn Lombos

FROM:           Linda Odermott, Paralegal
                Sean Brady, City Attorney

DATE:           02/10/2014

SUBJECT:        Consideration of Resolution No. 5179-14 Approving with Conditions, a Public
                Utilities Decision for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center Development Located at
                7455-7925 SW Nyberg Street (Tax Map 2S1 24A, Tax Lots 1601, 1602, 1900,
                2502, 2506, 2507, 2508, and 1700; Tax Map 2S1 24B, Tax Lots 2000, 2001, and
                2100)


ISSUE BEFORE THE COUNCIL:
Council will consider Resolution No. 5179-14 approving with conditions, a public utilities
decision for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center Development.

RECOMMENDATION:
Staff recommends Council approve Resolution No. 5179-14 approving with conditions, a Public
Facilities Decision for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
CenterCal Properties LLC (CenterCal) submitted an application for a Public Utilities decision for
the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center development. The City Engineer issued a Public Utilities
decision on December 20, 2013. The Public Utilities decision was appealed to City Council by
Zian Limited Partnership, a neighboring shopping center, for a de novo hearing. On January 27,
2014, City Council held a quasi-judicial hearing on the Public Utilities application. The City
Council considered the information and testimony presented at the hearing and deliberated to a
decision. The City Council voted 7-0 to approve with conditions the Public Utilities application for
the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center. Resolution No. 5179-14 will be the final written order of the
City Council on the Public Utilities application.


Attachments:       Resolution No. 5179-14 Utilities Decision
                   Reso No 5179-14 Exhibits
                              RESOLUTION NO. 5179-14

      RESOLUTION APPROVING WITH CONDITIONS A PUBLIC UTILITIES
      APPLICATION FOR THE NYBERG RIVERS SHOPPING CENTER
      DEVELOPMENT LOCATED AT 7455-7925 SW NYBERG STREET (TAX MAP
      2S1 24 A, TAX LOTS 1601, 1602, 1900, 2502, 2506, 2507, 2508, AND 2700;
      TAX MAP 2S1 24B, TAX LOTS 2000, 2001, AND 2100)


      WHEREAS, Center Cal Properties LLC submitted a Public Utilities application for
the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center; and

      WHEREAS, the City Engineer issued a Public Utilities decision on December 20,
2013; and

       WHEREAS, a request for review of the City Engineer’s Public Utilities decision
was filed; and

       WHEREAS, a public hearing was held before the City Council of the City of
Tualatin on January 27, 2014, to consider the request for review; and

      WHEREAS, notice of public hearing was given as required by Tualatin
Development Code 1.031; and

      WHEREAS, the City Council heard and considered the testimony and information
presented by City staff, the applicant, the appellant, and those appearing at the public
hearing; and

      WHEREAS, after conclusion of the public hearing, the Council voted
unanimously to approve the application with conditions.


     NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY
OF TUALATIN, OREGON, that:

        Section 1. The application for Public Utilities for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping
Center, which is attached as “Exhibit 1” and incorporated by reference, is approved with
the following conditions:




Resolution No. 5179-14                                                    Page 1
PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF A WATER QUALITY PERMIT:

PFR-1    The applicant shall grant a public stormwater facility easement for the public
         stormwater facility.

PFR-2    The applicant shall submit revised plans that show all private stormwater
         treatment facilities and lines; including the filter vault at the intersection of the
         private access easement acting as the Loop Road is shown within SW
         Nyberg Street to be located on private property, for review and approval.

PFR-3    The applicant shall submit final plans that show three LIDA planters within
         parking landscaping south of building 1030 and east of building 1040, for
         review and approval.

PFR-4    The applicant shall submit revised plans that do not show the LIDA rain
         garden over public easements, for review and approval.

PFR-5    The applicant shall submit revised plans that show access easements to the
         public stormwater facility and manholes, for review and approval.

PFR-6    The applicant shall grant a public access easement to the public stormwater
         facility and manholes.

PFR-7    The applicant shall submit revised plans that include a complete and
         connected stormwater treatment and conveyance system for the parking lot
         north of the City offices, for review and approval.

PFR-8    The applicant shall submit final plans that show mechanical filters treating the
         public Street “A” and future SW Seneca Street, for review and approval.


PFR-9    The applicant shall submit final plans that comply with the Service Provider
         Letter conditions and Clean Water Services Memorandum comments, for
         review and approval.

PFR-10   The applicant shall obtain a Stormwater Connection Permit.




Resolution No. 5179-14                                                         Page 2
PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF A PUBLIC WORKS PERMIT:

PFR-11   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show the existing public fire
         hydrant at the northwest corner of building D-130 labeled as public.

PFR-12   The applicant shall submit revised plans of SW Boones Ferry Road that
         include a median on the north side of the eastbound travel lane in order to
         restrict Street “A” to right-in/right-out movement, for review and approval.

PFR-13   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show a crosswalk at the
         intersection of SW Boones Ferry Road and Street “A” that includes material
         that is visually different and possibly raised, for review and approval.

PFR-14   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show SW Seneca Street from
         SW Martinazzi Avenue connecting to the Nyberg Rivers site for construction
         up to the requirements stated in Resolution 5163-13, without on-street
         parking, with signalization at SW Seneca Street & SW Martinazzi Avenue, for
         review and approval.

PFR-15   The applicant shall submit a copy of the ODOT Permit and Washington
         County Facility Permit for construction of SW Nyberg Street from I-5 to SW
         Tualatin Sherwood Road to add a 5-foot bike lane, a 15-foot westbound right-
         turn lane, a 4-foot planter strip with curb, streetlights, and trees, a 7-foot
         sidewalk, and a 2-foot landscape strip and a retaining wall with a hand rail on
         top and close SW 75th Avenue’s access.

PFR-16   The applicant shall submit final plans for SW Nyberg Street from SW
         Martinazzi Avenue to SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road that include two 11-foot
         westbound travel lanes, a 6-foot bike lane, a varied width 5- to 6-foot curb
         tight sidewalk with streetlights, and a varied width 4- to 6-foot planter strip
         with trees in compliance with Resolution 5163-13, for review and approval.

PFR-17   The applicant shall grant a public sidewalk easement from right-of-way to
         back of sidewalk adjacent to SW Nyberg Street.

PFR-18   The applicant shall submit revised plans for the Loop Road from the SW
         Nyberg Street main intersection north to the south side of building 1010 that
         includes the City’s standard 5’x5’ tree wells within the 14-foot wide shared
         path, for review and approval.

PFR-19   The applicant shall submit final plans from the south side of building 1010
         west to the south side of building D-120 that include two 13-foot travel lanes,
         a 12-foot pedestrian walkway on the north side with tree wells, a 6-foot
         planter and 5-foot sidewalk on the south side, for review and approval.




Resolution No. 5179-14                                                      Page 3
PFR-20   The applicant shall submit final plans that show along the west side of
         buildings D-120, D-125, and D-130 two 14-foot travel lanes, two 17.5-foot
         angled parking aisles, a 10-foot wide pedestrian walkway on the east side,
         trees planted in the parking buffers, a 4-foot sloped landscape area on the
         west side, and a 12-foot multi-use path on the west side, for review and
         approval.

PFR-21   The applicant shall submit final plans that show two 12-foot travel lanes with a
         pork chop at the intersection of Boones Ferry Road that will be mountable for
         emergency vehicles, 4-foot planter strips with curbs, streetlights, and trees, a
         6-foot bike lane and 5-foot sidewalk on the east side, and a 12-foot multi-use
         path on the west side.

PFR-22   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show a raised crosswalk at the
         intersection of the greenway trail and Street “A”, for review and approval.

PFR-23   The applicant shall grant a maintenance agreement to City standards for all
         cross-sections of the Loop Road.

PFR-24   The applicant shall grant a public access easement over all cross-sections of
         the Loop Road.

PFR-25   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show an approved street name
         in place of Street “A”, for review and approval.

PFR-26   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show a 32-foot wide access to
         the City’s back parking lot approximately 140 feet south of SW Boones Ferry
         Road without requiring relocation of existing structures, for review and
         approval.

PFR-27   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show the Heron’s Landing
         Apartments driveway cut to be a minimum of 32-feet wide with associated 40-
         foot private access easement and located opposite the City parking lot access
         approximately 140 feet south of SW Boones Ferry Road, for review and
         approval.

PFR-28   The applicant shall submit a copy of the private access easement allowing
         Heron’s Landing Apartments access to Street “A”, for review and approval.

PFR-29   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show private access easements
         for the lots with buildings E-100, F-100, G-100, and H-100 to allow circulation
         from the intersection of the public access easement acting as the Loop Road
         from SW Nyberg Street through the east parking area to south of building
         1010, for review and approval.




Resolution No. 5179-14                                                    Page 4
PFR-30   The applicant shall submit copies of the recorded documents that show
         private access easements for the lots with buildings E-100, F-100, G-100, and
         H-100 to allow circulation from the intersection of the public access easement
         acting as the Loop Road from SW Nyberg Street through the east parking
         area to south of building 1010, for review and approval.

PFR-31   The applicant shall submit a copy of the private access easement from TLID
         2S124B002000 through TLID 2S124B001602 to a public right-of-way, for
         review and approval.

PFR-32   The applicant shall submit final water system plans, for review and approval.

PFR-33   The applicant shall grant a 15-foot wide public water line easement over
         proposed public water lines.

PFR-34   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show access easements to
         public water lines, for review and approval.

PFR-35   The applicant shall grant an access easement to public water lines.

PFR-36   The applicant shall submit copies of private water line easements.

PFR-37   The applicant shall submit revised plans that minimize private water lines
         crossing public utility easements and only cross perpendicular to the public
         lines, for review and approval.

PFR-38   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show trees located outside
         public water line easements, for review and approval.

PFR-39   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show the public water line south
         of the City Offices will need to be relocated to within SW Seneca Street, for
         review and approval.

PFR-40   The applicant shall construct a public irrigation line to the irrigation system
         serving the City maintained plantings along I-5 and in the median of SW
         Tualatin-Sherwood with associated water meter and backflow prevention.

PFR-41   The applicant shall submit sanitary sewer system plans, for review and
         approval.

PFR-42   The applicant shall grant a 15-foot wide public sanitary sewer line easement
         over proposed public water lines.

PFR-43   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show access easements to
         public sanitary sewer manholes, for review and approval.




Resolution No. 5179-14                                                       Page 5
PFR-44   The applicant shall grant an access easement to public sanitary sewer
         manholes.

PFR-45   The applicant shall submit revised plans that minimize private sanitary sewer
         lines crossing public utility easements and only cross perpendicular to the
         public lines, for review and approval.

PFR-46   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show trees located outside
         public sanitary sewer line easements, for review and approval.

PFR-47   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show the public sanitary sewer
         line south of the City Offices will need to be relocated to within SW Seneca
         Street, for review and approval.

PFR-48   The applicant shall submit revised stormwater system plans that include the
         public stormwater treatment facility within a public stormwater easement
         outside of the public water line easement, for review and approval.

PFR-49   The applicant shall submit revised plans that minimize private stormwater
         lines crossing public utility easements and only cross perpendicular to the
         public lines and private facilities and structures located outside of public
         easements, for review and approval.

PFR-50   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show trees located outside
         public stormwater line easements, for review and approval.

PFR-51   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show access easements to
         public stormwater manholes, for review and approval.

PFR-52   The applicant shall grant an access easement to public stormwater manholes.

PFR-53   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show the public stormwater line
         south of the City Offices will need to be relocated to within SW Seneca Street,
         for review and approval.


PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF A BUILDING PERMIT:

PFR-54   The applicant shall submit plans that comply with fire protection requirements
         as determined through the Building Division and Tualatin Valley Fire &
         Rescue (TVF&R).

PFR-55   The applicant shall obtain all Public Works and Water Quality Permits needed
         for this development.
PFR-56   The applicant shall obtain a Public Works Permit for all cross-sections of the
         Loop Road.



Resolution No. 5179-14                                                     Page 6
PFR-57   The applicant shall obtain a City of Tualatin erosion control permit that
         includes the entire site area to be disturbed.

PFR-58   The applicant shall submit an amended 1200-C for the remainder of the site,
         for review and approval.

PFR-59   The applicant shall submit a completed FHADP application with a plan
         showing the balanced cut and fill and a 1st survey.

PFR-60   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show a trail connection from the
         development north of building 1040 that includes a 16-foot wide greenway
         trail easement that that allow for future construction of a cross section of a 12-
         foot wide path with additional 2-feet on either side for LIDA water quality
         treatment, for review and approval.

PFR-61   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show the greenway trail
         connection to the west along the Tualatin River within 40-feet of the top of
         bank, for review and approval.

PFR-62   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show a greenway trail
         connection on the west side of I-5 at the Tualatin River to access future north
         (south of shared pathway at locations shown on Exhibit M (Transportation
         Plant) in the Master Plan set, for review and approval.

PFR-63   The applicant shall submit revised plans that show a greenway trail easement
         over the three future viewing areas north of building 1040 and N-100, for
         review and approval.

PFR-64   The applicant shall grant an easement to allow for the trail to be located either
         within the area south of Heron’s Landing Apartments and the Tualatin River
         and north of the development or for a specific approved location as shown
         with an associated Clean Water Services Service Provider Letter.

PFR-65   The applicant shall submit final plans that show a 14-foot public shared
         pathway from the greenway trail between buildings 1010 & 1030 and 1040
         that connects to the public access easement acting as the Loop Road, for
         review and approval.

PFR-66   The applicant shall grant a 14-foot easement for a public shared pathway
         from the greenway trail between buildings 1010 & 1030 and 1040 that
         connects to the public access easement acting as the Loop Road.




Resolution No. 5179-14                                                      Page 7
PRIOR TO A FRAMING INSPECTION:

PFR-67   The applicant shall submit a 2nd survey for the Flood Hazard Area
         Development Permit.


PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:

PFR-68   The applicant shall construct SW Boones Ferry Road that include a median
         on the north side of the eastbound travel lane in order to restrict Street “A” to
         right-in/right-out movement as part of the Public Works Permit.

PFR-69   The applicant shall construct a crosswalk at the intersection of SW Boones
         Ferry Road and Street “A” that includes material that is visually different and
         possibly raised.

PFR-70   If the applicant obtains the right-of-way for the Seneca Street extension and
         traffic signal by April 1, 2014, the applicant will design and construct the
         Seneca Street extension along with a new signal at the SW Martinazzi
         Avenue/SW Seneca Street intersection per the Public Works Construction
         Code under a public works permit or if the applicant is unable to obtain the
         right-of-way by April 1, 2014, the applicant will provide a fee in lieu of the
         Seneca Street construction to the City in the amount of $360,000, which
         accounts for the applicant's share of the improvements.

PFR-71   If the east extension of SW Seneca Street is constructed, the applicant will
         need to extinguish and close the private access easement, Washington
         County recorded document 8295, Book 773, Page 873, exists over City
         owned TLID 2S124B001900.

PFR-72   The applicant shall construct SW Nyberg Street from I-5 to SW Tualatin
         Sherwood Road to add a 5-foot bike lane, a 15-foot westbound right-turn
         lane, a 4-foot planter strip with curb, streetlights, and trees, a 7-foot sidewalk,
         and a 2-foot landscape strip prior to a hand rail on top of a retaining wall and
         close SW 75th Avenue’s access.

PFR-73   The applicant shall construct SW Nyberg Street from SW Martinazzi Avenue
         to SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road that include two 11-foot westbound travel
         lanes, a 6-foot bike lane, a varied width 5- to 6-foot curb tight sidewalk with
         streetlights, and a varied width 4- to 6-foot planter strip with trees in
         compliance with Resolution 5163-13.

PFR-74   The applicant shall construct Loop Road from the SW Nyberg Street main
         intersection north to the south side of building 1010 that includes the City’s
         standard 5’x5’ tree wells within the 14-foot wide shared path.



Resolution No. 5179-14                                                        Page 8
PFR-75   The applicant shall construct a cross-section from the south side of building
         1010 west to the south side of building D-120 that include two 13-foot travel
         lanes, a 12-foot pedestrian walkway on the north side with tree wells, a 6-foot
         planter and 5-foot sidewalk on the south side.

PFR-76   The applicant shall construct along the west side of buildings D-120, D-125,
         and D-130 two 14-foot travel lanes, two 17.5-foot angled parking aisles, a 10-
         foot wide pedestrian walkway on the east side, trees planted in the parking
         buffers, a 4-foot sloped landscape area on the west side, and a 12-foot multi-
         use path on the west side.

PFR-77   The applicant shall construct two 12-foot travel lanes with a pork chop at the
         intersection of Boones Ferry Road will be mountable for emergency vehicles,
         4-foot planter strips with curbs, streetlights, and trees, a 6-foot bike lane and
         5-foot sidewalk on the east side, and a 12-foot multi-use path on the west
         side.

PFR-78   The applicant shall construct a raised crosswalk at the intersection of the
         greenway trail and Street “A.

PFR-79   The applicant shall complete all the public improvements and private water
         quality facilities and have them accepted by the City.

PFR-80   The applicant shall construct the public water system.

PFR-81   The applicant shall construct a public irrigation line to the irrigation system
         serving the City maintained plantings along I-5 and in the median of SW
         Tualatin-Sherwood with associated water meter and backflow prevention.

PFR-82   The applicant shall complete all the public water improvements and have
         them accepted by the City.

PFR-83   The applicant shall construct the public sanitary sewer system.

PFR-84   The applicant shall complete all the public sanitary sewer improvements and
         have them accepted by the City.

PFR-85   The applicant shall construct the public stormwater system.

PFR-86   The applicant shall complete all the public stormwater improvements and
         have them accepted by the City.
PFR-87   The applicant shall submit a 3rd survey for the Flood Hazard Area
         Development Permit.

      Section 2. The City Council adopts as its Findings and Analysis the findings set



Resolution No. 5179-14                                                       Page 9
                           Heath & Associates, Inc.
                             2214 Tacoma Road
                            Puyallup, WA 98371                                      File Name    : 3259a
                                                                                    Site Code    : 00003259
                                                                                    Start Date   : 05/16/2011
                                                                                    Page No      :1
                                Groups Printed- Group 1
                      U-HAUL IN                                      U-HAUL OUT
                      Southbound                                      Northbound
 Start Time   Right          Thru            Left            Right           Thru         Left        Int. Total
     Factor     1.0           1.0             1.0              1.0            1.0          1.0
  06:00 AM        0            15               0                0              0            0              15
  07:00 AM        0             2               0                0              2            0               4
  08:00 AM        0             3               0                0              2            0               5
  09:00 AM        0             5               0                0              4            0               9
  10:00 AM        0             3               0                0              2            0               5
  11:00 AM        0            13               0                0              8            0              21
  12:00 PM        0            11               0                0              5            0              16
  01:00 PM        0             7               0                0              7            0              14
  02:00 PM        0             8               0                0              7            0              15
  03:00 PM        0             7               0                0             12            0              19
  04:00 PM        0             3               0                0              8            0              11
  05:00 PM        0             3               0                0              8            0              11
  06:00 PM        0             1               0                0              1            0               2
Grand Total       0            81               0                0             66            0             147
 Apprch %       0.0         100.0             0.0              0.0          100.0          0.0
    Total %     0.0          55.1             0.0              0.0           44.9          0.0
                                          U-HAUL IN
                                   Out       In     Total
                                     66        81     147


                                                81
                                             Thru




                                             North


                                  5/16/2011 6:00:00 AM
                                  5/16/2011 9:00:00 AM

                                   Group 1




                                             Thru
                                                66


                                     81         66     147
                                   Out        In     Total
                                          U-HAUL OUT




                                             13
                                  Attachment 101B
                                 Application Materials
                                    Page 45 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 SB Ramps -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218003
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     1117            0                             Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                  2.9        0.0

                     593 17 507
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                  2.7 5.9 3.0


       1753   0                            0    1868
                                                                                                                     2.3   0.0                      0.0      2.3
              1227            0.98       1160
                                                                                                                           1.5                      2.2
       1847   620                        708    1734
                                                                                                                     1.6   1.8                      2.5      2.0

                          0    0     0
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0

                     1345            0
                                                                                                                                  2.2        0.0



                               7                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

              0                            0                                                                               4                          6

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                               2                                                                                                   0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                       NA




              NA                          NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                               NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                  I-5 SB Ramps                    I-5 SB Ramps              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At      Left         Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM         0             0      0     0        41        2     51     0        0   117     47     0     51     86     0     0             395
    4:05 PM         0             0      0     0        36        0     37     0        0   127     53     0     61     81     0     0             395
    4:10 PM         0             0      0     0        47        0     51     0        0    96     53     0     62     86     0     0             395
    4:15 PM         0             0      0     0        32        0     50     0        0    93     45     0     46   102      0     0             368
    4:20 PM         0             0      0     0        46        0     44     0        0    81     54     0     61   101      0     0             387
    4:25 PM         0             0      0     0        45        1     52     0        0    81     42     0     56     95     0     0             372
    4:30 PM         0             0      0     0        38        2     38     0        0    88     57     0     49     95     0     0             367
    4:35 PM         0             0      0     0        48        1     38     0        0   108     58     0     59     98     0     0             410
    4:40 PM         0             0      0     0        29        0     43     0        0   113     49     0     58   102      0     0             394
    4:45 PM         0             0      0     0        39        2     45     0        0   105     47     0     52   102      0     0             392
    4:50 PM         0             0      0     0        39        0     62     0        0    89     49     0     55   113      0     0             407
    4:55 PM         0             0      0     0        41        2     64     0        0   103     49     0     56     99     0     0             414            4696
    5:00 PM         0             0      0     0        38        1     49     0        0    83     48     0     65     84     0     0             368            4669
    5:05 PM         0             0      0     0        46        1     47     0        0   124     51     0     61     98     0     0             428            4702
    5:10 PM         0             0      0     0        53        1     67     0        0    96     49     0     62     74     0     0             402            4709
    5:15 PM         0             0      0     0        39        2     44     0        0   108     50     0     67     94     0     0             404            4745
    5:20 PM         0             0      0     0        47        3     48     0        0   107     52     0     54    111     0     0             422            4780
    5:25 PM         0             0      0     0        50        2     48     0        0   103     61     0     70     90     0     0             424            4832
    5:30 PM         0             0      0     0        34        0     39     0        0    94     43     0     69     92     0     0             371            4836
    5:35 PM         0             0      0     0        44        0     49     0        0   103     55     0     62     93     0     0             406            4832
    5:40 PM         0             0      0     0        46        1     53     0        0    94     52     0     53     91     0     0             390            4828
    5:45 PM         0             0      0     0        47        0     66     0        0    81     41     0     56     91     0     0             382            4818
    5:50 PM         0             0      0     0        48        0     36     0        0    86     30     0     55     67     0     0             322            4733
    5:55 PM         0             0      0     0        44        0     38     0        0    77     34     0     44     77     0     0             314            4633
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                      Southbound                  Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates       Left         Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles      0             0      0     0       552      16     632     0        0 1312     600     0    760 1064       0     0                    4936
 Heavy Trucks       0             0      0               0        0     16              0    12      4           28     24     0                           84
  Pedestrians                     0                               8                           0                          0                                  8
    Bicycles         0            0      0               0        0      0              0     0      0            0      4     0                            4
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:27 AM                                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                           Attachment 101B
                                                                          Application Materials
                                                                             Page 46 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 NB Ramps -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                                QC JOB #: 11218005
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                      0          1149                             Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                  0.0        2.1

                      0    0      0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


      1893   557                         588   1895
                                                                                                                    2.6   1.3                      2.9      2.8
             1184         0.95          1307
                                                                                                                          2.6                      2.8
      1741   0                             0   1756
                                                                                                                    2.2   0.0                      0.0      2.5

                    586    4     572
                                                                                                                                 2.2 0.0 2.3

                      0          1162
                                                                                                                                 0.0        2.2



                           5                                                                                                      0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             0                             1                                                                              4                          7

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                           3                                                                                                      0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                          NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count              I-5 NB Ramps                       I-5 NB Ramps              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period                (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left          Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM     47            0     32     0           0         0      0     0       49    99      0     0      0    92    47      0             366
    4:05 PM     36            0     37     0           0         0      0     0       65   102      0     0      0   102    59      0             401
    4:10 PM     39            1     37     0           0         0      0     0       39   100      0     0      0   112    37      0             365
    4:15 PM     45            1     46     0           0         0      0     0       35    86      0     0      0   123    45      0             381
    4:20 PM     47            0     42     0           0         0      0     0       35    97      0     0      0   122    40      0             383
    4:25 PM     45            0     59     0           0         0      0     0       35    90      0     0      0    87    44      0             360
    4:30 PM     52            0     32     0           0         0      0     0       30    94      0     0      0    90    49      0             347
    4:35 PM     49            0     52     0           0         0      0     0       58   105      0     0      0   107    56      0             427
    4:40 PM     55            3     52     0           0         0      0     0       50    95      0     0      0   113    62      0             430
    4:45 PM     55            1     34     0           0         0      0     0       45   104      0     0      0   114    37      0             390
    4:50 PM     59            0     53     0           0         0      0     0       33    93      0     0      0   118    40      0             396
    4:55 PM     55            0     63     0           0         0      0     0       46    94      0     0      0    87    44      0             389            4635
    5:00 PM     41            0     50     0           0         0      0     0       34    82      0     0      0   113    52      0             372            4641
    5:05 PM     43            0     47     0           0         0      0     0       66    98      0     0      0   106    54      0             414            4654
    5:10 PM     31            0     51     0           0         0      0     0       51   111      0     0      0   105    57      0             406            4695
    5:15 PM     54            0     60     0           0         0      0     0       52    91      0     0      0   134    58      0             449            4763
    5:20 PM     46            0     41     0           0         0      0     0       46   108      0     0      0   114    31      0             386            4766
    5:25 PM     46            0     37     0           0         0      0     0       46   109      0     0      0   106    48      0             392            4798
    5:30 PM     41            0     51     0           0         0      0     0       37    85      0     0      0   108    46      0             368            4819
    5:35 PM     52            0     48     0           0         0      0     0       42   102      0     0      0    96    54      0             394            4786
    5:40 PM     44            1     49     0           0         0      0     0       54    94      0     0      0    99    42      0             383            4739
    5:45 PM     42            0     49     0           0         0      0     0       43    82      0     0      0   103    44      0             363            4712
    5:50 PM     31            0     38     0           0         0      0     0       36   104      0     0      0    82    42      0             333            4649
    5:55 PM     47            0     39     0           0         0      0     0       38    84      0     0      0    82    50      0             340            4600
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                         Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left         Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles 512            0    632     0           0         0      0     0      676 1200       0     0      0 1380    676      0                    5076
 Heavy Trucks   12            0     16                 0         0      0              4    12      0            0    48    12                            104
  Pedestrians                 0                                  4                           0                         0                                   4
    Bicycles     0            0      0                 0         0      0              0     0      0            0     6      0                            6
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:27 AM                                             SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                          Attachment 101B
                                                                         Application Materials
                                                                            Page 47 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 65th Ave -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                               QC JOB #: 11218007
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                    499          345                            Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                  1.4        6.7

                    327 43 129
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                               2.1 0.0 0.0


      1928   262                        41    1356
                                                                                                                  2.7   8.0                      2.4      2.7
             1000         0.98         1178
                                                                                                                        2.2                      3.1
      1779   517                       137    1159
                                                                                                                  3.0   1.9                      0.0      2.0

                    422 43       30
                                                                                                                               2.1 2.3 3.3

                    697          495
                                                                                                                               1.4        2.2



                           0                                                                                                    1    0    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

             1                           0                                                                              4                          5

                                                                                                                        0                          0

                           0                                                                                                    0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                         NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count              SW 65th Ave                       SW 65th Ave              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left         Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM     40           2      3     0           14       4     22     0       25    55     41     0     11    79      5     0             301
    4:05 PM     30           5      2     0            8       3     20     0       27    91     33     0     16   133      2     0             370
    4:10 PM     29           4      6     0           13       4     28     0       20    63     45     0     13    92      0     0             317
    4:15 PM     29           2      2     0           17       5     20     0       11    86     37     0      6   104      3     0             322
    4:20 PM     41           3      2     0            6       1     32     0       30    86     40     0      7    95      3     0             346
    4:25 PM     38           1      0     0            4       4     19     0       31    77     43     0      8    71      2     0             298
    4:30 PM     37           2      1     0           13       1     24     0       29    70     32     0     11   103      6     0             329
    4:35 PM     34           2      3     0            9       3     30     0       23    81     42     0      8    94      4     0             333
    4:40 PM     58           4      2     0            4       4     38     0       38    78     30     0     19    69      3     0             347
    4:45 PM     24          12      1     0           17       3     23     0       21    94     41     0      6   105      4     0             351
    4:50 PM     29           4      2     0            7       1     33     0       28    92     37     0     14   102      6     0             355
    4:55 PM     39           2      7     0            5       2     23     0       21    68     42     0     14    64      6     0             293            3962
    5:00 PM     25           2      0     0           16      10     34     0       14    95     53     0      5   116      2     0             372            4033
    5:05 PM     50           8      5     0           11       5     29     0       12    56     42     0     13    82      2     0             315            3978
    5:10 PM     29           0      5     0           14       6     29     0       19   103     53     0     11   148      2     0             419            4080
    5:15 PM     35           5      2     0            4       2     18     0       18    81     52     0     13    93      1     0             324            4082
    5:20 PM     31           2      2     0           18       4     25     0       23    75     48     1     11    93      2     0             335            4071
    5:25 PM     31           0      0     0           11       2     21     0       15   107     45     0     12   109      3     0             356            4129
    5:30 PM     59           4      1     0            9       1     12     0       14    55     47     0     11    64      2     0             279            4079
    5:35 PM     31           0      1     0           10       5     19     0       16   105     44     0     14   119    13      0             377            4123
    5:40 PM     38           1      5     0           11       2     15     0       12    75     48     0      7    77      5     0             296            4072
    5:45 PM     39           4      3     0           11       1     26     0       13    77     41     0      3    67      3     1             289            4010
    5:50 PM     25           7      2     0            3       2     17     0       29    91     39     0     14    71      7     0             307            3962
    5:55 PM     30           5      3     0            8       7     15     0       10    82     37     0      8    73      4     0             282            3951
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                        Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles 456          52     48     0          116      52    304     0      196   960    588     0    148 1292     20      0                    4232
 Heavy Trucks   12           4      0                  0       0      8             12    12     12            0    40      0                           100
  Pedestrians                0                                 0                           0                         0                                   0
    Bicycles     0           0      0                  0       0      1              0     0      0            0     3      0                            4
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:27 AM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                        Attachment 101B
                                                                       Application Materials
                                                                          Page 48 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 65th Ave -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                          QC JOB #: 11218001
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                    104            54                        Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                       1.9        3.7

                       72    27    5
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                 2.8 0.0 0.0


       181   40                          4   42
                                                                                                                    2.2   2.5                      0.0       0.0
             79             0.94        37
                                                                                                                          0.0                      0.0
       326   207                         1   85
                                                                                                                    0.3   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                       72    10    1
                                                                                                                                 2.8 10.0 0.0

                    235            83
                                                                                                                                 0.0        3.6



                             1                                                                                                    1    1    2



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             1                           4                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                          1                          0

                             0                                                                                                    0    1    0




                            NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                         NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                SW 65th Ave                  SW 65th Ave                    SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM         8          1      0     0      0        0      6     0        3        5      7      0    0        2     0     0               32
    4:05 PM         9          2      0     0      0        1      5     0        4        5     20      0    0        8     0     0               54
    4:10 PM         5          2      1     0      0        2      4     0        3        7      8      0    0        3     0     0               35
    4:15 PM         8          1      0     0      0        0      1     0        4        7     12      0    0        6     1     0               40
    4:20 PM         6          0      0     0      0        0      7     0        3        8      8      0    0        5     0     0               37
    4:25 PM        10          0      0     0      0        2      5     0        4        6     14      0    0        3     1     0               45
    4:30 PM         2          0      0     0      1        3      7     0        2        5     16      0    0        2     0     0               38
    4:35 PM         7          1      0     0      0        1      6     0        5        5      9      0    1        1     0     0               36
    4:40 PM         5          0      0     0      1        0      5     0        3        5     16      0    0        5     0     0               40
    4:45 PM         8          0      0     0      0        2      4     0        4        5     19      0    0        4     0     0               46
    4:50 PM         8          3      0     0      0        0      1     0        1        3     11      0    0        3     1     0               31
    4:55 PM         8          2      0     0      0        2      5     0        4        9     17      0    0        6     2     0               55              489
    5:00 PM         4          0      0     0      1        1     13     0        5       11     21      0    0        5     0     0               61              518
    5:05 PM         7          2      0     0      0        9      5     0        2       11     18      0    0        0     0     0               54              518
    5:10 PM         8          0      0     0      1        1      2     0        3        9     18      0    0        1     1     0               44              527
    5:15 PM         3          0      0     0      1        1      8     0        7        3     24      0    0        2     0     0               49              536
    5:20 PM         7          1      0     0      0        3     10     0        1        7     19      0    0        4     0     0               52              551
    5:25 PM         5          1      1     0      0        4      6     0        3        6     19      0    0        4     0     0               49              555
    5:30 PM         3          2      0     0      1        0      4     0        3        8     11      0    0        4     0     0               36              553
    5:35 PM         6          0      0     0      2        1      8     0        3        8     13      0    0        5     0     0               46              563
    5:40 PM        10          2      0     0      0        1      3     0        3        7     12      0    0        3     1     0               42              565
    5:45 PM         7          2      0     0      0        2      3     0        1        8     10      0    0        2     0     0               35              554
    5:50 PM         6          2      0     0      0        0      2     0        4       11      8      0    0        6     0     0               39              562
    5:55 PM         9          1      1     0      0        0      7     0        3        9     12      0    0        1     0     0               43              550
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                   Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     72          8      0     0      8       44     60     0        48      92    240      0    0       12     4     0                      588
 Heavy Trucks       8          0      0            0        0      8               0       0      0           0        0     0                             16
  Pedestrians                  0                            0                              0                           0                                    0
    Bicycles       0           0      0            0        0      0              0        0      1           0        0     0                              1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:27 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                     Attachment 101B
                                                                    Application Materials
                                                                       Page 49 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: NW Natural Loading Area -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                     QC JOB #: 11218015
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                              DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0         0                       Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                    0.0        0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                      Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                      0    0
                                                                                                           0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0           NaN        0
                                                                                                                 0.0                      0.0
       0     0                      0    0
                                                                                                           0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0         0
                                                                                                                        0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                              0    0    0



                                                                                                                 0                          0

             0                      0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          0

                          2                                                                                              0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                    NA                                                                            NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count       NW Natural Loading Area    NW Natural Loading Area          SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)               (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U     Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM         1     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                2
    4:05 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:10 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:15 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      1      0    1        0     0     0                2
    4:20 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:25 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:30 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:35 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:40 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:45 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:50 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:55 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              4
    5:00 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              2
    5:05 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              2
    5:10 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              2
    5:15 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:20 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:25 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:30 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:35 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:40 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:45 PM         1     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                2              2
    5:50 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              2
    5:55 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              2
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                 Southbound                   Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U     Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles      0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                       0
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      0             0     0      0            0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians             0                          0                            0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles        0     0      0             0     0      0            0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 3:51 PM                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                              Attachment 101B
                                                             Application Materials
                                                                Page 50 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: E NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218009
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0          0                        Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                       0.0        0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 4:45 PM -- 5:00 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       1     0                       0     0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0           0.25        0
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       0     0                       0     0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     1    0     0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0          1
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                       0                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          1                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                     NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          E NW Natural Dwy             E NW Natural Dwy                 SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:20 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:55 PM        1      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                1              1
    5:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:20 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:55 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     4      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                       4
 Heavy Trucks      0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 3:51 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 51 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Mid NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218011
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0           0                       Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                         0.0         0.0

                     0     0     0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 4:35 PM -- 4:50 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       16    0                         0   0
                                                                                                                6.3    0.0                        0.0       0.0
             0            0.63         0
                                                                                                                       0.0                        0.0
       10    10                        0   4
                                                                                                                30.0   30.0                       0.0       0.0

                     16    0     4
                                                                                                                               6.3 0.0 0.0

                     10          20
                                                                                                                               30.0        5.0



                           0                                                                                                    0     0    0



                                                                                                                       0                            0

             0                         0                                                                               0                            0

                                                                                                                       0                            0

                           1                                                                                                    0     0    0




                          NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                       NA                                                                               NA                         NA




                          NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count         Mid NW Natural Dwy           Mid NW Natural Dwy                SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                     Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM         3     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   3
    4:05 PM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    1        0     0     0                   5
    4:10 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    1        0     0     0                   1
    4:15 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0
    4:20 PM         1     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   3
    4:25 PM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   1
    4:30 PM         0     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   2
    4:35 PM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      3      0    0        0     0     0                   4
    4:40 PM         3     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   5
    4:45 PM         3     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   3
    4:50 PM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   2
    4:55 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              29
    5:00 PM         3     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   4              30
    5:05 PM         3     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   5              30
    5:10 PM         0     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   3              32
    5:15 PM         1     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   2              34
    5:20 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              31
    5:25 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              30
    5:30 PM         0     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   1              29
    5:35 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              25
    5:40 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              20
    5:45 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   1              18
    5:50 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   2              18
    5:55 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              18
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                         Total
  All Vehicles     28     0      4     0        0       0      0     0        0        0    16       0    0        0     0     0                          48
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      0              0       0      0              0        0      8           0        0     0                                 8
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                       0
    Bicycles        0     0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 3:51 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 52 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: W NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218013
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0         0                         Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                       0.0        0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                      0      0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0           NaN        0
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       0     0                      0      0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0         0
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                      0                                                                                 0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          1                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                    NA                                                                                 NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          W NW Natural Dwy             W NW Natural Dwy                 SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:20 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:55 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:20 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:55 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                       0
 Heavy Trucks      0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 3:51 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 53 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 SB Ramps -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                                   QC JOB #: 11218004
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     1060             0                            Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                   4.0        0.0

                     568       4     488
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 12:00 PM -- 12:15 PM
                                                                                                                                    3.5 0.0 4.5


       1671   0                              0    1650
                                                                                                                       2.6   0.0                      0.0      3.0
              1147            0.94         1103
                                                                                                                             1.7                      2.2
       1590   443                          547    1635
                                                                                                                       2.0   2.9                      4.6      2.5

                          0    0      0
                                                                                                                                    0.0 0.0 0.0

                     994              0
                                                                                                                                    3.8        0.0



                               7                                                                                                     0    0    0



                                                                                                                             0                          0

              0                              0                                                                               0                          2

                                                                                                                             0                          0

                               1                                                                                                     0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                         NA




              NA                            NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                               NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                  I-5 SB Ramps                      I-5 SB Ramps              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period                    (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At      Left         Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U
   11:00 AM         0             0      0     0          32        0     34     0        0    90     36     0     34    60      0     0             286
   11:05 AM         0             0      0     0          27        2     40     0        0    72     33     0     32    78      0     0             284
   11:10 AM         0             0      0     0          44        0     53     0        0    66     39     0     44    82      0     0             328
   11:15 AM         0             0      0     0          42        1     47     0        0    70     42     0     41    79      0     0             322
   11:20 AM         0             0      0     0          41        0     40     0        0    67     33     0     51    92      0     0             324
   11:25 AM         0             0      0     0          37        0     49     0        0    65     37     0     39    82      0     0             309
   11:30 AM         0             0      0     0          33        0     51     0        0    66     33     0     36    88      0     0             307
   11:35 AM         0             0      0     0          46        0     49     0        0    84     38     0     40    72      0     0             329
   11:40 AM         0             0      0     0          49        0     47     0        0    87     39     0     40    99      0     0             361
   11:45 AM         0             0      0     0          43        0     78     0        0    75     35     0     51    96      0     0             378
   11:50 AM         0             0      0     0          41        0     58     0        0    87     39     0     34    92      0     0             351
   11:55 AM         0             0      0     0          32        0     58     0        0    67     34     0     57   103      0     0             351            3930
   12:00 PM         0             0      0     0          31        0     47     0        0    96     30     0     50   106      0     0             360            4004
   12:05 PM         0             0      0     0          43        2     47     0        0   123     40     0     50    84      0     0             389            4109
   12:10 PM         0             0      0     0          28        0     46     0        0   119     52     0     51    93      0     0             389            4170
   12:15 PM         0             0      0     0          55        0     47     0        0    91     37     0     45    88      0     0             363            4211
   12:20 PM         0             0      0     0          46        0     41     0        0   108     33     0     35    84      0     0             347            4234
   12:25 PM         0             0      0     0          38        1     40     0        0    87     33     0     36    93      0     0             328            4253
   12:30 PM         0             0      0     0          38        1     39     0        0    85     41     0     48    89      0     0             341            4287
   12:35 PM         0             0      0     0          41        0     47     0        0    78     29     0     44    96      0     0             335            4293
   12:40 PM         0             0      0     0          52        0     64     0        0    88     34     0     43   101      0     0             382            4314
   12:45 PM         0             0      0     0          44        0     57     0        0    93     34     0     37    94      0     0             359            4295
   12:50 PM         0             0      0     0          35        0     51     0        0    88     38     0     53    81      0     0             346            4290
   12:55 PM         0             0      0     0          37        0     42     0        0    91     42     0     55    94      0     0             361            4300
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                        Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates       Left         Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles      0             0      0     0         408        8    560     0        0 1352     488     0    604 1132       0     0                    4552
 Heavy Trucks       0             0      0                16        0     20              0    20     16           16    16      0                           104
  Pedestrians                     0                                 4                           0                         0                                   4
    Bicycles         0            0      0                 0        0      0              0     0      0            0     1      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:52 AM                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                             Attachment 101B
                                                                            Application Materials
                                                                               Page 54 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 NB Ramps -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                                QC JOB #: 11218006
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                      0          1067                           Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                   0.0        2.8

                      0    0      0
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 12:00 PM -- 12:15 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


      1675   506                        555    1766
                                                                                                                    2.7   2.0                      3.6      3.0
             1192         0.99          1211
                                                                                                                          2.6                      2.7
      1698   0                            0    1705
                                                                                                                    2.4   0.0                      0.0      2.7

                    464    6     513
                                                                                                                                 2.8 0.0 2.9

                      0          983
                                                                                                                                 0.0        2.8



                           4                                                                                                      0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             0                            0                                                                               0                          3

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                           6                                                                                                      0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                          NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count              I-5 NB Ramps                       I-5 NB Ramps              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period                (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left          Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right     U
   11:00 AM     33            2     29     0           0         0      0     0       37    79      0     0      0    59    38      0             277
   11:05 AM     33            0     47     0           0         0      0     0       37    72      0     0      0    78    27      0             294
   11:10 AM     38            0     42     0           0         0      0     0       33    93      0     0      0    86    48      0             340
   11:15 AM     42            0     42     0           0         0      0     0       34    82      0     0      0    96    42      0             338
   11:20 AM     39            0     32     0           0         0      0     0       26    92      0     0      0   101    36      0             326
   11:25 AM     47            0     47     0           0         0      0     0       28    75      0     0      0    57    42      0             296
   11:30 AM     37            0     46     0           0         0      0     0       30    59      0     0      0    84    51      0             307
   11:35 AM     31            0     42     0           0         0      0     0       46    82      0     0      0    79    54      0             334
   11:40 AM     52            0     49     0           0         0      0     0       46   106      0     0      0    82    37      0             372
   11:45 AM     52            0     52     0           0         0      0     0       35    87      0     0      0   106    39      0             371
   11:50 AM     41            0     37     0           0         0      0     0       40    90      0     0      0    98    52      0             358
   11:55 AM     44            2     55     0           0         0      0     0       34    67      0     0      0    97    40      0             339            3952
   12:00 PM     41            1     53     0           0         0      0     0       36    85      0     0      0   107    55      0             378            4053
   12:05 PM     41            1     31     0           0         0      0     0       44   114      0     0      0    95    45      0             371            4130
   12:10 PM     40            0     38     0           0         0      0     0       45   108      0     0      0   104    40      0             375            4165
   12:15 PM     32            1     44     0           0         0      0     0       41   105      0     0      0   113    30      0             366            4193
   12:20 PM     40            0     32     0           0         0      0     0       54   104      0     0      0    78    46      0             354            4221
   12:25 PM     44            0     46     0           0         0      0     0       38   102      0     0      0    89    52      0             371            4296
   12:30 PM     34            1     49     0           0         0      0     0       37    89      0     0      0   103    40      0             353            4342
   12:35 PM     46            0     45     0           0         0      0     0       33    91      0     0      0   101    48      0             364            4372
   12:40 PM     36            1     46     0           0         0      0     0       48   107      0     0      0   100    47      0             385            4385
   12:45 PM     38            0     38     0           0         0      0     0       37   107      0     0      0   114    47      0             381            4395
   12:50 PM     31            1     43     0           0         0      0     0       46    97      0     0      0   103    53      0             374            4411
   12:55 PM     41            0     48     0           0         0      0     0       47    83      0     0      0   104    52      0             375            4447
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                         Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left         Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles 488            8    488     0           0         0      0     0      500 1228       0     0      0 1224    560      0                    4496
 Heavy Trucks   16            0     20                 0         0      0              8    28      0            0    16    20                            108
  Pedestrians                 0                                  4                           0                         0                                   4
    Bicycles     0            0      0                 0         0      0              0     0      0            0     1      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:52 AM                                             SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                          Attachment 101B
                                                                         Application Materials
                                                                            Page 55 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 65th Ave -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                             QC JOB #: 11218008
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                   506          452                          Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                  2.4        1.3

                   312 52 142
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 12:00 PM -- 12:15 PM
                                                                                                                             1.3 5.8 3.5


      1785   326                       54   1197
                                                                                                                3.2   0.9                      0.0      3.8
             845         0.99         999
                                                                                                                      3.7                      4.5
      1677   506                      144   1033
                                                                                                                2.9   3.0                      0.7      3.5

                   473 73       46
                                                                                                                             1.9 4.1 0.0

                   702          592
                                                                                                                             2.7        2.0



                          5                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             7                          5                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          4                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                       NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count             SW 65th Ave                      SW 65th Ave              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period              (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left        Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U
   11:00 AM     25          5      3     0           2       2     12     0       17    52     39     1     11    62      2     0             233
   11:05 AM     32          3      4     0           1       2     11     0       23    68     24     0      8    64      0     0             240
   11:10 AM     37          2      5     0           3       2     30     0       19    80     31     0      7    72      5     0             293
   11:15 AM     27          3      3     0           9       2      8     0       24    78     26     0      4    92      2     0             278
   11:20 AM     40          5      3     0           4       2     15     0       18    73     34     0      9    79      8     0             290
   11:25 AM     19          8      6     0           5       4     17     0       25    59     39     1     13    77      4     0             277
   11:30 AM     41          2      3     0          12       1     22     0       16    64     31     0     14    69      4     0             279
   11:35 AM     39          7      3     0           9       3     21     0        9    49     25     0      9    69      4     0             247
   11:40 AM     31          1      5     0           6       4     16     0       39    98     40     1      9    88      6     0             344
   11:45 AM     40          8      5     0           9       3     21     0       21    51     42     1     16    51      1     0             269
   11:50 AM     24          9      3     0           4       5     30     0       29    72     40     1     11   100      7     0             335
   11:55 AM     53          3      5     0           8       3     21     0       24    52     39     0     13    67      5     0             293            3378
   12:00 PM     49          5      1     0           7       4     31     0       34    63     35     0     20    76      4     0             329            3474
   12:05 PM     28          5      3     0          10       3     24     0       31    78     47     0     15   110      9     0             363            3597
   12:10 PM     49         10      4     0          12       2     28     0       21    58     43     0      7    70      5     0             309            3613
   12:15 PM     22          5      4     0          12       7     23     0       40    77     56     1     13    73      6     0             339            3674
   12:20 PM     33          5      2     0          20       6     25     0       15    65     33     0      7    66      1     0             278            3662
   12:25 PM     62          4      7     0          13       4     18     0       24    76     42     0      9    78      3     0             340            3725
   12:30 PM     36          4      5     0           9       2     25     0       33    53     43     0     14    67      3     0             294            3740
   12:35 PM     27          2      3     0           7       4     37     0       29   100     33     0     13   113      3     0             371            3864
   12:40 PM     39          8      4     0          14       1     26     0       21    66     46     0      7    80      4     0             316            3836
   12:45 PM     41          7      4     0          11       7     28     0       36    75     40     0     13    81      6     0             349            3916
   12:50 PM     30          6      5     0          13       6     24     0       22    84     39     0     13   105      7     0             354            3935
   12:55 PM     57         12      4     0          14       6     23     0       19    50     49     0     13    80      3     0             330            3972
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                       Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left       Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles 504         80     32     0         116      36    332     0      344   796    500     0    168 1024     72      0                    4004
 Heavy Trucks   16         12      0                12       4      4              4    24     16            4    28      0                           124
  Pedestrians               0                                8                           4                         4                                   16
    Bicycles     0          0      0                 0       0      0              0     0      0            0     0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:52 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                      Attachment 101B
                                                                     Application Materials
                                                                        Page 56 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 65th Ave -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                           QC JOB #: 11218002
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                       73          90                        Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                       4.1        6.7

                       66    4     3
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 12:00 PM -- 12:15 PM
                                                                                                                                  4.5 0.0 0.0


       208   78                           3   45
                                                                                                                     2.9   7.7                      0.0       0.0
             63             0.91         40
                                                                                                                           6.3                      0.0
       230   89                           2   68
                                                                                                                     5.2   2.2                      0.0       7.4

                    102      9     2
                                                                                                                                  2.9 0.0 50.0

                       95          113
                                                                                                                                  2.1        3.5



                             1                                                                                                     0    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                          1

             1                            0                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                             0                                                                                                     0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                SW 65th Ave                   SW 65th Ave                    SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
   11:00 AM         7          0      0     0       0        1      2     0         3       6      4      0    0        1     0     0               24
   11:05 AM         9          1      0     0       0        2      4     0         3       6      7      0    0        5     1     0               38
   11:10 AM         3          1      0     0       1        0      4     0         2       3      7      0    0        7     0     0               28
   11:15 AM        11          2      0     0       0        0      4     0         3       1      5      0    0        0     0     0               26
   11:20 AM         6          0      0     0       0        0      6     0         1       4     11      0    0        4     0     0               32
   11:25 AM         7          2      0     0       1        1      5     0         2       3      5      0    0        6     0     0               32
   11:30 AM         9          0      1     0       0        2      4     0         2       3      6      0    0        4     0     0               31
   11:35 AM        11          1      0     0       1        3      8     0         6       2      7      0    0        7     1     0               47
   11:40 AM         8          0      0     0       1        1      8     0         5       5     10      0    0        3     0     0               41
   11:45 AM        14          1      0     0       0        0      9     0         7       3      7      0    0        5     0     0               46
   11:50 AM         6          3      0     0       0        1      6     0         9       7      6      0    0        5     0     0               43
   11:55 AM         8          2      0     0       0        2      5     0         6       3     11      0    0        7     0     0               44              432
   12:00 PM         7          0      0     0       1        0     11     0         6       6      9      0    0        3     0     0               43              451
   12:05 PM         9          1      1     0       0        1      9     0         9       2      6      0    0        1     0     0               39              452
   12:10 PM         8          1      0     0       0        0      9     0         4       6     11      0    2        3     1     0               45              469
   12:15 PM         7          2      0     0       1        0      2     0         6       3      5      0    0        3     0     0               29              472
   12:20 PM        12          0      1     0       0        1      4     0         4       8     11      0    0        3     0     0               44              484
   12:25 PM         8          2      0     0       0        0      9     0        10       2      3      0    0        4     0     0               38              490
   12:30 PM         7          1      0     0       1        0      4     0        12       5      6      0    0        3     1     0               40              499
   12:35 PM        10          0      0     0       0        1      0     0         5       7      6      0    0        3     0     0               32              484
   12:40 PM         5          0      0     0       0        0      3     0         5       2      5      0    0        3     0     0               23              466
   12:45 PM         6          0      0     0       0        1      3     0         3       6     10      0    0        6     0     0               35              455
   12:50 PM        13          2      0     0       0        0      3     0         9       6      7      0    0        5     1     0               46              458
   12:55 PM        10          0      0     0       0        0      9     0         5      10     10      0    0        3     0     0               47              461
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     96          8      4     0       4        4    116     0        76      56    104      0    8       28     4     0                      508
 Heavy Trucks       4          0      0             0        0      4               8       4      4           0        0     0                             24
  Pedestrians                  0                             0                              0                           0                                    0
    Bicycles       0           0      0             0        0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:52 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                      Attachment 101B
                                                                     Application Materials
                                                                        Page 57 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: NW Natural Loading Area -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                       QC JOB #: 11218016
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0          0                     Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                        0.0         0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                     Peak 15-Min: 12:45 PM -- 1:00 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                       0   0
                                                                                                           0.0     0.0                         0.0       0.0
             0           0.25        0
                                                                                                                   0.0                         0.0
       1     1                       0   0
                                                                                                           100.0   100.0                       0.0       0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

                     1          0
                                                                                                                           100.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                 0      0    0



                                                                                                                   0                             0

             0                       0                                                                             0                             0

                                                                                                                   0                             0

                          0                                                                                                 0      0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                     NA                                                                             NA                          NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count       NW Natural Loading Area    NW Natural Loading Area          SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                       Total       Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)               (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                   Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U     Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
   11:00 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    1        0     0     0                     1
   11:05 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:10 AM         1     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     1
   11:15 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:20 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:25 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:30 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:35 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:40 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:45 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:50 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:55 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              2
   12:00 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              1
   12:05 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              1
   12:10 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:15 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:20 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:25 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:30 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:35 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:40 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:45 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:50 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:55 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                     1              1
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                 Southbound                   Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U     Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                           Total
  All Vehicles      0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      4      0    0        0     0     0                            4
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      0             0     0      0            0        0      4           0        0     0                                  4
  Pedestrians             0                          0                            0                           0                                        0
    Bicycles        0     0      0             0     0      0            0        0      0           0        0     0                                  0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 4:03 PM                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                              Attachment 101B
                                                             Application Materials
                                                                Page 58 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: E NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218010
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0          0                       Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                       0.0        0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                       Peak 15-Min: 12:10 PM -- 12:25 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       1     0                       0     0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0           0.25        0
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       0     0                       0     0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     1    0     0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0          1
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                       0                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                     NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          E NW Natural Dwy             E NW Natural Dwy                 SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
   11:00 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:05 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:10 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:15 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:20 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:25 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:30 AM        1      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                1
   11:35 AM        1      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                2
   11:40 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:45 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:50 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:55 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:20 PM        1      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                1              4
   12:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              4
   12:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
   12:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
   12:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
   12:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
   12:55 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     4      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                       4
 Heavy Trucks      0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 4:03 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 59 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Mid NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218012
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0           0                      Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                         0.0         0.0

                     0     0     0
                                                       Peak 15-Min: 12:15 PM -- 12:30 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       21    0                         0   2
                                                                                                                0.0    0.0                        0.0       0.0
             0            0.65         0
                                                                                                                       0.0                        0.0
       16    16                        2   0
                                                                                                                12.5   12.5                       0.0       0.0

                     21    0     0
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                     18          21
                                                                                                                               11.1        0.0



                           0                                                                                                    0     0    0



                                                                                                                       0                            0

             0                         0                                                                               0                            0

                                                                                                                       0                            0

                           0                                                                                                    0     0    0




                          NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                       NA                                                                               NA                         NA




                          NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count         Mid NW Natural Dwy           Mid NW Natural Dwy                SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                     Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
   11:00 AM         3     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   4
   11:05 AM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   2
   11:10 AM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    1        0     0     0                   3
   11:15 AM         3     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   3
   11:20 AM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0
   11:25 AM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   3
   11:30 AM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   2
   11:35 AM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      3      0    1        0     0     0                   6
   11:40 AM         2     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   3
   11:45 AM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0
   11:50 AM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   2
   11:55 AM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   1              29
   12:00 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              25
   12:05 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    1        0     0     0                   1              24
   12:10 PM         4     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   6              27
   12:15 PM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      3      0    0        0     0     0                   5              29
   12:20 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    1        0     0     0                   2              31
   12:25 PM         6     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   8              36
   12:30 PM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   3              37
   12:35 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   1              32
   12:40 PM         5     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   7              36
   12:45 PM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   2              38
   12:50 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              36
   12:55 PM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      3      0    0        0     0     0                   4              39
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                         Total
  All Vehicles     32     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0    24       0    4        0     0     0                          60
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                                 0
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                       0
    Bicycles        0     0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 4:03 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 60 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: W NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218014
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0         0                        Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                       0.0        0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                       Peak 15-Min: 12:00 PM -- 12:15 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                      0      0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0           NaN        0
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       0     0                      0      0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0         0
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                      0                                                                                 0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                    NA                                                                                 NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          W NW Natural Dwy             W NW Natural Dwy                 SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
   11:00 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:05 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:10 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:15 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:20 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:25 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:30 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:35 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:40 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:45 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:50 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:55 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:20 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:55 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                       0
 Heavy Trucks      0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 4:03 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 61 of 70
