           


                                           TUALATIN CITY COUNCIL
                                              Monday, February 24, 2014
                                                CITY COUNCIL CHAMBERS
                                                18880 SW Martinazzi Avenue
                                                   Tualatin, OR 97062
                                             WORK SESSION begins at 5:30 p.m.
                                            BUSINESS MEETING begins at 7:00 p.m.
                                                                  


                                                         Mayor   Lou Ogden

                                             Council President Monique Beikman

                           Councilor Wade Brooksby                   Councilor Frank Bubenik

                           Councilor Joelle Davis                    Councilor Nancy Grimes

                                                     Councilor Ed Truax
                                                                  
Welcome! By your presence in the City Council Chambers, you are participating in the process
of representative government. To encourage that participation, the City Council has specified a
time for citizen comments on its agenda -  Item C, following Announcements, at which time
citizens may address the Council concerning any item not on the agenda with each speaker
limited to three minutes,  unless the time limit is extended by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council.

Copies of staff reports or other written documentation relating to each item of business referred
to on this agenda are available for review on the City website at 
www.tualatinoregon.gov/meetings, the Library located at 18878 SW Martinazzi Avenue, and on
file in the Office of the City Manager for public inspection. Any person with a question
concerning any agenda item may call Administration at 503.691.3011 to make an inquiry
concerning the nature of the item described on the agenda.

In compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, if you need special assistance to
participate in this meeting, you should contact Administration at 503.691.3011. Notification
thirty-six (36) hours prior to the meeting will enable the City to make reasonable arrangements to
assure accessibility to this meeting.

Council meetings are televised live the day of the meeting through Washington County Cable
Access Channel 28. The replay schedule for Council meetings can be found at www.tvctv.org.
Council meetings can also be viewed by live streaming video on the day of the meeting at 
www.tualatinoregon.gov/meetings.

Your City government welcomes your interest and hopes you will attend the City of Tualatin
Council meetings often.
                       PROCESS FOR LEGISLATIVE PUBLIC HEARINGS
                        PROCESS     FOR LEGISLATIVE PUBLIC HEARINGS
A legislative public hearing is typically held on matters which affect the general welfare of the
entire City rather than a specific piece of property.
      1. Mayor opens the public hearing and identifies the subject.
      2. A staff member presents the staff report.
      3. Public testimony is taken.
      4. Council then asks questions of staff, the applicant, or any member of the
          public who testified.
      5. When the Council has finished questions, the Mayor closes the public
          hearing.
      6. When the public hearing is closed, Council will then deliberate to a decision
          and a motion will be made to either approve, deny, or continue the public
          hearing.
      
                       PROCESS FOR QUASI-JUDICIAL PUBLIC HEARINGS
A quasi-judicial public hearing is typically held for annexations, planning district changes,
conditional use permits, comprehensive plan changes, and appeals from subdivisions,
partititions and architectural review.
       1. Mayor opens the public hearing and identifies the case to be considered.
       2. A staff member presents the staff report.
       3. Public testimony is taken:
             a) In support of the application
             b) In opposition or neutral
       4. Council then asks questions of staff, the applicant, or any member of the
           public who testified.
       5. When Council has finished its questions, the Mayor closes the public
           hearing.
       6. When the public hearing is closed, Council will then deliberate to a decision
           and a motion will be made to either approve, approve with conditions, or
           deny the application, or continue the public hearing. 
      
                             TIME LIMITS FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS
The purpose of time limits on public hearing testimony is to provide all provided all interested
persons with an adequate opportunity to present and respond to testimony. All persons providing
testimony shall be limited to 3 minutes, subject to the right of the Mayor to amend or waive the
time limits.
                             EXECUTIVE SESSION INFORMATION
An Executive Session is a meeting of the City Council that is closed to the public to allow the City
Council to discuss certain confidential matters. An Executive Session may be conducted as a
separate meeting or as a portion of the regular Council meeting. No final decisions or actions
may be made in Executive Session. In many, but not all, circumstances, members of the news
media may attend an Executive Session.

The City Council may go into Executive Session for certain reasons specified by Oregon law.
These reasons include, but are not limited to: ORS 192.660(2)(a) employment of personnel;
ORS 192.660(2)(b) dismissal or discipline of personnel; ORS 192.660(2)(d) labor relations; ORS
192.660(2)(e) real property transactions; ORS 192.660(2)(f) information or records exempt by
law from public inspection; ORS 192.660(2)(h) current litigation or litigation likely to be filed; and
ORS 192.660(2)(i) employee performance of chief executive officer.
                       
                      OFFICIAL AGENDA OF THE TUALATIN CITY COUNCIL MEETING FOR FEBRUARY 24, 2014




                                                                                                                                

A.                CALL TO ORDER
                  Pledge of Allegiance
 

B.                ANNOUNCEMENTS
 

               
     1.           Proclamation Declaring February 9-15, 2014 Future Business Leaders of America
                  Week
 

               
     2.           Proclamation Declaring March 2014 American Red Cross Month in the City of
                  Tualatin
 

               
     3.           Proclamation Declaring Karen Miller as Tualatin's "2013 Employee of the Year"
 

     4.           Employee Introduction- Stephanie Marcinkiewicz, Building Department Permit
                  Technician
 

C.                CITIZEN COMMENTS
                  This section of the agenda allows citizens to address the Council regarding any issue not on the
                  agenda. The duration for each individual speaking is limited to 3 minutes. Matters requiring further
                  investigation or detailed answers will be referred to City staff for follow-up and report at a future meeting.
 

D.                CONSENT AGENDA
                  The Consent Agenda will be enacted with one vote. The Mayor will first ask staff, the public and
                  Councilors if there is anyone who wishes to remove any item from the Consent Agenda for discussion
                  and consideration. The matters removed from the Consent Agenda will be considered individually at the
                  end of this Agenda under, I) Items Removed from the Consent Agenda. The entire Consent Agenda,
                  with the exception of items removed from the Consent Agenda to be discussed, is then voted upon by
                  roll call under one motion.
 

               
     1.           Consideration of Approval of the Minutes for the City Council Regular Meeting of
                  February 10, 2014
 

               
     2.           Consideration of Recommendations from the Council Committee on Advisory
                  Appointments
 

               
     3.           Consideration of Approval of Liquor License Renewals for 2014
 

               
     4.           Consideration of Resolution No. 5184-14 Authorizing the City Manager to Execute
                  Documents Related to the Dedication of Right-of-Way for SW Seneca Street and
                  Street A
 

E.                SPECIAL REPORTS
 

           
     1.       Quarterly Financial Update
 

F.            PUBLIC HEARINGS ­ Quasi-Judicial
 

           
     1.       Consideration of a Conditional Use Permit to Allow Rental and Leasing of Autos and
              Light Trucks in the Light Manufacturing (ML) Planning District for U-Haul at 7100 SW
              McEwan Road (Tax Map 2S1 13DD, Tax Lots 900, 1000, 1100, 1200, 1600, and
              1700, and Tax Map 2S1 24AA, Tax Lot 5500) (CUP-13-05)
 

G.            GENERAL BUSINESS
 

           
     1.       Consideration of Resolution 5185-14 Adopting the Tualatin Tomorrow Vision Plan
 

           
     2.       Consideration of Ordinance 1366-14 Relating to the Annual Report of the Arts
              Advisory Committee; and Amending the Tualatin Municipal Code (TMC) 11-05
 

           
     3.       Consideration of Ordinance No. 1368-14 Relating to Medical Marijuana Facilities;
              Establishing New Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 9-08; and Declaring an
              Emergency
 

           
     4.       Consideration of Ordinance No. 1367-14 An Ordinance Relating to the
              Transportation System Plan; Amending the Tualatin Development Code (TDC)
              11.650 and the 2012 Tualatin Transportation System Plan Adopted February 25,
              2013
 

H.            ITEMS REMOVED FROM CONSENT AGENDA 
              Items removed from the Consent Agenda will be discussed individually at this time. The Mayor may
              impose a time limit on speakers addressing these issues.
 

I.            COMMUNICATIONS FROM COUNCILORS
 

J.            ADJOURNMENT
 
                     
City Council Meeting                                                      B. 1.
Meeting Date:       02/24/2014                   
ANNOUNCEMENTS: Proclamation Declaring February 9-15, 2014 Future Business Leaders of
                    America Week

ANNOUNCEMENTS
Proclamation Declaring February 9-15, 2014 Future Business Leaders of America Week


Proclamation
                                     Proclamation
      Proclamation Declaring February 9-15, 2014 Future Business Leaders
                              of America Week

             WHEREAS, Future Business Leaders of America is a nonprofit educational organization whose
     first chapter was established in Johnson City, Tennessee in 1942 and has grown to encompass over
     250,000 members nationwide; and

             WHEREAS, FBLA promotes high school students to experience the world of business through
     the key pillars of service, education and progress that reflect the social, professional, and community
     service experience provided; and

             WHEREAS, FBLA helps develop vocational and career supportive competencies and promotes
     civic and personal responsibility; and

              WHEREAS, the Tualatin High School FBLA club is the largest club at Tualatin High School and
     is the largest FBLA club in the state of Oregon; and

            WHEREAS the Tualatin High School FBLA members attend the State Business Leadership
     Conference, bringing home the past three Chapter of the Year awards as a testament to superior
     community involvement and participation of members in competitions and business activities; and

              WHEREAS recent community service has included raising close to $2,000 for March of Dimes
     for Doernbecher's Children's Hospital; designing a campus-wide food drive to provide a complete
     Thanksgiving meal for 10 families in Tualatin High School, and establishing a Philippines hurricane
     relief supply drive; and

            WHEREAS, members of the Tualatin High School FBLA club have received national attention
     through the years by placing in the top ten for their business competitions in the National Leadership
     Conference.

           NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT PROCLAIMED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TUALATIN,
     Oregon that:

            Tualatin High School Future Business Leaders of America club is commended on their
     achievements, service, and community involvement and that the week of February 9 ­ 15, 2014 is
     declared FUTURE BUSINESS LEADERS OF AMERICAN Week with February 10, 2014 declared as
     TUALATIN FUTURE BUSINESS LEADERS OF AMERICA DAY.

IN          INTRODUCED AND ADOPTED this 24th day of February, 2014.

                                                         CITY OF TUALATIN, OREGON

                                                         BY ____________________________
                                                                     Mayor
                                                         ATTEST:

                                                         BY ____________________________
                                                                     City Recorder
                     
City Council Meeting                                                   B. 2.
Meeting Date:       02/24/2014                  
ANNOUNCEMENTS: Proclamation Declaring March 2014 American Red Cross Month in the
                    City of Tualatin

ANNOUNCEMENTS
Proclamation Declaring March 2014 American Red Cross Month in the City of Tualatin


American Red Cross Month Proclamation
                               Proclamation
     Proclamation Declaring March 2014 American Red Cross Month
                        in the City of Tualatin

            WHEREAS American Red Cross Month is a time to recognize and thank our everyday
     heroes ­ those ordinary people who perform extraordinary acts to aid others in need; and

             WHEREAS we would like to recognize our heroes in the City of Tualatin who work
     tirelessly to help people affected by disasters, donate blood to save lives and provide comfort
     and compassion to individuals in crisis. They provide round-the-clock support to members of the
     military, veterans and their families, and teach lifesaving classes in CPR, aquatics safety and first
     aid; and

             WHEREAS across the country and around the world, the Red Cross responds to tragedies
     such as home fires, floods and natural disasters; and who assist members of the armed forces,
     their families and veterans. In Oregon, nearly 2,000 volunteers stand ready to help when
     disaster strikes; and

            WHEREAS the month of March is dedicated to all those who support the Red Cross
     mission to prevent and alleviate human suffering in the face of emergencies. Our community
     depends on the Red Cross, which relies on donations of time, money and blood to fulfill its
     humanitarian mission.

          NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT PROCLAIMED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
     TUALATIN, Oregon that:

            The citizens of Tualatin are hereby encouraged to join in observance of American Red
     Cross Month.

IN          INTRODUCED AND ADOPTED this 24th day of February, 2014.

                                                        CITY OF TUALATIN, OREGON

                                                        BY ____________________________
                                                                   Mayor
                                                        ATTEST:

                                                        BY ____________________________
                                                                   City Recorder
                     
City Council Meeting                                                       B. 3.
Meeting Date:       02/24/2014                    
ANNOUNCEMENTS: Proclamation Declaring Karen Miller as Tualatin's "2013 Employee of the
                    Year"

ANNOUNCEMENTS
Proclamation Declaring Karen Miller as Tualatin's "2013 Employee of the Year"


Proclamation
                                      Proclamation
                      Proclamation Declaring Karen Miller as Tualatin's
                                 "2013 Employee of the Year"

             WHEREAS, the Employee of the Year program is designed to recognize the work and actions which
     bring credit to the City and improve our ability to deliver excellent service to Tualatin's customers; and

           WHEREAS, Karen Miller was selected as Tualatin's 2013 Employee of the Year by the Employee
     Engagement Krew (EEK!); and

            WHEREAS, Karen Miller was hired on December 4, 2000 as an Accounting Technician in the
     Finance Department, responsible for handling the City's payroll functions; and

            WHEREAS Karen is recognized as a team player who works with everyone to provide them with
     any payroll information they need, not making people jump through hoops or passing the buck; she is
     committed to providing the best possible customer service; and

            WHEREAS Karen always stands ready to help; she is not afraid to research and gather the
     information needed to answer questions; she streamlines procedures when possible to save time; and

             WHEREAS Karen is always willing to do her part in any project; she is an incredibly hard worker
     and is respected for her quality work; she is willing to try new things and volunteers for committees and
     projects including assisting the City of West Linn for a few months when they were without payroll staff
     and helped train the new staff person; and

             WHEREAS Karen seeks out opportunities to do her job better by researching and educating herself
     on the latest trends, staying up to date on software changes, new tax laws, and other job-specific
     information; and

             WHEREAS, Karen demonstrates Tualatin's core values of TEAMWORK, RESPECT, ONE CITY,
     EMPOWERMENT, PROBLEM SOLVING, CUSTOMER SERVICE and being NON-BUREAUCRATIC in a
     multitude of ways every day.

            NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT PROCLAIMED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TUALATIN,
     Oregon that:

            Karen Miller is named the "2013 City of Tualatin Employee of the Year.

IN          INTRODUCED AND ADOPTED this 24th day of February, 2014.

                                                           CITY OF TUALATIN, OREGON

                                                           BY ____________________________
                                                                       Mayor
                                                           ATTEST:

                                                           BY ____________________________
                                                                       City Recorder
TO:            Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council

THROUGH:       Sherilyn Lombos

FROM:          Nicole Morris, Deputy City Recorder

DATE:          02/24/2014

SUBJECT:       Consideration of Approval of the Minutes for the City Council Regular Meeting of
               February 10, 2014


ISSUE BEFORE THE COUNCIL:
The issue before the Council is to approve the minutes for the City Council Regular Meeting of
February 10, 2014.

RECOMMENDATION:
Staff respectfully recommends that the Council adopt the attached minutes.


Attachments:      City Council Meeting Minutes February 10, 2014
  


   
                     OFFICIAL MINUTES OF THE TUALATIN CITY COUNCIL MEETING FOR
                     FEBRUARY 10, 2014 


 


    Present: Mayor Lou Ogden; Council President Monique Beikman; Councilor Wade Brooksby;
             Councilor Frank Bubenik; Councilor Joelle Davis; Councilor Nancy Grimes; Councilor
             Ed Truax 
    Staff    City Manager Sherilyn Lombos; City Attorney Sean Brady; Assistant City Manager
    Present: Alice Cannon; Community Services Director Paul Hennon; Finance Director Don
             Hudson; Deputy City Manager Sara Singer; Planning Manager Aquilla Hurd-Ravich;
             Deputy City Recorder Nicole Morris; Information Services Manager Lance Harris;
             Assistant Planner Colin Cortes; Associate Planner Cindy Hahn; Parks and Recreation
             Manager Carl Switzer; Engineering Manager Kaaren Hofmann; Teen Program
             Specialist Julie Ludemann 
 


                                                                                                                          

A.             CALL TO ORDER
               Pledge of Allegiance
 
 
               Mayor Ogden called the meeting to order at 7:03 p.m.
 

B.             ANNOUNCEMENTS
 
                                                                                                                               
      1.       Tualatin Youth Advisory Council update for February, 2014
 
 
               Members of the Youth Advisory Committee (YAC) presented a Power Point on their
               latest activities and upcoming events. YAC has begun revising and updating
               curriculum for their annual Project FRIENDS workshop tentatively scheduled for
               May 23. Other upcoming projects include a Youth and Elected Leader Social, Teen
               Extravaganza, and preparation for the Crawfish Festival and Movies on the
               Commons.
 

C.             CITIZEN COMMENTS
               This section of the agenda allows citizens to address the Council regarding any issue not on the
               agenda. The duration for each individual speaking is limited to 3 minutes. Matters requiring further
               investigation or detailed answers will be referred to City staff for follow-up and report at a future
               meeting.
 

D.             CONSENT AGENDA
               The Consent Agenda will be enacted with one vote. The Mayor will first ask staff, the public and
               Councilors if there is anyone who wishes to remove any item from the Consent Agenda for discussion
               and consideration. The matters removed from the Consent Agenda will be considered individually at
               the end of this Agenda under, I) Items Removed from the Consent Agenda. The entire Consent
               Agenda, with the exception of items removed from the Consent Agenda to be discussed, is then voted
               upon by roll call under one motion.
 


February 10, 2014
1 of 7 
  
 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Nancy
           Grimes to approve the consent agenda. 
 
           Vote: 7 - 0 MOTION CARRIED
                                                                                                    
     1.    Consideration of Approval of the Minutes for the City Council Work Session and
           Regular Meeting of January 27, 2014
 
                                                                                                    
     2.    Consideration of the 2013 Tualatin Development Commission Annual Financial
           Report
 
                                                                                                    
     3.    Consideration of Resolution No. 5180-14 Approving with Conditions, the
           Architectural Review Application for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center Located at
           7455-7925 SW Nyberg Street  (Tax Map 2S1 24A, Tax Lots 1601, 1602, 1900, 2502,
           2506, 2507, 2508, and 2700; Tax Map 2S1 24B, Tax Lots 2000, 2001, and 2100
           (AR-13-07)
 
                                                                                                    
     4.    Consideration of Resolution No. 5179-14 Approving with Conditions, a Public
           Utilities Decision for the Nyberg Rivers Shopping Center Development Located at
           7455-7925 SW Nyberg Street (Tax Map 2S1 24A, Tax Lots 1601, 1602, 1900, 2502,
           2506, 2507, 2508, and 1700; Tax Map 2S1 24B, Tax Lots 2000, 2001, and 2100)
 
                                                                                                    
     5.    Consideration of Approval of a New Liquor License Application for Gallardo Inc.
           d.b.a. Super Mercado la Montana 3
 
                                                                                                    
     6.    Consideration of Resolution No. 5183-14 Authorizing the City Manager to Sign
           a Contract for Community Development Software with CRW Systems, Inc.
 

E.         SPECIAL REPORTS
 
                                                                                                    
     1.    2013 Annual Report of the Tualatin Park Advisory Committee
 
 
           Parks and Recreation Manager Carl Switzer introduced Tualatin Parks Advisory
           Committee Chair Dennis Wells. Chair Wells presented the Tualatin Parks Advisory
           Committee 2013 Annual Report. The report covered actions and accomplishments
           from the past year and their 2014 action plan. The committee recommended that
           the City move forward with an update to the Parks and Recreation Master Plan and
           take appropriate action to see the shared pathway serving the Tualatin River
           Greenway Trail is constructed as quickly as possible to promote safe circulation and
           connectivity to the east side of Tualatin.

           Mayor Ogden thanked the committee for their hard work throughout the year.

           Community Services Director Paul Hennon announced that Parks and Recreation
           Manager Switzer had accepted a position with another jurisdiction. He wished him
           well.
 

     2.    Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue Annual State of the District Presentation
 
 
           Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue (TVFR) Chief Mike Duyck presented an update.


February 10, 2014
2 of 7 
  
 
           Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue (TVFR) Chief Mike Duyck presented an update.
           TVFR responded to 2,500 incidents within the City of Tualatin last year and 8 out of
           10 calls were emergency medical related. TVFR offers many services including
           HazMat, Technical Rescue, and Swift Water Rescue teams. Many public safety
           campaigns occurred over the past year with 60,000 people participating in these
           risk reduction activities to help promote a safer community. TVFR is current
           working  on a replacement levy bond that will be on the May 2014 ballot. The bond
           would retain 42 firefighter medics and add 32 new firefighter medics, as well as add
           three new stations to the community over the next five years.

           Councilor Bubenik asked about the potential for increased staffing at the local
           station. Chief Dyuck responded that TVFR closely monitors response demand in
           the area and that the increase in call volume is comfortably absorbed at current
           staffing levels.

           Mayor Ogden asked what the average call response time is. Chief Duyck noted that
           the average call time is 6 to 8 minutes.

           Mayor Ogden thanked TVFR for their service and dedication to the City of Tualatin.
 

F.         PUBLIC HEARINGS ­ Legislative or Other
 
                                                                                                        
     2.    Consideration of Ordinance No. 1367-14 to Modify the Transportation System Plan
           to Comply with the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA) Opinion and Order
 
 
           Associate Planner Cindy Hahn and Planning Manager Aquilla Hurd-Ravich
           presented the staff report for Ordinance No. 1367-14 modifying the Transportation
           System Plan (TSP) to comply with the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA) Opinion
           and Order. Associate Planner Hahn noted the decision came from an appeal filed
           regarding the City's 2012 TSP. LUBA found only one of the eight appeals to be
           affirmed. The remanded issue focused on the Ice Age Tonquin Train and Tonquin
           Trail Master Plan. LUBA found the trail, as a whole, constitutes a "park" per Metro
           Code (MC) and the Tualatin Development Code (TDC). Associate Planner Hahn
           stated the City has responded to the remand order by preparing a draft ordinance to
           amend the TSP and the TDC to remove all specific references to the Ice Age
           Tonquin Trail.

           PUBLIC COMMENT
           Support
           None

           Opposed
           Wendie Kellington submitted materials for the record. Ms. Kellington requested
           Council modify the proposed amendments to make clear that the Ice Age Tonquin
           Trail and all other regional trails are prohibited in the Tonquin Industrial Group (TIG)
           Area and the  Regionally Significant Industrial Area (RSIA).

           Mark Brown stated the Tonquin Trail as it currently stands conflicts with heavy truck
           traffic, future development in the industrial area, and hinders the ability to add a
           railroad spur in the future to the area.

February 10, 2014
3 of 7 
  


           Henry Stukey requested the Council protect and preserve the RSIA. He would like
           the Council to look carefully at the issues the TIG has presented before making a
           decision.

           Nick Storie stated his disappointment in the Council's decision and is no longer
           willing to sell his property to be used as part of the Tonquin Trail.

           Steve McGuire stated the approach the City is taking to address the remand order
           for LUBA is unfair. He read a letter into the record from Tony Reesers, Senior Vice
           President of Kidder Matthew.

           Linda Moholt spoke in support of the Tonquin Trail and concerns presented by the
           TIG. She would like to see the trail relocated as to not affect the growth potential in
           the industrial area.

           Council Questions
           Mayor Ogden asked if the trail had been moved. Associate Planner Hahn stated the
           trail had been removed from figure 7 completely and references to it have been
           stricken from the TSP based on the remand order.

           Mayor Ogden asked what specifically the objections are from the TIG. Ms.
           Kellington responded they would like to see a different alignment reflected outside
           the RSIA and language stating that any regional trail would not be built through the
           RSIA.

           Councilor Davis asked if language should be added to the Parks Master Plan
           instead of the TSP since LUBA considered the Ice Age Tonquin Trail a park.
           Attorney Brady stated it is an option Council could consider.

           Councilor Grimes asked if it would be possible to add the language requested by
           the TIG. Attorney Brady stated it was possible to add such language but LUBA has
           classified the Tonquin Trail as a park and the City already has a provision in the
           code prohibiting this in the RSIA.

           Councilor Truax asked about the time frame in which the remand orders have to be
           applied. Attorney Brady stated the City has until March 1 st to implement the orders.

           Council Deliberations
           Councilor Truax stated there is not enough time to re-plan the trail on the map, with
           the appropriate citizen involvement, based on the timeframe from LUBA. He
           supports the ordinance as it stands.

           Councilor Davis would like to see the suggested amendments from TIG
           implemented in the ordinance. Councilor Grimes concurred with adding the
           clarifying language.

           Mayor Ogden stated the clarifying language is not needed.

           Councilor Davis clarified the language she would recommend would be specifically
           referencing the TIG area.

February 10, 2014
4 of 7 
  
 

 
           MOTION by Councilor Ed Truax, SECONDED by Council President Monique
           Beikman to approve staff findings and conditions as presented. 
 
           Vote: 5 - 2 MOTION CARRIED
 
            Nay:  Councilor Joelle Davis 
             
                  Councilor Nancy Grimes 

G.         PUBLIC HEARINGS ­ Quasi-Judicial
 
                                                                                                       
     1.    Consideration of a Conditional Use Permit to Allow Rental and Leasing of Autos and
           Light Trucks in the Light Manufacturing (ML) Planning District for U-Haul at 7100 SW
           McEwan Road (Tax Map 2S1 13DD, Tax Lots 900, 1000, 1100, 1200, 1600, and
           1700, and Tax Map 2S1 24AA, Tax Lot 5500) (CUP-13-05)
 
 
           Mayor Ogden opened the public hearing for consideration of a conditional use
           permit to allow rental and leasing of autos and light trucks in the Light Manufacturing
           (ML) Planning District for U-Haul at 7100 SW McEwan Road (CUP-13-05). He read
           the rules of the hearing in accordance with ORS 197.763(5) and (6) and ORS
           197.796(3)(b).
            
           Assistant Planner Colin Cortes entered the staff report and attachments into the
           record. He noted the applicant has asked for a continuance of the public hearing.
            
           Ryan Schera, on behalf of the applicant requested a continuance to the next
           meeting on February 24 th, 2014.
 

 
           MOTION by Councilor Ed Truax, SECONDED by Councilor Joelle Davis to grant a
           continuance of the hearing to February 24, 2014. 
 
           Vote: 7 - 0 MOTION CARRIED
H.         GENERAL BUSINESS
 
                                                                                                       
     1.    Consideration of Ordinance No. 1367-14 An Ordinance Relating to the
           Transportation System Plan; Amending the Tualatin Development Code (TDC)
           11.650 and the 2012 Tualatin Transportation System Plan Adopted February 25,
           2013
 
 
           City Attorney Sean Brady noted this ordinance is part of the legislative decision from
           the public hearing remand on the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA) relating to the
           Transportation System Plan and amending the Tualatin Development Code (TDC)
           11.650 and the 2012 Tualatin Transportation System Plan Adopted February 25,
           2013.

           PUBLIC COMMENT
           Wendie Kellington asked for verification that the information from the previous
           public hearing would be included in the record for this action as well.Attorney Brady
           noted that the previous record would be included with this action. Wendie Kellington
           stated she believes that the advice the Council is receiving regarding the LUBA
           remand is incorrect.

February 10, 2014
5 of 7 
  


           Mark Brown thanked Councilor Grimes and Councilor Davis for understanding the
           Tonquin Industrial Group's request.

           Henry Stuckey asked that Council give the same considerations to the businesses
           in the Industrial Area that they do to citizens in residential neighborhoods.

           Nick Storie stated he is no longer willing to annex property with the City.
 

 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Frank
           Bubenik for first reading by title only. 
 
           Vote: 5 - 2 MOTION CARRIED
 
            Nay:  Councilor Joelle Davis 
             
                  Councilor Nancy Grimes 
 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Frank
           Bubenik for second reading by title only.  [MOTION FAILED] [SECOND READING
           BY TITLE AT MEETING OF FEBRUARY 24, 2014]
 

                                                                                                                
     2.    Consideration of Ordinance No. 1368-14 Relating to Medical Marijuana Facilities;
           Establishing New Tualatin Municipal Code Chapter 9-08; and Declaring an
           Emergency.
 
 
           Council Discussion
           Councilor Truax is not in favor of medical marijuana dispensaries being located in
           Tualatin. He is in favor of regulating them through the zoning process. Councilor
           Truax proposed changing the sunset date in the draft ordinance to 180 days.
           Councilor Davis concurred with the change.

           Mayor Ogden expressed concern over moving up the sunset date. He believes it
           will take longer than 180 days to do the proper outreach to citizens and allow
           Council and staff enough time to draft code language.

           Council President Beikman concurred with the Mayor. She wants to make sure the
           Council has time to look at both recreational and medical marijuana dispensaries.
 

 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Nancy
           Grimes for first reading by title only. 
 
           Vote: 7 - 0 MOTION CARRIED
 
           MOTION by Council President Monique Beikman, SECONDED by Councilor Nancy
           Grimes for second reading by title only.  [MOTION FAILED] [SECOND READING
           BY TITLE AT MEETING OF FEBRUARY 24, 2014]
 

I.         ITEMS REMOVED FROM CONSENT AGENDA 
           Items removed from the Consent Agenda will be discussed individually at this time. The Mayor may
           impose a time limit on speakers addressing these issues.
 

J.         COMMUNICATIONS FROM COUNCILORS
February 10, 2014
6 of 7 
  
 
 
           Council President Beikman attended the Washington County Coordinating
           Committee (WCCC) where the Transportation Development Tax (TDT) discount for
           2014 was discussed. The WCCC recommended that the current discount of 20% be
           applied until 2015. Mayor Ogden expressed concern over the discount being
           applied for another year as the tax was put in place to support design infrastructure.
           He believes that the TDT tax should be adjusted if it is too high instead of
           discounting it each year.

           Councilor Truax attended the Regional Water Suppliers Consortium meeting. The
           consortium has commissioned a project to help pinpoint boil water notices to a
           specific address. The project will beta test in June.

           Councilor Davis thanked City Staff for the extra hours that were put in over the
           snowy weekend to help keep the roads and citizens safe.

           Councilor Bubenik reminded citizens of the Washington County screening of the
           movie  American Winter. The screening will kick off the 2014-2020 update to their
           Cooperative Plan. The screening will take place on February 26, 6pm, at the
           Venetian Theater and will be followed by a panel discussion on poverty in Oregon.
 

K.         ADJOURNMENT
 
 
           Mayor Ogden adjourned the meeting at 9:23 p.m.
 

 


Sherilyn Lombos, City Manager

____________________________ / Nicole Morris, Recording Secretary


____________________________ / Lou Ogden, Mayor
 




February 10, 2014
7 of 7 
TO:             Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council

THROUGH:        Sherilyn Lombos

FROM:           Nicole Morris, Deputy City Recorder

DATE:           02/24/2014

SUBJECT:        Consideration of Recommendations from the Council Committee on Advisory
                Appointments


ISSUE BEFORE THE COUNCIL:
Consideration of re-appointments and new appointments to the Tualatin Parks Advisory
Committee and the Budget Committee.

RECOMMENDATION:
Staff recommends the City Council approve the recommendations from the Council Committee
on Advisory Appointments (CCAA) and reappoint and appoint the below listed individuals.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
The Council Committee on Advisory Appointments met and interviewed citizens interested in
participating on City advisory committees and boards. The Committee
recommends reappointing and appointing the following individuals:

Individuals           Board                             Term
Dana Paulino        Tualatin Parks Advisory Committee   Reappointment Term Expiring 2/28/17
Valerie Pratt       Tualatin Parks Advisory Committee   Reappointment Term Expiring 2/28/17
Dennis Wells        Tualatin Parks Advisory Committee   Reappointment Term Expiring 2/28/17
Kay Dix             Tualatin Parks Advisory Committee   Reappointment Term Expiring 2/28/17
Derek Ruckman       Budget Committee                    New Appointment Term Expiring 12/31/16



Attachments:
TO:                Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council

THROUGH:           Sherilyn Lombos

FROM:              Nicole Morris, Deputy City Recorder

DATE:              02/24/2014

SUBJECT:           Consideration of Approval of Liquor License Renewals for 2014


ISSUE BEFORE THE COUNCIL:
The issue before the Council is to approve liquor license renewal applications for 2014. Copies
have not been included with this staff report but are available at the City Offices for review.

RECOMMENDATION:
Staff respectfully recommends that the Council approve endorsement of the liquor license
renewals for 2014 as listed in attachment A.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
Annually the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) require all liquor licenses be renewed.
According to the provisions of City Ordinance No. 680-86, establishing procedures for liquor
license applicants, applicants are required to fill out a City application form, from which a review
by the Police Department is conducted according to standards and criteria established in the
Ordinance. The liquor license renewal applications are in accordance with all ordinances and
the Police Department has conducted reviews of the applications.

According to the provisions of Section 5 of Ordinance No. 680-85 a member of Council or the
Public may request a public hearing on any of the liquor license renewal requests. If such a
public hearing request is made, a hearing will be scheduled and held on the license. It is
important that any request for such a hearing include reasons for said hearing.

FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS:
A renewal fee of $35 has been paid by each applicant.


Attachments:       Attachment A- Liquor License Renewals 2014
Liquor License Renewals 2014
76 of Tualatin
Applebee's Neighborhood Grill & Bar
Birra Deli
Boones Ferry Chevron
Buffalo Wild Wings
Bushwhackers Saloon
C.I. Bar & Grill
Chipotle Mexican Grill
Claim Jumper
Club Sport
Dickie Jo's Burgers
El Sol De Mexico
Elks Lodge
Famous Dave's BBQ
Fred Meyer #393
Fuddruckers
Grand Hotel
Grochau Cellars
Haggen
Hayden's Lake front grill
Hayden's Lake Front Grill Catering
Hot Seat Sports Bar
Jacksons #533 (shell gas station)
King Estate Winery
La Isla Bonita
Lee's Kitchen
Marinepolis Sushiland
Millers Homestead Inn
Native Foods Café
New York Ruben's
Outback Steakhouse
P.F. Changs
Pastini Pastaria Bridgeport
Pizza Hut #2878
Plaid Pantries, Inc.
Qdoba Mexican Grill
Royal Panda
Safeway #1047
Shari's of Tualatin #242
Stafford Hills Club
Stars Cabaret
Sushi & Teriyaki
Sushi Train
Thai Bistro
Thai Cuisine Restaurant
Tualatin Cheveron

                                      Attachment A
                                             1 of 2
Tualatin Country Club
Tualatin Food Store
Tualatin Gas & Food
Tualatin Indoor Soccer
Tualatin Island Grill
Walgreens #09625
Whole Foods




                         Attachment A
                                2 of 2
TO:            Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council

THROUGH:       Sherilyn Lombos

FROM:          Kaaren Hofmann, Engineering Manager
               Sean Brady, City Attorney

DATE:          02/24/2014

SUBJECT:       Consideration of Resolution No. 5184-14 Authorizing the City Manager to
               Execute Documents Related to the Dedication of Right-of-Way for SW Seneca
               Street and Street A


ISSUE BEFORE THE COUNCIL:
On January 27, 2014, the City Council approved Resolution No. 5182-14 Declaring the City
Council's Intent to Construct an Extension of Seneca Street and a Traffic Signal at the
Intersection of Seneca Street and Martinazzi Avenue. The attached Resolution 5184-14
authorizes the City Manager to proceed with executing the dedication of the right-of-way
necessary to construct the extension of SW Seneca Street and Street A per the Nyberg Rivers
Master Plan and the Public Facilites Decision (PFR-70).

RECOMMENDATION:
Staff recommends that Council consider and take action on the attached Resolution.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
The City Council approved the Nyberg Rivers Master Plan on August 26, 2013. The approved
Nyberg Rivers Plan shows the extension of Seneca Street per the City's Transportation System
Plan (TSP) to improve circulation, pedestrian safety and enhance the access to the adjacent
development site. The Master Plan also includes "Street A," which allows for right-in, right-out
access to the development from Lower Boones Ferry Road.

On January 27, 2014, the Council approved a Resolution authorizing the construction of the
Seneca Street Extension with the Nyberg Rivers development. As a part of the construction of
this roadway, the City will need to dedicate right-of-way for SW Seneca Street. Additionally, the
City will also need to dedicate the right-of-way necessary for Street A, as it crosses over City
property. Both a legal description and map are needed prior to dedicating the right-of-way. The
City Manager will work with CenterCal, the developer of Nyberg Rivers on this process.

Staff is currently working on the alignments and design options for Seneca Street and Street A.
The options for street alignments will be designed to maximize parking for the Library and City
Offices, enhance pedestrian safety, and provide good circulation on the City's property and in
the downtown area. The preliminary locations for both streets are shown on Attachment A and
B. The Council's feedback on the street design and parking is being incorporated into the
design. The final design for the street and parking will be shared as soon as it becomes
available within 30-45 days.

Once the design of both streets is completed to the point where a legal description can be
developed, a Deed of Dedication will be executed by the City Manager in a form substantially
similar to that attached as Attachment C. This Deed of Dedication will then be recorded with the
County.

Approval of the resolution will allow the City Manager to execute the Deed of Dedication once
the legal description is created and remain synchronized with the Nyberg Rivers project
schedule.


Attachments:      Resolution Dedicate ROW
                  A - Map
                  B - Map
                  C-Form Deed of Dedication
                              RESOLUTION NO. 5184-14

      RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING THE CITY MANAGER TO EXECUTE
      DOCUMENTS TO DEDICATE CITY PROPERTY FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY
      PURPOSES


      WHEREAS, the Central Urban Renewal District Plan provides for the
construction of Seneca Street east of Martinazzi and "Street A" to improve
transportation service to the City of Tualatin's downtown area; and

       WHEREAS, the City's Transportation System Plan provides for the Seneca
Street extension and "Street A" to be constructed as a needed transportation project;
and

      WHEREAS, the City Council, by Resolution No. 5182-14, declared its intent to
construct Seneca Street and a traffic signal at Seneca Street and Martinazzi Avenue;
and

     WHEREAS, the City of Tualatin owns real property at the locations where
Seneca Street and "Street A" are to be constructed; and

        WHEREAS, a Deed of Dedication is needed to dedicate land to the public for
right-of-way purposes for the locations of Seneca Street and "Street A"; and

      WHEREAS, the City Council finds it is in the best interest of the public to
dedicate right-of-way for Seneca Street and "Street A."


     NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY
OF TUALATIN, OREGON, that:


      Section 1. The City Council authorizes the City Manager to execute any and all
documents necessary to dedicate City-owned property to the public for right-of-way
purposes to effectuate the construction of Seneca Street and "Street A."




Resolution No. 5184-14                                                     Page 1
      Section 2. This Resolution is effective upon adoption.


      Adopted by the City Council this ____ Day of ______________, 2014.


                                           CITY OF TUALATIN, OREGON

                                           BY _______________________
                                                      Mayor

APPROVED AS TO FORM                        ATTEST:

BY _______________________                 BY _______________________
        City Attorney                               City Recorder




Resolution No. 5184-14                                               Page 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ATTACHMENT A - page 1 of 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                               SW Marti




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                        City Offices




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SD
                                                  nazzi Av




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RD
                                                                                                                                       U
                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SD
                                                                                                               SV
                                                                                                                                             SD
                                                                                                   U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                             W




                                                                                                                         SD
                                                                                                   SS                         SS                       SS                    SS                  SS                      SS                     SS            SS
                                                                             D                              SD                                                                                                                                   SD            SD                 D
                                                                                                                                       SD                                                                                     SD
                                                                             CTV




                                                                                                                                                               SD                  D                  SD
                                                                                    CTV
                                           G




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W                       W             W                            W        W
                                                                        SS




                                                                                                                                       W                       W                   W
                                                                                                               W
                                                                                   W




                                                                                                                                                                        SV
                                                                                                                                                                       SV
                                                                                                                                                                        SV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Seneca Street Alignment
                                               G




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CenterCal Properties, LLC.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nyberg Rivers
                                                                              SS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c
                                                                                        W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tualatin, Oregon
                                                                                                                                                                                                           65.00'
                                                                                            E
                                                                                            E
                                                     G




                                                                                                                                                                                             59.00'
                                                                        G
                                                                                                   T
                                                                                   SS

                                                                                            W


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                  G                                                                                                                                               R150.00'

                                                                                                E
                                                                                                E
                                                          W                                                                                                                                                                                                         RD
                         W




                                                                                                        T
          SD                          SD                            D

                                                                                          SS
                    SS




                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                                                 Proposed Centerline
               SW Seneca St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RD
                                                               G

                                                                       SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Possible Right-of-Way




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                        E
SS                           SS                                SS




                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  01/29/2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    21998310
                                                                                                   SS
                                                                   G


                                                                             SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FSW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EX1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            G




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PROJECT NO.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        G
                                                                                                                   GV                                                         G                   G




                                                                                                            FO W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SHEET NO.
                                                                                                                    SD                      SD             G                      SD                   SD                      SD                    SD
                    SCALE: 1"=30'                                                                                                  G
                                                                                               G




                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                       E




                                                                                                                                                       E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DATE:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BY:
                                                                                   SD




                                                                                                                               E
     30        15            0                         30                                                                                                                                                  E                            TP




                                                                                                            SD


                                                                                                                        CTV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ATTACHMENT B - page 1 of 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SW Bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ones F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         erry         Rd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    W       G
                                                                                                                                                                                                             V
                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OHW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OHW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T                OHW                                                                                                                                                   OHW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OHW                                                                                                     OHW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OHW                                                 OHW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OHW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Issues:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Floodplain Capacity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W                                                                                                                                          Wall Height Increases
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D                                                     10.00' For Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          on Both Sides




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (Re-Aligned)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Street A
                                                                                                  e.
                                                                                                  Av




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  X
                                                                                             zi
                                                                                             az




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Heron's Landing Apartments




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s &
                                                                                        rtin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                all s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              St all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SD
                                                                                   Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AD ng




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SD
                                                                               SW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 arki
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17.00'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Regional Trail Alignment
                                                                                                                                                                          City Hall / Library




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Future Driveway




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Nyberg Rivers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   32.00'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Tualatin, Oregon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                32.00'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SD
                                             SS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BY
                                                  W
                                                  W




                       SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SD
                                       CT




                                  D
                                         V




                                                      SS
                            SS



                                  W
                             SS




                                                                         CT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SD
                                                                           V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SS
                                  CT




                                                  SD
                            CT


                                  V




                                                                         SD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SS
                              V




                                                                    SS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DESCRIPTION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SS                                                                             SS
                        W
                        W
                  SS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c
                                                               SD                            SD
                                             W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SD
                                                                                        SS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CI                           SD                                                                                                 SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 )




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DATE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         c
                                                                                                                 SD
                 W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W
          SS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SS
                                                           W                       SD
                                                                                                            SS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SD
                                                                               W                       SD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Access Easement for Heron's Landing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W
          W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SD
     SS




                                                                                                                               SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LY TIO
                                                                                                  W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R OR
                                                                                                                          SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SS
                                                                                                                                            SS
     W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FO F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R
SS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                      W
                                                                                                                                        D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                                                      SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SS
W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                                                                 SD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D                                                                                                         SD
                                                                                                                                                                SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DATE                            01/31/2014




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DRAWN                           FSW/RHH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DESIGNED                        FSW/RHH
                                                                                                                                                           SD
               Council Building                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                          SD
                                                                                                                                                                                    SS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHECKED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PROJECT #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 21198310




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SHEET TITLE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SS
                                                                                                                                                                               SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Proposed - Opt 3




                                                                                                                                                                     SD
                                                                                                                                                                W                             SS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SHEET NUMBER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SCALE: 1"=20'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EX3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SS
                                                                                                                                                                                         SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20          10                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                    W              SS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LAND USE #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R
Send taxes to and
after recording return to:
City of Tualatin, Oregon
18880 SW Martinazzi Ave.
Tualatin, OR 97062-7092




                     CITY OF TUALATIN, OREGON
                     DEED OF DEDICATION



       CITY OF TUALATIN dedicates to the public a perpetual right-of way for street, road,
public utility, and pedestrian purposes, on, over, across, under, along, and within all of the
following real property situated in the County of Washington, State of Oregon, and which is
bounded and described as follows, to wit:

The premises described in the legal description attached as Attachment A, and as further
 depicted on the Map attached as Attachment B, both of which are incorporated herein.

       TO HAVE AND TO HOLD, the above described and granted premises unto the
public forever.


       [Continued on next page for formatting purposes]




                                                                                              Page 1 of 4
                                                                                          Revised 02/14
                                                  Attorney Drive/Real Estate Documents/Deed of Dedication
CITY PROPERTY
DEED OF DEDICATION
Page 2 of 4




        EXECUTED this ___ day of ____________, 2014.

______________________________________
SHERILYN LOMBOS
City Manager

______________________________________
Signature

______________________________________
Date

(STATE OF OREGON                        )ss
(County of Washington                   )

        On this ___ day of ____________, 20___, before me, the undersigned, a Notary

Public, personally appeared ____________ and acknowledged the foregoing instrument

to be their voluntary act and deed.

                                                     Before me: ______________________________
                                                                   Notary Public for Oregon
                                                     My commission expires: _________________



The City Manager of the City of Tualatin, being duly authorized and directed by the Council of the City of
Tualatin, approves and accepts the foregoing document on behalf of the City of Tualatin. Dated this ___
day of ____________ 20___.

                                                         ______________________________________
                                                                 City Manager

APPROVED AS TO FORM

By: ______________________________________
              City Attorney
CITY PROPERTY
DEED OF DEDICATION
Page 3 of 4



                         ATTACHMENT A




      INSERT LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPERTY TO BE DEDICATED
CITY PROPERTY
DEED OF DEDICATION
Page 4 of 4


                           ATTACHMENT B




              INSERT MAP DEPICTING PROPERTY TO BE DEDICATED
TO:                   Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council

THROUGH:              Sherilyn Lombos

FROM:                 Don Hudson, Finance Director

DATE:                 02/24/2014

SUBJECT:              Quarterly Financial Update


ISSUE BEFORE THE COUNCIL:
An update on the second quarter financial activities for fiscal year 2013/14.

RECOMMENDATION:
No action is required by the Council.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
Tonight's report will provide the Council with an update of financial activities during the second
quarter of fiscal year 2013/14.

Staff will discuss the recently completed fiscal year 2012/13 annual audit (including the auditing
standards letter to the City Council from the City's independent auditor), the status of revenues
and expenditures in the three operating funds (General Fund, Building Fund and Operations
Fund), the upcoming 2014/15 budget process and an updated Fiscal Health model projection.


Attachments:       2nd Quarter Financial Report Presentation
        Fiscal Year 2013 ­ 2014
Second Quarter, ending December 31, 2013
                                        Financial statements
                                             present fairly,
                                      in all material respects,
                                      the financial position of
                                       the City and the TDC,
                                         in accordance with
                                         generally accepted
                                         accounting principles



www.tualatinoregon.gov/finance/comprehensive-annual-financial-reports
                                          Auditing Standards
                                          letter to Council
                                          Internal control
                                          testing did not
                                          identify any
                                          deficiencies in
                                          internal controls




www.tualatinoregon.gov/finance/comprehensive-annual-financial-reports
   22nd Consecutive Year
   Highest form of
   recognition in
   governmental
   accounting and
   financial reporting
   National recognition
   of Tualatin's Finance
   Department
   Only 38 cities in
   Oregon receive award
                           General Fund Revenue
100.0%
           94.6%
90.0%


80.0%


70.0%
                                            64.5%

60.0%
                                                                   50.8%
                                                        48.6%                    47.1%
50.0%

                                                                                              38.2%
40.0%
                                 33.9%                                                                   32.4%
30.0%


20.0%

                     11.0%
10.0%


  0.0%
         Property   Franchise     State   Intergovt'l   Fees &    Charges for     Fines &     Interest    Other
          Taxes       Fees       Shared    Revenue      Charges     Service     Forfeitures              Revenue
                                Revenue
                   Building Fund Revenue
100.0%                                           108.7%


90.0%


80.0%


70.0%


60.0%                               57.2%


50.0%


40.0%

                 30.4%
30.0%


20.0%


10.0%


  0.0%
         Licenses and Permits   Fees & Charges   Interest
                      Operating Expenditures
100.0%


90.0%


80.0%


70.0%


60.0%
                                                                                    53.6%
         49.2%            48.3%               46.4%   49.2%
50.0%

                 38.1%
40.0%
                                                                34.3%

30.0%


20.0%


10.0%
                                                                                                     0.3%
  0.0%
           Personal Services                    Materials & Services                     Capital Outlay

                               General Fund     Building Fund          Operations Fund
   Departments working on budget projections
   March ­ Meetings with City Manager and
   Finance Director
   April ­ Council Work Session
   May 13th (6-8pm) ­ Delivery of Budget Message
   to Budget Committee and distribution of
   budget document
   May 28th (6-8pm) ­ Second Budget Committee
   Meeting
   June 23rd ­ Budget Hearing/Budget Adoption
   On-going revenues exceed on-going
   expenditures for fiscal year 2014/15
   Fiscal year 2015/16 projects an on-going gap of
   approximately 0.25% of total General Fund
   expenditures
   Revenue and expenditure projections will
   continue to be monitored
TO:             Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council

THROUGH:        Sherilyn Lombos

FROM:           Colin Cortes, Assistant Planner
                Alice Cannon, Assistant City Manager

DATE:           02/24/2014

SUBJECT:        Consideration of a Conditional Use Permit to Allow Rental and Leasing of Autos
                and Light Trucks in the Light Manufacturing (ML) Planning District for U-Haul at
                7100 SW McEwan Road (Tax Map 2S1 13DD, Tax Lots 900, 1000, 1100, 1200,
                1600, and 1700, and Tax Map 2S1 24AA, Tax Lot 5500) (CUP-13-05)


ISSUE BEFORE THE COUNCIL:
The issue before the City Council is consideration of a conditional use permit to allow rental and
leasing of autos and light trucks in the Light Manufacturing (ML) Planning District for U-Haul at
7100 SW McEwan Road (Tax Map 2S1 13DD, Tax Lots 900, 1000, 1100, 1200, 1600, and 1700,
and Tax Map 2S1 24AA, Tax Lot 5500).

This matter is continued from the February 10, 2014 public hearing at which staff had entered
the staff report and supporting attachments into the record, the applicant had requested a
continuance to February 24, 2014, and the Council had affirmed the continuance. This February
24 staff report has a few revisions: a revised site plan submitted by the applicant February 12,
2014 and integrated with the original application materials (Attachment 101B, p. 17), conditions
of approval revised by staff in response to the revised site plan, analysis and findings
(Attachment 101C) revised by staff to accommodate the revised conditions of approval, and a
revised slide presentation (Attachment 101F).



RECOMMENDATION:
Staff recommends that the City Council consider the staff report and supporting attachments
and direct staff to prepare a resolution consistent with its decision. Based on the application, the
proposed conditions of approval, and the Analysis and Findings (Attachment 101C), U-Haul
(CUP-13-05), a proposal for rental and leasing of autos and light trucks with incidental sale of
vehicles, meets the criteria of TDC 32.030.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
    This matter is a quasi-judicial public hearing.
This matter is a quasi-judicial public hearing.
This matter is a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) request.
The subject property is approximately 10.08 acres at 7100 SW McEwan Road (Tax Map
2S1 13DD, Tax Lots 900, 1000, 1100, 1200, 1600, and 1700, and Tax Map 2S1 24AA, Tax
Lot 5500) located in the Light Manufacturing Planning District (ML).
A Vicinity Map is included as Attachment 101A.
The applicant is U-Haul International / AMERCO Real Estate Co., represented by David
Pollock, Development Manager, and the subject property owner is U-Haul.
"Rental and leasing of autos and light trucks with incidental sale of vehicles" is a
conditional use within the ML Planning District pursuant to Tualatin Development Code
(TDC) 60.040(1)(p).
The applicant proposes to re-use and convert the developed industrial site and existing
buildings, vacated by NW Natural [Gas], into a self-storage, warehouse, and
truck/equipment rental facility for U-Haul.
The proposed uses other than truck rental are permitted. Self-service storage, mini
storage, or self storage is a permitted use within both the Light and General Manufacturing
Planning Districts (ML and MG) through zoning interpretation INT-88-12 dated June 21,
1988. Because it's permitted by interpretation, the use isn't specifically listed among ML or
MG permitted uses.
The applicant conducted a neighborhood/developer meeting on November 20, 2013 to
explain the proposal to neighboring property owners and to receive comments. Four
attendees besides staff signed in for the meeting. An attendee asked about
U-Haul operations in general and those intended for the site. Staff and the applicant had a
pre-application meeting on July 18, 2013.
The applicant submitted a narrative that describes the proposed conditional use and
addresses the CUP approval criteria (Attachment 101B).
Staff has reviewed the application materials and included pertinent excerpts in the
Analysis and Findings section of this report (Attachment 101C). An Engineering Division
Memo addressing transportation and other public facilities associated with the proposed
CUP is included (Attachment 101D).
The Engineering Division Memo dated January 14, 2014 regarding the transportation
analysis reviewed a report from the applicant's transportation consultant and concluded
that the use will not increase trips or change traffic operations. Further information is
available in the memo (Attachment 101D).
The applicable Tualatin Community Plan policies and TDC regulations that apply to the
proposed conditional use in the ML Planning District include TDC:
     Chapter 7 "Manufacturing Planning Districts", Section 7.030 "Objectives";
     Chapter 32 "Conditional Uses", Section 32.030 "Conditional Uses ­ Siting Criteria";
     Chapter 38 "Signs";
     Chapter 60 "Light Manufacturing Planning District (ML)", Sections 60.010 "Purpose"
     and 60.041 "Restrictions on Conditional Uses";
     Chapter 63 "Environmental Regulations"; and
     Chapter 73 "Community Design Standards", Sections
        73.040(1), 73.050(4), 73.160(3)(c) and (4)(b), and 73.380(6).
  Clean Water Services (CWS) submitted written comment of no objection to the application
  (Attachment 101E). As of this writing, no other notified agency, property owner, or
  member of the public has commented on the application.
  Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) 227.178(2) requires that the City Council take final action
  on a land use application, including resolution of all appeals under ORS 227.180, within
  120 days after the application is deemed c omplete. The Council hearing date of February
  24, 2014 is the 70th day following completeness, and the 120th day is April 15, 2014.
  Before granting the proposed CUP, the City Council must find that the use is allowed as a
  conditional use in the subject planning district and the application submittal meets the five
  criteria listed in TDC 32.030. The Analysis and Findings (Attachment 101C) examines the
  application with respect to the criteria for granting a CUP. Conditions of approval are
  necessary to have the application meet the CUP criteria, satisfy objectives and policies of
  the TDC, and not impair either the use of surrounding properties or the character of the
  surrounding area.
  Based on the application, the proposed conditions of approval, and the Analysis and
  Findings (Attachment 101C), U-Haul (CUP-13-05), a proposal for rental and leasing of
  autos and light trucks with incidental sale of vehicles, meets the criteria of TDC 32.030.
  The conditions of approval, which would run with the property, not a tenant or owner, are
  listed below. ("TDC" refers to the Tualatin Development Code.)
1. Application: The applicant shall operate the use consistent with all application materials
   submitted to the City on November 27, 2013 and revised December 12, 2013 and
   February 12, 2014 unless otherwise directed by another condition of approval. Truck
   rental cannot commence until there is compliance with Conditions 3(a) and (b).
2. Environmental Regulations: The applicant shall comply with the noise, vibration, air
   quality, odors, and other manufacturing planning districts environmental standards of TDC
   63.
3. Landscaping & Outdoor Storage Screening:
        (a) Provide site perimeter landscaping by planting trees, shrubs, lawn and live
        groundcover in yards along SW McEwan Road and the entire adjacent segment of
        I-5 in compliance with TDC 73.240(9). Additionally, the applicant shall provide site
        perimeter landscaping at least 5 feet in width and adhering to planting specifications
        in TDC 73.340(2)(a)(i-iv) and in compliance with comply with TDC 73.340(2). Prior
        to issuance of a building permit, provide a landscaping plan. Prior to issuance of a
        temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall
        install the landscaping.

        (b) Screen any outdoor storage with dense evergreen landscaping along the
        west/northwest boundary of the subject property along I-5 pursuant to
        TDC 73.160(4)(b) and 73.260(1)(b) and (c). Any shrubbery proposed for such
        screening shall be at least a gallon in size. Prior to issuance of a building permit,
        provide a landscaping plan. Prior to issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy
        or certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall install the landscaping.
4. Restrictions on Conditional Uses: The applicant shall comply with the retail restrictions on
   conditional uses in the ML Planning District pursuant to TDC 60.041 and indicate
     compliance on a site plan submitted prior to issuance of any building permits.
   5. Signage: The applicant shall separately from this CUP approval submit sign permit
      applications for any proposed signage.
   6. Approval Period: The approval period shall be pursuant to TDC 32.090 Automatic
      Termination of Conditional Use as follows:
           (1) Unless otherwise provided by the Council in the resolution granting approval of
           the conditional use permit, a conditional use permit shall automatically become null
           and void two years after the effective date upon which it was granted unless one of
           the following events occur:

           (a) The applicant or his successor in interest has secured a building permit within
           said two-year period, if a building permit is required, and has actually commenced
           construction of the building or structure authorized by the permit within said two-year
           period.

           (b) The applicant or his successor in interest has commenced the activity or
           installation of the facility or structure authorized by the conditional use permit within
           said two-year period.

           (2) The applicant may submit a written request to the City Council for an extension of
           time on the conditional use permit to avoid the permit becoming null and void. The
           request for extension must be submitted prior to the expiration of the times
           established by Subsection (1) above. The City Council may, in the resolution
           granting such conditional use permit, provide for an extension of time beyond 1 year.
           [Ord. 743-88, 3/28/88; Ord. 1333-11 §2, 9/12/11]
   7. This CUP approval excludes approval of any site improvements as described in TDC
      73.040(1). Any such site improvements that the applicant might propose shall be subject
      to all applicable TDC policies and regulations.
   8. General: The applicant shall comply with all applicable TDC policies and regulations.



OUTCOMES OF DECISION:
Approval of the Conditional Use Permit (CUP) request will result in the following:


   1. Allows the applicant to have on the subject property the use of rental and leasing of autos
      and light trucks with incidental sale of vehicles as conditioned.
   2. The Council directs staff to bring Resolution Number 5177-14 approving the conditional
      use permit.


Denial of the CUP request will result in the following:


     Prohibits the applicant from having on the subject property the use of rental and leasing of
     autos and light trucks with incidental sale of vehicles.
ALTERNATIVES TO RECOMMENDATION:
The alternatives to the staff recommendation for the Council are:


   1. Approve the proposed Conditional Use Permit (CUP) with modified conditions of approval.
   2. Deny the request for the proposed CUP with findings that state which criteria in Tualatin
      Development Code (TDC) 32.030 the applicant fails to meet.
   3. Continue the discussion of the proposed CUP and return to the matter at a later date.



FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS:
The Fiscal Year 2013/14 budget allocated revenue to process current planning applications, and
the applicant submitted payment per the City of Tualatin Fee Schedule to process the
application.


Attachments:      Attachment 101A - Vicinity Map
                  Attachment 101B - Application Materials
                  Attachment 101C - Analysis and Findings
                  Attachment 101D - Engineering Division Memo
                  Attachment 101E - Agency Comment CWS
                  Attachment 101F - Slide Presentation
        CUP 13-05: U-Haul
        7100 SW McEwan Rd
                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                              AN




                                                                                S
                                                                                 W
                                                             RD                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                          W




                                                                                   H
                                                  T                                                                                               C
                                                OR




                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                              M




                                                                                        ZE
                                            EP                                                                                           SW
                                       DG




                                                                                             L
                                     RI




                                                                                                 FE
                                 B
                            SW




                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                      RD




                                                                                                  N
 SW
DHAWK
 CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                B




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S W L O N G F E L L O W AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                       IE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   V
                                                                                                                                                                                              KE
                                                                                                                                                                                         LA
                                                                                            RD
                                                                                   R   RY
                                                                                FE
                                                                            S
                                                                          NE
                                                                      O
                                                                 BO
                                                      ER
                                                     W
                                                LO                                                                                                                                            S W E D G EW O
                                                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                        SW                                                                 CUP 13-05                                                                                                                   D ST

                                                                                                             Site

                                                                                                                                                                                                            SW MCEWAN RD
                                     SW
                                            C
                                                H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O N G F E L L O W AV E
                                                    IL
                                                                                                      WY




                                                         D
                                                             S
                                                                                                 I-5 F




                                                                 R
                                                                     D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S W T E R R Y AV E
                                                                                                                  MONT
                                                                                                             SW            AU
                                                                                                                                K C
                                                                                                                                    IR                                                             S W DAW
                                                                                                                                                                                                           N                        ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W L
                                                                                                               SW                                                                                                                                    City Boundary




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S
                                                                                                                    CHI
                                                                                                                          LDS                                                                                                                        Parcels




                                                                                                                                                                           SW 65TH AVE
                                                                                                                                RD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RF1:5000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             This map is derived from various digital database sources.
        Attachment 101A                                                                                                                                                                                                      While an attempt has been made to provide an accurate map,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the City of Tualatin, OR assumes no responsibility or liability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             for any errors or ommissions in the information. This map is
        Vicinity Map                                                                                                                                                                                                         provided "as is". -IS Dept.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Printed 1/15/2014
                        CONDITIONAL USE
                        PERMIT

                        To
                        City of Tualatin

                        For
                        U-Haul International/
                        AMERCO Real Estate Co.

                        Submitted
                        November 27, 2013

                        Project Number
                        2130364.00




 Attachment 101B
Application Materials
    Page 1 of 70
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.   Project Summary ................................................................................. 1
II.  Introduction ........................................................................................ 2
     Site Description ................................................................................... 2
     Proposal ............................................................................................. 3
     Request .............................................................................................. 4
III. Approval Criteria/ Requirements .......................................................... 5
     Section 32.030 Criteria for Review of Conditional Uses. ......................... 5
IV.  Conclusion ........................................................................................ 10



EXHIBITS
A.   Application for Conditional Use
B.   Site Aerial Map
C.   Site Survey
D.   Preliminary Site Plan
E.   Landscape As-Built Drawings
F.   Site Photos
G.   Traffic Study
H.   Legal Description
I.   Assessors Map
J.   Property Owner Names and Addresses: within 1,000'
K.   Neighborhood/Developer Meeting Materials
     1.     Certification of Sign Posting
     2.     Affidavit of Mailing
     3.     Notice Letter
     4.     Sign-In Sheet




                                              Attachment 101B
                                             Application Materials
                                                 Page 2 of 70
                           Heath & Associates, Inc.
                             2214 Tacoma Road
                            Puyallup, WA 98371                                      File Name    : 3259a
                                                                                    Site Code    : 00003259
                                                                                    Start Date   : 05/16/2011
                                                                                    Page No      :1
                                Groups Printed- Group 1
                      U-HAUL IN                                      U-HAUL OUT
                      Southbound                                      Northbound
 Start Time   Right          Thru            Left            Right           Thru         Left        Int. Total
     Factor     1.0           1.0             1.0              1.0            1.0          1.0
  06:00 AM        0            15               0                0              0            0              15
  07:00 AM        0             2               0                0              2            0               4
  08:00 AM        0             3               0                0              2            0               5
  09:00 AM        0             5               0                0              4            0               9
  10:00 AM        0             3               0                0              2            0               5
  11:00 AM        0            13               0                0              8            0              21
  12:00 PM        0            11               0                0              5            0              16
  01:00 PM        0             7               0                0              7            0              14
  02:00 PM        0             8               0                0              7            0              15
  03:00 PM        0             7               0                0             12            0              19
  04:00 PM        0             3               0                0              8            0              11
  05:00 PM        0             3               0                0              8            0              11
  06:00 PM        0             1               0                0              1            0               2
Grand Total       0            81               0                0             66            0             147
 Apprch %       0.0         100.0             0.0              0.0          100.0          0.0
    Total %     0.0          55.1             0.0              0.0           44.9          0.0
                                          U-HAUL IN
                                   Out       In     Total
                                     66        81     147


                                                81
                                             Thru




                                             North


                                  5/16/2011 6:00:00 AM
                                  5/16/2011 9:00:00 AM

                                   Group 1




                                             Thru
                                                66


                                     81         66     147
                                   Out        In     Total
                                          U-HAUL OUT




                                             13
                                  Attachment 101B
                                 Application Materials
                                    Page 45 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 SB Ramps -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218003
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     1117            0                             Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                  2.9        0.0

                     593 17 507
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                  2.7 5.9 3.0


       1753   0                            0    1868
                                                                                                                     2.3   0.0                      0.0      2.3
              1227            0.98       1160
                                                                                                                           1.5                      2.2
       1847   620                        708    1734
                                                                                                                     1.6   1.8                      2.5      2.0

                          0    0     0
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0

                     1345            0
                                                                                                                                  2.2        0.0



                               7                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

              0                            0                                                                               4                          6

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                               2                                                                                                   0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                       NA




              NA                          NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                               NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                  I-5 SB Ramps                    I-5 SB Ramps              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At      Left         Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM         0             0      0     0        41        2     51     0        0   117     47     0     51     86     0     0             395
    4:05 PM         0             0      0     0        36        0     37     0        0   127     53     0     61     81     0     0             395
    4:10 PM         0             0      0     0        47        0     51     0        0    96     53     0     62     86     0     0             395
    4:15 PM         0             0      0     0        32        0     50     0        0    93     45     0     46   102      0     0             368
    4:20 PM         0             0      0     0        46        0     44     0        0    81     54     0     61   101      0     0             387
    4:25 PM         0             0      0     0        45        1     52     0        0    81     42     0     56     95     0     0             372
    4:30 PM         0             0      0     0        38        2     38     0        0    88     57     0     49     95     0     0             367
    4:35 PM         0             0      0     0        48        1     38     0        0   108     58     0     59     98     0     0             410
    4:40 PM         0             0      0     0        29        0     43     0        0   113     49     0     58   102      0     0             394
    4:45 PM         0             0      0     0        39        2     45     0        0   105     47     0     52   102      0     0             392
    4:50 PM         0             0      0     0        39        0     62     0        0    89     49     0     55   113      0     0             407
    4:55 PM         0             0      0     0        41        2     64     0        0   103     49     0     56     99     0     0             414            4696
    5:00 PM         0             0      0     0        38        1     49     0        0    83     48     0     65     84     0     0             368            4669
    5:05 PM         0             0      0     0        46        1     47     0        0   124     51     0     61     98     0     0             428            4702
    5:10 PM         0             0      0     0        53        1     67     0        0    96     49     0     62     74     0     0             402            4709
    5:15 PM         0             0      0     0        39        2     44     0        0   108     50     0     67     94     0     0             404            4745
    5:20 PM         0             0      0     0        47        3     48     0        0   107     52     0     54    111     0     0             422            4780
    5:25 PM         0             0      0     0        50        2     48     0        0   103     61     0     70     90     0     0             424            4832
    5:30 PM         0             0      0     0        34        0     39     0        0    94     43     0     69     92     0     0             371            4836
    5:35 PM         0             0      0     0        44        0     49     0        0   103     55     0     62     93     0     0             406            4832
    5:40 PM         0             0      0     0        46        1     53     0        0    94     52     0     53     91     0     0             390            4828
    5:45 PM         0             0      0     0        47        0     66     0        0    81     41     0     56     91     0     0             382            4818
    5:50 PM         0             0      0     0        48        0     36     0        0    86     30     0     55     67     0     0             322            4733
    5:55 PM         0             0      0     0        44        0     38     0        0    77     34     0     44     77     0     0             314            4633
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                      Southbound                  Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates       Left         Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles      0             0      0     0       552      16     632     0        0 1312     600     0    760 1064       0     0                    4936
 Heavy Trucks       0             0      0               0        0     16              0    12      4           28     24     0                           84
  Pedestrians                     0                               8                           0                          0                                  8
    Bicycles         0            0      0               0        0      0              0     0      0            0      4     0                            4
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:27 AM                                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                           Attachment 101B
                                                                          Application Materials
                                                                             Page 46 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 NB Ramps -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                                QC JOB #: 11218005
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                      0          1149                             Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                  0.0        2.1

                      0    0      0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


      1893   557                         588   1895
                                                                                                                    2.6   1.3                      2.9      2.8
             1184         0.95          1307
                                                                                                                          2.6                      2.8
      1741   0                             0   1756
                                                                                                                    2.2   0.0                      0.0      2.5

                    586    4     572
                                                                                                                                 2.2 0.0 2.3

                      0          1162
                                                                                                                                 0.0        2.2



                           5                                                                                                      0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             0                             1                                                                              4                          7

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                           3                                                                                                      0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                          NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count              I-5 NB Ramps                       I-5 NB Ramps              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period                (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left          Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM     47            0     32     0           0         0      0     0       49    99      0     0      0    92    47      0             366
    4:05 PM     36            0     37     0           0         0      0     0       65   102      0     0      0   102    59      0             401
    4:10 PM     39            1     37     0           0         0      0     0       39   100      0     0      0   112    37      0             365
    4:15 PM     45            1     46     0           0         0      0     0       35    86      0     0      0   123    45      0             381
    4:20 PM     47            0     42     0           0         0      0     0       35    97      0     0      0   122    40      0             383
    4:25 PM     45            0     59     0           0         0      0     0       35    90      0     0      0    87    44      0             360
    4:30 PM     52            0     32     0           0         0      0     0       30    94      0     0      0    90    49      0             347
    4:35 PM     49            0     52     0           0         0      0     0       58   105      0     0      0   107    56      0             427
    4:40 PM     55            3     52     0           0         0      0     0       50    95      0     0      0   113    62      0             430
    4:45 PM     55            1     34     0           0         0      0     0       45   104      0     0      0   114    37      0             390
    4:50 PM     59            0     53     0           0         0      0     0       33    93      0     0      0   118    40      0             396
    4:55 PM     55            0     63     0           0         0      0     0       46    94      0     0      0    87    44      0             389            4635
    5:00 PM     41            0     50     0           0         0      0     0       34    82      0     0      0   113    52      0             372            4641
    5:05 PM     43            0     47     0           0         0      0     0       66    98      0     0      0   106    54      0             414            4654
    5:10 PM     31            0     51     0           0         0      0     0       51   111      0     0      0   105    57      0             406            4695
    5:15 PM     54            0     60     0           0         0      0     0       52    91      0     0      0   134    58      0             449            4763
    5:20 PM     46            0     41     0           0         0      0     0       46   108      0     0      0   114    31      0             386            4766
    5:25 PM     46            0     37     0           0         0      0     0       46   109      0     0      0   106    48      0             392            4798
    5:30 PM     41            0     51     0           0         0      0     0       37    85      0     0      0   108    46      0             368            4819
    5:35 PM     52            0     48     0           0         0      0     0       42   102      0     0      0    96    54      0             394            4786
    5:40 PM     44            1     49     0           0         0      0     0       54    94      0     0      0    99    42      0             383            4739
    5:45 PM     42            0     49     0           0         0      0     0       43    82      0     0      0   103    44      0             363            4712
    5:50 PM     31            0     38     0           0         0      0     0       36   104      0     0      0    82    42      0             333            4649
    5:55 PM     47            0     39     0           0         0      0     0       38    84      0     0      0    82    50      0             340            4600
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                         Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left         Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles 512            0    632     0           0         0      0     0      676 1200       0     0      0 1380    676      0                    5076
 Heavy Trucks   12            0     16                 0         0      0              4    12      0            0    48    12                            104
  Pedestrians                 0                                  4                           0                         0                                   4
    Bicycles     0            0      0                 0         0      0              0     0      0            0     6      0                            6
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:27 AM                                             SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                          Attachment 101B
                                                                         Application Materials
                                                                            Page 47 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 65th Ave -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                               QC JOB #: 11218007
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                    499          345                            Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                  1.4        6.7

                    327 43 129
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                               2.1 0.0 0.0


      1928   262                        41    1356
                                                                                                                  2.7   8.0                      2.4      2.7
             1000         0.98         1178
                                                                                                                        2.2                      3.1
      1779   517                       137    1159
                                                                                                                  3.0   1.9                      0.0      2.0

                    422 43       30
                                                                                                                               2.1 2.3 3.3

                    697          495
                                                                                                                               1.4        2.2



                           0                                                                                                    1    0    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

             1                           0                                                                              4                          5

                                                                                                                        0                          0

                           0                                                                                                    0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                         NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count              SW 65th Ave                       SW 65th Ave              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left         Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM     40           2      3     0           14       4     22     0       25    55     41     0     11    79      5     0             301
    4:05 PM     30           5      2     0            8       3     20     0       27    91     33     0     16   133      2     0             370
    4:10 PM     29           4      6     0           13       4     28     0       20    63     45     0     13    92      0     0             317
    4:15 PM     29           2      2     0           17       5     20     0       11    86     37     0      6   104      3     0             322
    4:20 PM     41           3      2     0            6       1     32     0       30    86     40     0      7    95      3     0             346
    4:25 PM     38           1      0     0            4       4     19     0       31    77     43     0      8    71      2     0             298
    4:30 PM     37           2      1     0           13       1     24     0       29    70     32     0     11   103      6     0             329
    4:35 PM     34           2      3     0            9       3     30     0       23    81     42     0      8    94      4     0             333
    4:40 PM     58           4      2     0            4       4     38     0       38    78     30     0     19    69      3     0             347
    4:45 PM     24          12      1     0           17       3     23     0       21    94     41     0      6   105      4     0             351
    4:50 PM     29           4      2     0            7       1     33     0       28    92     37     0     14   102      6     0             355
    4:55 PM     39           2      7     0            5       2     23     0       21    68     42     0     14    64      6     0             293            3962
    5:00 PM     25           2      0     0           16      10     34     0       14    95     53     0      5   116      2     0             372            4033
    5:05 PM     50           8      5     0           11       5     29     0       12    56     42     0     13    82      2     0             315            3978
    5:10 PM     29           0      5     0           14       6     29     0       19   103     53     0     11   148      2     0             419            4080
    5:15 PM     35           5      2     0            4       2     18     0       18    81     52     0     13    93      1     0             324            4082
    5:20 PM     31           2      2     0           18       4     25     0       23    75     48     1     11    93      2     0             335            4071
    5:25 PM     31           0      0     0           11       2     21     0       15   107     45     0     12   109      3     0             356            4129
    5:30 PM     59           4      1     0            9       1     12     0       14    55     47     0     11    64      2     0             279            4079
    5:35 PM     31           0      1     0           10       5     19     0       16   105     44     0     14   119    13      0             377            4123
    5:40 PM     38           1      5     0           11       2     15     0       12    75     48     0      7    77      5     0             296            4072
    5:45 PM     39           4      3     0           11       1     26     0       13    77     41     0      3    67      3     1             289            4010
    5:50 PM     25           7      2     0            3       2     17     0       29    91     39     0     14    71      7     0             307            3962
    5:55 PM     30           5      3     0            8       7     15     0       10    82     37     0      8    73      4     0             282            3951
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                        Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles 456          52     48     0          116      52    304     0      196   960    588     0    148 1292     20      0                    4232
 Heavy Trucks   12           4      0                  0       0      8             12    12     12            0    40      0                           100
  Pedestrians                0                                 0                           0                         0                                   0
    Bicycles     0           0      0                  0       0      1              0     0      0            0     3      0                            4
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:27 AM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                        Attachment 101B
                                                                       Application Materials
                                                                          Page 48 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 65th Ave -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                          QC JOB #: 11218001
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                    104            54                        Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                       1.9        3.7

                       72    27    5
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                 2.8 0.0 0.0


       181   40                          4   42
                                                                                                                    2.2   2.5                      0.0       0.0
             79             0.94        37
                                                                                                                          0.0                      0.0
       326   207                         1   85
                                                                                                                    0.3   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                       72    10    1
                                                                                                                                 2.8 10.0 0.0

                    235            83
                                                                                                                                 0.0        3.6



                             1                                                                                                    1    1    2



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             1                           4                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                          1                          0

                             0                                                                                                    0    1    0




                            NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                         NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                SW 65th Ave                  SW 65th Ave                    SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM         8          1      0     0      0        0      6     0        3        5      7      0    0        2     0     0               32
    4:05 PM         9          2      0     0      0        1      5     0        4        5     20      0    0        8     0     0               54
    4:10 PM         5          2      1     0      0        2      4     0        3        7      8      0    0        3     0     0               35
    4:15 PM         8          1      0     0      0        0      1     0        4        7     12      0    0        6     1     0               40
    4:20 PM         6          0      0     0      0        0      7     0        3        8      8      0    0        5     0     0               37
    4:25 PM        10          0      0     0      0        2      5     0        4        6     14      0    0        3     1     0               45
    4:30 PM         2          0      0     0      1        3      7     0        2        5     16      0    0        2     0     0               38
    4:35 PM         7          1      0     0      0        1      6     0        5        5      9      0    1        1     0     0               36
    4:40 PM         5          0      0     0      1        0      5     0        3        5     16      0    0        5     0     0               40
    4:45 PM         8          0      0     0      0        2      4     0        4        5     19      0    0        4     0     0               46
    4:50 PM         8          3      0     0      0        0      1     0        1        3     11      0    0        3     1     0               31
    4:55 PM         8          2      0     0      0        2      5     0        4        9     17      0    0        6     2     0               55              489
    5:00 PM         4          0      0     0      1        1     13     0        5       11     21      0    0        5     0     0               61              518
    5:05 PM         7          2      0     0      0        9      5     0        2       11     18      0    0        0     0     0               54              518
    5:10 PM         8          0      0     0      1        1      2     0        3        9     18      0    0        1     1     0               44              527
    5:15 PM         3          0      0     0      1        1      8     0        7        3     24      0    0        2     0     0               49              536
    5:20 PM         7          1      0     0      0        3     10     0        1        7     19      0    0        4     0     0               52              551
    5:25 PM         5          1      1     0      0        4      6     0        3        6     19      0    0        4     0     0               49              555
    5:30 PM         3          2      0     0      1        0      4     0        3        8     11      0    0        4     0     0               36              553
    5:35 PM         6          0      0     0      2        1      8     0        3        8     13      0    0        5     0     0               46              563
    5:40 PM        10          2      0     0      0        1      3     0        3        7     12      0    0        3     1     0               42              565
    5:45 PM         7          2      0     0      0        2      3     0        1        8     10      0    0        2     0     0               35              554
    5:50 PM         6          2      0     0      0        0      2     0        4       11      8      0    0        6     0     0               39              562
    5:55 PM         9          1      1     0      0        0      7     0        3        9     12      0    0        1     0     0               43              550
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                   Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     72          8      0     0      8       44     60     0        48      92    240      0    0       12     4     0                      588
 Heavy Trucks       8          0      0            0        0      8               0       0      0           0        0     0                             16
  Pedestrians                  0                            0                              0                           0                                    0
    Bicycles       0           0      0            0        0      0              0        0      1           0        0     0                              1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:27 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                     Attachment 101B
                                                                    Application Materials
                                                                       Page 49 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: NW Natural Loading Area -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                     QC JOB #: 11218015
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                              DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0         0                       Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                    0.0        0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                      Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                      0    0
                                                                                                           0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0           NaN        0
                                                                                                                 0.0                      0.0
       0     0                      0    0
                                                                                                           0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0         0
                                                                                                                        0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                              0    0    0



                                                                                                                 0                          0

             0                      0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          0

                          2                                                                                              0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                    NA                                                                            NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count       NW Natural Loading Area    NW Natural Loading Area          SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)               (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U     Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM         1     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                2
    4:05 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:10 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:15 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      1      0    1        0     0     0                2
    4:20 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:25 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:30 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:35 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:40 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:45 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:50 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:55 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              4
    5:00 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              2
    5:05 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              2
    5:10 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              2
    5:15 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:20 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:25 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:30 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:35 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:40 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:45 PM         1     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                2              2
    5:50 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              2
    5:55 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              2
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                 Southbound                   Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U     Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles      0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                       0
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      0             0     0      0            0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians             0                          0                            0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles        0     0      0             0     0      0            0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 3:51 PM                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                              Attachment 101B
                                                             Application Materials
                                                                Page 50 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: E NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218009
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0          0                        Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                       0.0        0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 4:45 PM -- 5:00 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       1     0                       0     0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0           0.25        0
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       0     0                       0     0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     1    0     0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0          1
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                       0                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          1                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                     NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          E NW Natural Dwy             E NW Natural Dwy                 SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:20 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:55 PM        1      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                1              1
    5:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:20 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
    5:55 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     4      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                       4
 Heavy Trucks      0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 3:51 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 51 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Mid NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218011
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0           0                       Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                         0.0         0.0

                     0     0     0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 4:35 PM -- 4:50 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       16    0                         0   0
                                                                                                                6.3    0.0                        0.0       0.0
             0            0.63         0
                                                                                                                       0.0                        0.0
       10    10                        0   4
                                                                                                                30.0   30.0                       0.0       0.0

                     16    0     4
                                                                                                                               6.3 0.0 0.0

                     10          20
                                                                                                                               30.0        5.0



                           0                                                                                                    0     0    0



                                                                                                                       0                            0

             0                         0                                                                               0                            0

                                                                                                                       0                            0

                           1                                                                                                    0     0    0




                          NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                       NA                                                                               NA                         NA




                          NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count         Mid NW Natural Dwy           Mid NW Natural Dwy                SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                     Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM         3     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   3
    4:05 PM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    1        0     0     0                   5
    4:10 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    1        0     0     0                   1
    4:15 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0
    4:20 PM         1     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   3
    4:25 PM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   1
    4:30 PM         0     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   2
    4:35 PM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      3      0    0        0     0     0                   4
    4:40 PM         3     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   5
    4:45 PM         3     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   3
    4:50 PM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   2
    4:55 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              29
    5:00 PM         3     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   4              30
    5:05 PM         3     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   5              30
    5:10 PM         0     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   3              32
    5:15 PM         1     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   2              34
    5:20 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              31
    5:25 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              30
    5:30 PM         0     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   1              29
    5:35 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              25
    5:40 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              20
    5:45 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   1              18
    5:50 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   2              18
    5:55 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              18
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                         Total
  All Vehicles     28     0      4     0        0       0      0     0        0        0    16       0    0        0     0     0                          48
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      0              0       0      0              0        0      8           0        0     0                                 8
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                       0
    Bicycles        0     0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 3:51 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 52 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: W NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218013
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0         0                         Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                       0.0        0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                      0      0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0           NaN        0
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       0     0                      0      0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0         0
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                      0                                                                                 0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          1                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                    NA                                                                                 NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          W NW Natural Dwy             W NW Natural Dwy                 SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:20 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
    4:55 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:20 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
    5:55 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                       0
 Heavy Trucks      0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 3:51 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 53 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 SB Ramps -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                                   QC JOB #: 11218004
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     1060             0                            Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                   4.0        0.0

                     568       4     488
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 12:00 PM -- 12:15 PM
                                                                                                                                    3.5 0.0 4.5


       1671   0                              0    1650
                                                                                                                       2.6   0.0                      0.0      3.0
              1147            0.94         1103
                                                                                                                             1.7                      2.2
       1590   443                          547    1635
                                                                                                                       2.0   2.9                      4.6      2.5

                          0    0      0
                                                                                                                                    0.0 0.0 0.0

                     994              0
                                                                                                                                    3.8        0.0



                               7                                                                                                     0    0    0



                                                                                                                             0                          0

              0                              0                                                                               0                          2

                                                                                                                             0                          0

                               1                                                                                                     0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                         NA




              NA                            NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                               NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                  I-5 SB Ramps                      I-5 SB Ramps              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period                    (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At      Left         Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U
   11:00 AM         0             0      0     0          32        0     34     0        0    90     36     0     34    60      0     0             286
   11:05 AM         0             0      0     0          27        2     40     0        0    72     33     0     32    78      0     0             284
   11:10 AM         0             0      0     0          44        0     53     0        0    66     39     0     44    82      0     0             328
   11:15 AM         0             0      0     0          42        1     47     0        0    70     42     0     41    79      0     0             322
   11:20 AM         0             0      0     0          41        0     40     0        0    67     33     0     51    92      0     0             324
   11:25 AM         0             0      0     0          37        0     49     0        0    65     37     0     39    82      0     0             309
   11:30 AM         0             0      0     0          33        0     51     0        0    66     33     0     36    88      0     0             307
   11:35 AM         0             0      0     0          46        0     49     0        0    84     38     0     40    72      0     0             329
   11:40 AM         0             0      0     0          49        0     47     0        0    87     39     0     40    99      0     0             361
   11:45 AM         0             0      0     0          43        0     78     0        0    75     35     0     51    96      0     0             378
   11:50 AM         0             0      0     0          41        0     58     0        0    87     39     0     34    92      0     0             351
   11:55 AM         0             0      0     0          32        0     58     0        0    67     34     0     57   103      0     0             351            3930
   12:00 PM         0             0      0     0          31        0     47     0        0    96     30     0     50   106      0     0             360            4004
   12:05 PM         0             0      0     0          43        2     47     0        0   123     40     0     50    84      0     0             389            4109
   12:10 PM         0             0      0     0          28        0     46     0        0   119     52     0     51    93      0     0             389            4170
   12:15 PM         0             0      0     0          55        0     47     0        0    91     37     0     45    88      0     0             363            4211
   12:20 PM         0             0      0     0          46        0     41     0        0   108     33     0     35    84      0     0             347            4234
   12:25 PM         0             0      0     0          38        1     40     0        0    87     33     0     36    93      0     0             328            4253
   12:30 PM         0             0      0     0          38        1     39     0        0    85     41     0     48    89      0     0             341            4287
   12:35 PM         0             0      0     0          41        0     47     0        0    78     29     0     44    96      0     0             335            4293
   12:40 PM         0             0      0     0          52        0     64     0        0    88     34     0     43   101      0     0             382            4314
   12:45 PM         0             0      0     0          44        0     57     0        0    93     34     0     37    94      0     0             359            4295
   12:50 PM         0             0      0     0          35        0     51     0        0    88     38     0     53    81      0     0             346            4290
   12:55 PM         0             0      0     0          37        0     42     0        0    91     42     0     55    94      0     0             361            4300
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                        Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates       Left         Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles      0             0      0     0         408        8    560     0        0 1352     488     0    604 1132       0     0                    4552
 Heavy Trucks       0             0      0                16        0     20              0    20     16           16    16      0                           104
  Pedestrians                     0                                 4                           0                         0                                   4
    Bicycles         0            0      0                 0        0      0              0     0      0            0     1      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:52 AM                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                             Attachment 101B
                                                                            Application Materials
                                                                               Page 54 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 NB Ramps -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                                QC JOB #: 11218006
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                      0          1067                           Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                   0.0        2.8

                      0    0      0
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 12:00 PM -- 12:15 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


      1675   506                        555    1766
                                                                                                                    2.7   2.0                      3.6      3.0
             1192         0.99          1211
                                                                                                                          2.6                      2.7
      1698   0                            0    1705
                                                                                                                    2.4   0.0                      0.0      2.7

                    464    6     513
                                                                                                                                 2.8 0.0 2.9

                      0          983
                                                                                                                                 0.0        2.8



                           4                                                                                                      0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             0                            0                                                                               0                          3

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                           6                                                                                                      0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                          NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count              I-5 NB Ramps                       I-5 NB Ramps              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period                (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left          Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right     U
   11:00 AM     33            2     29     0           0         0      0     0       37    79      0     0      0    59    38      0             277
   11:05 AM     33            0     47     0           0         0      0     0       37    72      0     0      0    78    27      0             294
   11:10 AM     38            0     42     0           0         0      0     0       33    93      0     0      0    86    48      0             340
   11:15 AM     42            0     42     0           0         0      0     0       34    82      0     0      0    96    42      0             338
   11:20 AM     39            0     32     0           0         0      0     0       26    92      0     0      0   101    36      0             326
   11:25 AM     47            0     47     0           0         0      0     0       28    75      0     0      0    57    42      0             296
   11:30 AM     37            0     46     0           0         0      0     0       30    59      0     0      0    84    51      0             307
   11:35 AM     31            0     42     0           0         0      0     0       46    82      0     0      0    79    54      0             334
   11:40 AM     52            0     49     0           0         0      0     0       46   106      0     0      0    82    37      0             372
   11:45 AM     52            0     52     0           0         0      0     0       35    87      0     0      0   106    39      0             371
   11:50 AM     41            0     37     0           0         0      0     0       40    90      0     0      0    98    52      0             358
   11:55 AM     44            2     55     0           0         0      0     0       34    67      0     0      0    97    40      0             339            3952
   12:00 PM     41            1     53     0           0         0      0     0       36    85      0     0      0   107    55      0             378            4053
   12:05 PM     41            1     31     0           0         0      0     0       44   114      0     0      0    95    45      0             371            4130
   12:10 PM     40            0     38     0           0         0      0     0       45   108      0     0      0   104    40      0             375            4165
   12:15 PM     32            1     44     0           0         0      0     0       41   105      0     0      0   113    30      0             366            4193
   12:20 PM     40            0     32     0           0         0      0     0       54   104      0     0      0    78    46      0             354            4221
   12:25 PM     44            0     46     0           0         0      0     0       38   102      0     0      0    89    52      0             371            4296
   12:30 PM     34            1     49     0           0         0      0     0       37    89      0     0      0   103    40      0             353            4342
   12:35 PM     46            0     45     0           0         0      0     0       33    91      0     0      0   101    48      0             364            4372
   12:40 PM     36            1     46     0           0         0      0     0       48   107      0     0      0   100    47      0             385            4385
   12:45 PM     38            0     38     0           0         0      0     0       37   107      0     0      0   114    47      0             381            4395
   12:50 PM     31            1     43     0           0         0      0     0       46    97      0     0      0   103    53      0             374            4411
   12:55 PM     41            0     48     0           0         0      0     0       47    83      0     0      0   104    52      0             375            4447
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                         Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left         Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles 488            8    488     0           0         0      0     0      500 1228       0     0      0 1224    560      0                    4496
 Heavy Trucks   16            0     20                 0         0      0              8    28      0            0    16    20                            108
  Pedestrians                 0                                  4                           0                         0                                   4
    Bicycles     0            0      0                 0         0      0              0     0      0            0     1      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:52 AM                                             SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                          Attachment 101B
                                                                         Application Materials
                                                                            Page 55 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 65th Ave -- Lower Boones Ferry Rd                                                                             QC JOB #: 11218008
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                   506          452                          Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                  2.4        1.3

                   312 52 142
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 12:00 PM -- 12:15 PM
                                                                                                                             1.3 5.8 3.5


      1785   326                       54   1197
                                                                                                                3.2   0.9                      0.0      3.8
             845         0.99         999
                                                                                                                      3.7                      4.5
      1677   506                      144   1033
                                                                                                                2.9   3.0                      0.7      3.5

                   473 73       46
                                                                                                                             1.9 4.1 0.0

                   702          592
                                                                                                                             2.7        2.0



                          5                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             7                          5                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          4                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                       NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count             SW 65th Ave                      SW 65th Ave              Lower Boones Ferry Rd     Lower Boones Ferry Rd            Total      Hourly
     Period              (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left        Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U
   11:00 AM     25          5      3     0           2       2     12     0       17    52     39     1     11    62      2     0             233
   11:05 AM     32          3      4     0           1       2     11     0       23    68     24     0      8    64      0     0             240
   11:10 AM     37          2      5     0           3       2     30     0       19    80     31     0      7    72      5     0             293
   11:15 AM     27          3      3     0           9       2      8     0       24    78     26     0      4    92      2     0             278
   11:20 AM     40          5      3     0           4       2     15     0       18    73     34     0      9    79      8     0             290
   11:25 AM     19          8      6     0           5       4     17     0       25    59     39     1     13    77      4     0             277
   11:30 AM     41          2      3     0          12       1     22     0       16    64     31     0     14    69      4     0             279
   11:35 AM     39          7      3     0           9       3     21     0        9    49     25     0      9    69      4     0             247
   11:40 AM     31          1      5     0           6       4     16     0       39    98     40     1      9    88      6     0             344
   11:45 AM     40          8      5     0           9       3     21     0       21    51     42     1     16    51      1     0             269
   11:50 AM     24          9      3     0           4       5     30     0       29    72     40     1     11   100      7     0             335
   11:55 AM     53          3      5     0           8       3     21     0       24    52     39     0     13    67      5     0             293            3378
   12:00 PM     49          5      1     0           7       4     31     0       34    63     35     0     20    76      4     0             329            3474
   12:05 PM     28          5      3     0          10       3     24     0       31    78     47     0     15   110      9     0             363            3597
   12:10 PM     49         10      4     0          12       2     28     0       21    58     43     0      7    70      5     0             309            3613
   12:15 PM     22          5      4     0          12       7     23     0       40    77     56     1     13    73      6     0             339            3674
   12:20 PM     33          5      2     0          20       6     25     0       15    65     33     0      7    66      1     0             278            3662
   12:25 PM     62          4      7     0          13       4     18     0       24    76     42     0      9    78      3     0             340            3725
   12:30 PM     36          4      5     0           9       2     25     0       33    53     43     0     14    67      3     0             294            3740
   12:35 PM     27          2      3     0           7       4     37     0       29   100     33     0     13   113      3     0             371            3864
   12:40 PM     39          8      4     0          14       1     26     0       21    66     46     0      7    80      4     0             316            3836
   12:45 PM     41          7      4     0          11       7     28     0       36    75     40     0     13    81      6     0             349            3916
   12:50 PM     30          6      5     0          13       6     24     0       22    84     39     0     13   105      7     0             354            3935
   12:55 PM     57         12      4     0          14       6     23     0       19    50     49     0     13    80      3     0             330            3972
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                       Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left       Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles 504         80     32     0         116      36    332     0      344   796    500     0    168 1024     72      0                    4004
 Heavy Trucks   16         12      0                12       4      4              4    24     16            4    28      0                           124
  Pedestrians               0                                8                           4                         4                                   16
    Bicycles     0          0      0                 0       0      0              0     0      0            0     0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:52 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                      Attachment 101B
                                                                     Application Materials
                                                                        Page 56 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 65th Ave -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                           QC JOB #: 11218002
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                       73          90                        Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                       4.1        6.7

                       66    4     3
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 12:00 PM -- 12:15 PM
                                                                                                                                  4.5 0.0 0.0


       208   78                           3   45
                                                                                                                     2.9   7.7                      0.0       0.0
             63             0.91         40
                                                                                                                           6.3                      0.0
       230   89                           2   68
                                                                                                                     5.2   2.2                      0.0       7.4

                    102      9     2
                                                                                                                                  2.9 0.0 50.0

                       95          113
                                                                                                                                  2.1        3.5



                             1                                                                                                     0    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                          1

             1                            0                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                             0                                                                                                     0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                SW 65th Ave                   SW 65th Ave                    SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
   11:00 AM         7          0      0     0       0        1      2     0         3       6      4      0    0        1     0     0               24
   11:05 AM         9          1      0     0       0        2      4     0         3       6      7      0    0        5     1     0               38
   11:10 AM         3          1      0     0       1        0      4     0         2       3      7      0    0        7     0     0               28
   11:15 AM        11          2      0     0       0        0      4     0         3       1      5      0    0        0     0     0               26
   11:20 AM         6          0      0     0       0        0      6     0         1       4     11      0    0        4     0     0               32
   11:25 AM         7          2      0     0       1        1      5     0         2       3      5      0    0        6     0     0               32
   11:30 AM         9          0      1     0       0        2      4     0         2       3      6      0    0        4     0     0               31
   11:35 AM        11          1      0     0       1        3      8     0         6       2      7      0    0        7     1     0               47
   11:40 AM         8          0      0     0       1        1      8     0         5       5     10      0    0        3     0     0               41
   11:45 AM        14          1      0     0       0        0      9     0         7       3      7      0    0        5     0     0               46
   11:50 AM         6          3      0     0       0        1      6     0         9       7      6      0    0        5     0     0               43
   11:55 AM         8          2      0     0       0        2      5     0         6       3     11      0    0        7     0     0               44              432
   12:00 PM         7          0      0     0       1        0     11     0         6       6      9      0    0        3     0     0               43              451
   12:05 PM         9          1      1     0       0        1      9     0         9       2      6      0    0        1     0     0               39              452
   12:10 PM         8          1      0     0       0        0      9     0         4       6     11      0    2        3     1     0               45              469
   12:15 PM         7          2      0     0       1        0      2     0         6       3      5      0    0        3     0     0               29              472
   12:20 PM        12          0      1     0       0        1      4     0         4       8     11      0    0        3     0     0               44              484
   12:25 PM         8          2      0     0       0        0      9     0        10       2      3      0    0        4     0     0               38              490
   12:30 PM         7          1      0     0       1        0      4     0        12       5      6      0    0        3     1     0               40              499
   12:35 PM        10          0      0     0       0        1      0     0         5       7      6      0    0        3     0     0               32              484
   12:40 PM         5          0      0     0       0        0      3     0         5       2      5      0    0        3     0     0               23              466
   12:45 PM         6          0      0     0       0        1      3     0         3       6     10      0    0        6     0     0               35              455
   12:50 PM        13          2      0     0       0        0      3     0         9       6      7      0    0        5     1     0               46              458
   12:55 PM        10          0      0     0       0        0      9     0         5      10     10      0    0        3     0     0               47              461
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     96          8      4     0       4        4    116     0        76      56    104      0    8       28     4     0                      508
 Heavy Trucks       4          0      0             0        0      4               8       4      4           0        0     0                             24
  Pedestrians                  0                             0                              0                           0                                    0
    Bicycles       0           0      0             0        0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/25/2013 9:52 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                      Attachment 101B
                                                                     Application Materials
                                                                        Page 57 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: NW Natural Loading Area -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                       QC JOB #: 11218016
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0          0                     Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                        0.0         0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                     Peak 15-Min: 12:45 PM -- 1:00 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                       0   0
                                                                                                           0.0     0.0                         0.0       0.0
             0           0.25        0
                                                                                                                   0.0                         0.0
       1     1                       0   0
                                                                                                           100.0   100.0                       0.0       0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

                     1          0
                                                                                                                           100.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                 0      0    0



                                                                                                                   0                             0

             0                       0                                                                             0                             0

                                                                                                                   0                             0

                          0                                                                                                 0      0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                     NA                                                                             NA                          NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count       NW Natural Loading Area    NW Natural Loading Area          SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                       Total       Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)               (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                   Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U     Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
   11:00 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    1        0     0     0                     1
   11:05 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:10 AM         1     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     1
   11:15 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:20 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:25 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:30 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:35 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:40 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:45 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:50 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0
   11:55 AM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              2
   12:00 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              1
   12:05 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              1
   12:10 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:15 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:20 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:25 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:30 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:35 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:40 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:45 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:50 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                     0              0
   12:55 PM         0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                     1              1
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                 Southbound                   Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U     Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                           Total
  All Vehicles      0     0      0     0       0     0      0     0      0        0      4      0    0        0     0     0                            4
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      0             0     0      0            0        0      4           0        0     0                                  4
  Pedestrians             0                          0                            0                           0                                        0
    Bicycles        0     0      0             0     0      0            0        0      0           0        0     0                                  0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 4:03 PM                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                              Attachment 101B
                                                             Application Materials
                                                                Page 58 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: E NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218010
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0          0                       Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                       0.0        0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                       Peak 15-Min: 12:10 PM -- 12:25 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       1     0                       0     0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0           0.25        0
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       0     0                       0     0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     1    0     0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0          1
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                       0                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                     NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          E NW Natural Dwy             E NW Natural Dwy                 SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
   11:00 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:05 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:10 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:15 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:20 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:25 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:30 AM        1      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                1
   11:35 AM        1      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                2
   11:40 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:45 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:50 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:55 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:20 PM        1      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                1              4
   12:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              4
   12:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              3
   12:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
   12:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
   12:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
   12:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
   12:55 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              1
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     4      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                       4
 Heavy Trucks      0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 4:03 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 59 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Mid NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218012
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0           0                      Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                         0.0         0.0

                     0     0     0
                                                       Peak 15-Min: 12:15 PM -- 12:30 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       21    0                         0   2
                                                                                                                0.0    0.0                        0.0       0.0
             0            0.65         0
                                                                                                                       0.0                        0.0
       16    16                        2   0
                                                                                                                12.5   12.5                       0.0       0.0

                     21    0     0
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                     18          21
                                                                                                                               11.1        0.0



                           0                                                                                                    0     0    0



                                                                                                                       0                            0

             0                         0                                                                               0                            0

                                                                                                                       0                            0

                           0                                                                                                    0     0    0




                          NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                       NA                                                                               NA                         NA




                          NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count         Mid NW Natural Dwy           Mid NW Natural Dwy                SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                     Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
   11:00 AM         3     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   4
   11:05 AM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   2
   11:10 AM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    1        0     0     0                   3
   11:15 AM         3     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   3
   11:20 AM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0
   11:25 AM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   3
   11:30 AM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   2
   11:35 AM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      3      0    1        0     0     0                   6
   11:40 AM         2     0      1     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   3
   11:45 AM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0
   11:50 AM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   2
   11:55 AM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   1              29
   12:00 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              25
   12:05 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    1        0     0     0                   1              24
   12:10 PM         4     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   6              27
   12:15 PM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      3      0    0        0     0     0                   5              29
   12:20 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    1        0     0     0                   2              31
   12:25 PM         6     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   8              36
   12:30 PM         2     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   3              37
   12:35 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   1              32
   12:40 PM         5     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      2      0    0        0     0     0                   7              36
   12:45 PM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      1      0    0        0     0     0                   2              38
   12:50 PM         0     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                   0              36
   12:55 PM         1     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      3      0    0        0     0     0                   4              39
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                         Total
  All Vehicles     32     0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0    24       0    4        0     0     0                          60
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                                 0
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                       0
    Bicycles        0     0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 4:03 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 60 of 70
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: W NW Natural Dwy -- SW McEwan Rd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 11218014
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Sep 17 2013
                     0         0                        Peak-Hour: 12:00 PM -- 1:00 PM                                       0.0        0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                       Peak 15-Min: 12:00 PM -- 12:15 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                      0      0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0           NaN        0
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       0     0                      0      0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     0    0    0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0         0
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                      0                                                                                 0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                    NA                                                                                 NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          W NW Natural Dwy             W NW Natural Dwy                 SW McEwan Rd                SW McEwan Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
   11:00 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:05 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:10 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:15 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:20 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:25 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:30 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:35 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:40 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:45 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:50 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0
   11:55 AM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:00 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:05 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:10 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:15 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:20 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:25 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:30 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:35 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:40 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:45 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:50 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
   12:55 PM        0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                0              0
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                       0
 Heavy Trucks      0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
  Pedestrians             0                             0                              0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0      0      0              0       0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/4/2013 4:03 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                 Attachment 101B
                                                                Application Materials
                                                                   Page 61 of 70
