                                         AGENDA REQUEST
AGENDA HEADING:                                      COMMISSION MEETING DATE:                  AGENDA ITEM NO:
Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing                        September 16, 2013                        XII.B.1.
BY Neighborhood and Development                   Timothy Litchet          Senior Planner Mendez and General
   Services                                                                Manager/Integration Smith
    Originating Department                        Department Head         Presenter

SUBJECT:

Continued Public Hearing Re: Proposed Ordinance No. 13-5044 rezoning 0.55 acres located at 1174 and
1186 Hampton Road.

COMMISSION PRIORITIES:
     Business Requirement

EXPLANATION:                 (see next page for additional explanation)
This public hearing is continued from March 4, June 3,and July 1, 2013.

Dr. Steve Bedi proposes to rezone properties located at 1174 and 1186 Hampton Road from RMF-3 to the
NT zone district in order to construct Reflections Resort, a medical-spa type use on the site that would
serve psoriasis and dermatitis patients who would stay at the facility for a period ranging from a few days
to a few weeks. The proposed use would be allowed in the NT zone district as it may be considered to be
a combination of uses - "hotel/motel" since it would provide for daily or weekly stays and "medical office"
since patients would be seeking treatment/lifestyle changes in order to cope with psoriasis and dermatitis.
Both uses are permitted within the NT district. Additionally, a "health club or spa, exercise insruction or
dance facility" is a permitted use in the NT zone district.

The Future Land Use Map classification for the subject property is Community Commercial. The NT
zone district is an implementing district for Community Commercial. The staff report indicates that the
proposed rezoning is consistent with the Sarasota City Plan.

 ADMINISTRATION'S RECOMMENDATION:

Neighborhood and Development Services staff recommends approval of Ordinance No. 13-5044 with the
revised proffers from May 22, 2013 included on first reading.




APPROVAL SUMMARY:
                              AGENDA REQUEST
Approval                          Required Date Completed   Completed By      Status
Department Head Approval             Y       09/09/2013     Timothy Litchet   APPROVED
Deputy City Manager Approval         Y       09/09/2013     Marlon Brown      APPROVED
City Manager Approval                Y       09/09/2013     Marlon Brown      APPROVED
City Auditor and Clerk Approval      Y       09/09/2013     Pamela Nadalini   APPROVED




                                                  2
                                    AGENDA REQUEST
ADDITIONAL EXPLANATION:

The applicant originally proffered to restrict the following uses from the site: motor vehicle fueling, motor
vehicle service, alcoholic beverage store, bar, convenience store, nightclub, and industrial service uses
(including print shop and limousine or taxi dispatch). On May 22, 2013, the applicant revised the proffer to
limit uses only to hotel/motel; health club or spa, exercise instruction or dance facility; and office or clinic,
medical or dental.

A traffic study was performed for the proposed rezoning. The study examined a more intensive mixed-use
project (6,000 sq. ft. drive-in bank and 4 apartment units) than that is being proposed by the applicant because
a site plan is not accompanying the rezone petition and the most recent proffer had not been submitted at the
time. The results indicate that all study intersections and roadway segments are currently operating at an
acceptable level of service and are expected to operate at an acceptable level of service with future traffic
conditions. It includes one recommended condition for the rezone: a new sidewalk (minimum 5-foot width)
should be provided to connect the project to the off-site sidewalk located along US 41. The sidewalk should
be designed to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act guidelines. An additional traffic analysis was
performed for Hampton Road, a local street. This analysis indicates that Hampton Road is currently operating
at LOS A and would continue to operate acceptably with the project traffic and future traffic conditions.

If the City Commission desires to review a site plan in conjunction with and prior to making a decision
regarding this rezoning request, the Zoning Code does state "at the option of the development review
committee, planning board, or city commission, an applicant may also be required to submit a site plan in
order to demonstrate consistency with the Sarasota City Plan or tree protection regulations."

This petition was considered on January 9 and January 23, 2013 as one member of the Planning Board was
absent at the first meeting and one member abstained. On January 9, the Planning Board voted 2-1
recommending denial. On January 23, the member that was absent on January 9 voted against the motion of
denial. Therefore, the recommendation of the Planning Board is for denial by a vote of 2-2.

Additionally, the agenda backup material includes information regarding the adoption of the comprehensive
plan that occurred in 2008 wherein the Future Land Use Map was revised to Community Commercial for the
site. This material includes a brief history of the site dating from the 1950's, public meeting notices, proposed
and adopted Future Land Use Maps, and the adopting ordinance for the comprehensive plan from December
1, 2008. This material begins on page 89.

ADDITIONAL ADMIN RECOMMENDATION:




FUNDING SOURCE:                                                                                                     AMOUNT:


                                                                3
                                     AGENDA REQUEST
HOUSING IMPACT (Per House):                     NEW CONSTRUCTION:                         REHABILITATION:

                                                                    $0                               $0

SUPPORT DEPARTMENTS:
City Auditor and Clerk - Pamela M. Nadalini     Neighborhood and Development Services -
                                                Timothy Litchet
City Attorney - Robert Fournier                 City Manager - Thomas Barwin
Commission Liaisons - Marlon Brown



                                              AGENDA DISPOSITION
COMMISSION ACTION:
Final Action Motion:

Motion By:                                                    Second By:

Vote:




                                                          4
September 11, 2013




City Commission

City of Sarasota

1565 1st Street

Sarasota, Florida 34236




RE:     Proposed Ordinance No. 13-5044

       Rezoning Petition No. 12-REN-02 from RMF-3 to NT

         O.55-acres at 1174 and 1186 Hampton Road




Dear Commissioners:




As you may recall, my daughter, Monica Bedi, MD, I serve as agent for the Applicant, Fusion Healthcare, Inc.,
in connection with the referenced rezoning application. The public hearing on that application was continued
from July 1 to next Monday, September 16, 2013. The purpose of this letter is to seek a postponement ofthese
proceedings to enable us to amend the pending application to include a proffered site plan.




When we initiated this process, we were aware that rezone applicants are given the option of submitting either a
site plan or written proffers in lieu of a site plan. Because we had not yet finalized our site plan, we chose to
submit a written proffer to restrict the most intensive uses permitted in the NT zoning district, including motor
vehicle fueling, motor vehicle service, alcoholic beverage store, bar, convenience store, nightclub, and industrial
service uses. We submitted graphics depicting our proposed Reflections Resort, including elevation drawings;
but we did not submit a formal site plan.




In the course of the ensuing public hearings before the Planning Board and City Commission, it became
increasingly apparent that free-standing rezone applications (those without a site plan) are not looked upon with
favor, and that the zoning code specifically gives the City Commission the option of requiring an applicant to
submit a site plan in order to demonstrate consistency with the Sarasota City Plan or tree protection regulations.
Over the past year, we have listened to comments from the our neighbors and questions from commissioners
from which we gained a sense that many folks would feel more comfortable with our proposed rezoning if they
could only visualize how we intend to address parking requirements, tree protection, and other compatibility
issues. We do not wish to put Commissioners in the awkward position of having to mandate that we submit a
site plan. Instead, we propose to do it voluntarily.
Weare aware that this decision will essentially require that we "reboot" the process by once again undergoing
review by the Development Review Committee (DRC) and by participating in another public hearing before the
Planning Board. We are eager to do this if it achieves our ultimate goal of securing the rezoning. Our decision
in this respect is justifiable given the reality that we will eventually have to submit a site plan for approval at a
Planning Board public hearing, anyway, before we can undertake any development.




We are comforted in the knowledge that the property is classified as Community Commercial on the City's
Future Land Use Map (FLUM), and that NT is an appropriate implementing district. This designation has an
historical foundation as the site was previously classified as a Resort under an earlier version of the
comprehensive plan. US 41 is a major corridor in need of redevelopment; and due to the high volume of traffic,
multiple family development would not be as suitable. The parcel has sufficient depth to support commercial
use; and it matches the depth of the commercial designations to the north. It was in reliance on these favorable
circumstances that Fusion Healthcare, Inc. chose to purchase the property in 2011. We are further reassured by
the staff's analysis indicating that the proposed rezoning is consistent with each and every element of the City
Plan; and by staffs recommendation of approval. Under these circumstances, we are confident of our ability to
present a site plan that will be embraced by the City Commission and, hopefully, by many ofthe neighbors.




We will of course be in attendance at the resumed public hearing Monday night to await the Commission's
decision on our requested postponement.




Thank you for your consideration of our request.




Respectfully submitted,




~~
                                     ?
Steve Bedi
706 Riviera Dunes Way
Palmetto FI, 34221
(727)686-3489
stevebedimd@yahoo.com
                                     ORDINANCE NO. 13-5044

               AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SARASOTA, FLORIDA TO
               REZONE CERTAIN REAL PROPERTY LOCATED ON THE
               SOUTH SIDE OF HAMPTON ROAD WEST OF NORTH TAMIAMI
               TRAIL (U.S. 41) WITH STREET ADDRESSES OF 1174 AND
               1186 HAMPTON ROAD FROM THE RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE
               FAMILY 3 (RMF-3) ZONE DISTRICT TO THE NORTH TRAIL
               (NT) ZONE DISTRICT; PROVIDING FOR CONDITIONS OF SAID
               REZONING; ALL AS IS MORE PARTICULARLY SET FORTH
               HEREIN; PROVIDING FOR READING BY TITLE ONLY; AND
               PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.

        WHEREAS, Fusion Healthcare, Inc., as the fee simple owner of the real property
described herein, through Steve Bedi of Rejuvenation Media, LLC, as its agent, hereinafter
collectively referred to as the Applicant, has filed Application No. 12-REN-02 requesting a
rezoning of said real property from the Residential Multiple Family 3 (RMF-3) Zone District to
the North Trail (NT) Zone District; and

      WHEREAS, Section IV-1102(b) Zoning Code (2002 edition) provides that the City
Commission may accept the performance of conditions voluntarily proffered by an applicant in
connection with an application for rezoning; and

      WHEREAS, Applicant has proffered conditions relative to Rezone Application No. 12-
REN-02 which would limit the potential uses of the subject property described herein; and

        WHEREAS, Rezone Application No. 12-REN-02 shall be considered in accordance with
the requirements and procedures set forth in Article IV, Division 11, of the Zoning Code (2002
edition) pertaining to rezoning; and

       WHEREAS, the Planning Board, acting in its capacity as the Local Planning Agency has
held a duly noticed public hearing pertaining to Rezone Application No. 12-REN-02 on January
9, 2013 and continued to January 23, 2013; and

       WHEREAS, the Planning Board, acting in its capacity as the Local Planning Agency has
considered the written staff analysis and the testimony at the public hearing and specifically
found that Rezone Application No. 12-REN-02 failed to satisfy the standards for review set forth
in Section IV-1106, Zoning Code (2002 edition) and was inconsistent with the Sarasota City
Plan (2030) and recommended denial to the City Commission; and

       WHEREAS, the City Commission has held a duly noticed public hearing pertaining to
Rezone Application No. 12-REN-02 which was originally scheduled for March 4, 2013 and was
continued to June 1, 2013 as well as July 1, 2013 as well as September 16, 2013.

      NOW THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE CITY OF SARASOTA,
FLORIDA:


       Section 1.   The following described real property located in the corporate limits of the

City of Sarasota, Sarasota County:



                                                                                Page 1 of 156
                 Lots 1 and 2 (less Trail Right of Way), and Lots 3 and the East 49 feet of
        Lot 4, Subdivision of Lots 3 and 16, Block B, WHITAKER SUBDIVISION of
        Fractional Section 13, Township 36 South, Range 17 East, as per plat thereof
        recoded in Plat Book 1, Page 125 1/2, Public Records of Sarasota County,
        Florida.

               The above-described property is referred to by the Sarasota County
        Property Appraiser as ParcellD Nos. 2007-01-0001 and 2007-01-0003 located at
        1186 and 1174 Hampton Road


is hereby reclassified from the Residential Multiple Family 3 (RMF-3) Zone District to the North

Trail (NT) Zone District, and the Official Zoning Map of the City of Sarasota is amended

accordingly, subject to all of the terms and conditions set out below.

       Section 2.    This rezoning is granted pursuant to Article IV, Division 11, of the Zoning

Code (2002 edition) pertaining to rezoning and shall be subject to all of the terms, requirements

and limitations thereof.

       Section 3.      The approvals granted by this Ordinance with regard to Rezone

Application No. 12-REN-02 are subject to the following conditions:

              A.     Table VI-501-A, Zoning Code (2002 edition), sets forth the primary
       uses allowed in the commercial zones. Pursuant to Applicant's proffer, all future
       uses on the property described in Section 1, above, shall be limited to one or
       more of the following North Trail (NT) Zone District permitted uses set forth in
       Table VI-501-A:

                       i.   Hotel/motel;

                       ii. Health club or spa, exercise, exercise instruction or dance
                           facility; and

                       iii. Office or clinic, medical or dental.

               B.     All development and construction plans for future uses upon the
       property described in Section 1, above, shall be in full compliance with all
       applicable codes and regulations of the City of Sarasota or any other regulatory
       entity. This shall include, but is not limited to, all zoning code provisions
       applicable to development under the North Trail (NT) Zone District.

              C.      Applicant covenants to obtain from the Florida Department of
       Business and Professional Regulations a license to operate a hotel/motel on the
       property described in Section 1, above.

                                                   2



                                                                                  Page 2 of 156
                 D.      As a condition precedent to issuance of any temporary or
         permanent Certificate of Occupancy for any structure constructed upon the
         property described in Section 1, above, Applicant shall construct a new sidewalk
         (minimum 5-foot width) to connect said structure to the off-site sidewalk along
         U.S. 41. The sidewalk should be designed to comply with the Americans with
         Disability Act Guidelines.

         Section 4.        This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon second reading.

         PASSED on first reading by title only, after posting on the bulletin board at City Hall for

at least three (3) days prior to first reading, as authorized by Article IV, Section 2, Charter of the

City of Sarasota, Florida this _ _ _ _ day of _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ " 2013.

         PASSED on second reading and finally adopted this ___ day of _ _ _ _ __

2013.




                                                      Shannon Snyder, Mayor
ATTEST:


Pamela M. Nadalini, MBA, CMC
City Auditor and Clerk




_ _ Mayor Shannon Synder
_ _ Vice Mayor Willie Charles Shaw
    Commissioner Suzanne Atwell
    Commissioner Paul Caragiulo
    Commissioner Susan 1. Chapman




C:ITammy's FilesIOrdinances\2013113·5033·rezone Hampton Road·?·8·13.doc




                                                          3



                                                                                     Page 3 of 156
Revised Proffer Statement




                            Page 4 of 156
                                                                                   RECEIVED
                                                                                      MAY 22 201 3
 City of Sarasota
 Development Application                                                        City Auditor & Clerk
 Proffer Statement

 Subject: 1174 & 1187 Hampton road rezone to North Trail

         The undersigned has applied for re-zoning of the property located at: 1174 and
1186 Hampton rd. The property is presently a RMF-3. We have applied to change the
zoning to north trail. According to the future land use by the Planning Board, this
property is subject to implicating north trail zoning. There will be no adverse effect;
rather it will be a compliment to the Sarasota City Plan.

        We have submitted a proffer statement in the past, now we are specifically
stating and modifying that we will only be allowed to construct a Reflection Resort.
The permitted uses we are proffering are hotel/motel; health club or spa, exercise
instruction or dance facility; and/or office or clinic, medical or dental, as may be
applicable to our project. We will follow all the rules and regulations for the site plan
approval & environmental regulations, in the city of Sarasota under the North Trail
zonmg.

        It will consist of approximately 20-25 suites each approximately 400 sq. ft.
containing a living room, bedroom, and bathroom. The resort will have educational
rooms, yoga and meditation space, classrooms, health spa, pool, conference room,
examination room, exercise facility, and a nutritional education kitchen classroom. We
will obtain from the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation a
license to operate as a hotel/motel under the North Trail Zoning ..

        The purpose of the spa will be to provide educational services for lifestyle
modification for longevity, chronic dermatitis and psoriasis. It will provide
comprehensive, vertically integrated solutions to prevent, cure and manage our guests.
This is achieved through cognitive fitness, nutrition, physical fitness, stress-management
for chronic diseases. Guests will stay a minimum of one week to three weeks and the
program will consist of:

        o   [Personalized exercise plan (aerobic and yoga classes), Nutritional education,
            Education related to al body wellness, Cooking demonstrations, Stress
            Management Classes (meditation and visualization), Daily tacking activities,
            Evening Entertainment]

Physicians from all over the United States will refer all patients. Physicians will evaluate
these patients before they are accepted at the resort for radical lifestyle modifications. It
has been found most physicians have no time to educate these patients on how to
modify their lifestyles significantly and effectively. All patients will be given a
personal lifestyle manual and have follow up visits upon their return with their own
physician to sustain these new lifestyle modifications.




                                                                                    Page 5 of 156
 More than 90% of the clients will be from out of state, and from different parts of the
 world . The resort will have a shuttle service that will transport guest to and from the
 airport. This facility will only provide in-house services. Our marketing team has made
 many contacts throughout the country, and many physicians will be sending their clients
 here.

 The resort will be supervised under the direction of Monica K. Bedi, MD. , Board
 Certified Dermatologist.




 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned have executed this Proffer Statement on the
 date certified below.



    kJ                                         ,
                                               --
 S ' ned ,sealed and delivered in the presence of:
                                        ~)\           Q~
             --=-.
             --=-.                      Y ~             ~. ~~ ~
 Fi/st   ~s signature
         rt1i:ss                Applicant or designated representa lve signature


~c/>~ l , 2V4'l:>
          21/4'\:>
Type or print name             Type or print name




 IYI ; L~f /1 c UfiC}[
Type or print name




The forgoing was acknowledged before me this          Zd
                                                    day of                  fl1ct '
                                                                       Co I ~ ,
by  Stet.te I?:ect {          who is ~ personally known to me ; or (has produced)
                          as identification.
---------------------
                                                           \\\111111,
                                                           \\\1111111
                                                         ,\~ ",RY   PU",
                                                       /'?"",I:(;""             ANDREW J WEAVER
   tary Public 5c<c.so\-'-..county , Florida           ~. : A'\i:
                                                              A\i: . ~ Notary PUblic - State of Florida
  y commission Expires s-- 13-    Jl1                .
                                                       ~'J,:
                                                         " ~0
                                                              -   «",:,,," MyC
                                                                 o~,,,,
                                                                 o~,...
                                                          "",;"";",,
                                                                              Comm . Expires May 13 2014
                                                                              ommission # DO 991873
                                                                                                   '




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 156
 MINUTES OF THE REGULAR SARASOTA CITY COMMISSION MEETING OF MARCH 4, 2013

PRESENT:         Mayor Suzanne Atwell, Vice Mayor Willie Shaw, Commissioners Paul Caragiulo, Shannon
                 Snyder, and Terry Turner, City Attorney Robert Fournier, City Manager Thomas Barwin and
                 City Auditor and Clerk Pamela Nadalini

ABSENT:          None

The meeting was called to order by Mayor Atwell at 2:32 p.m.

INVOCATION: City Auditor and Clerk Nadalini

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE: Vice Mayor Shaw

1.      CHANGES TO THE ORDER OF THE DAY:

Commissioner Caragiulo presented the following Change to the Order of the Day:

        A.      Continue under Unfinished Business, Agenda Item No. XIL1., Adoption Re: Second Reading
                of proposed Ordinance No. 13-5049, amending the Zoning Code (2002 Edition) of the City of
                Sarasota by making amendments which, add Tandem Parking pursuant to certain standards
                as a permitted parking option for 60-days, per the request of the applicant.

A motion was made by Vice Mayor Shaw, seconded by Commissioner Snyder and carried by a 4-1 vote with
Commissioner Turner voting no to continuing, Agenda Item No. XIL1. for 60-days, per the request of the
applicant.

Mayor Atwell presented the following Change to the Order of the Day:

        B.      Continue under Quasi-Judicial Public Hearings, Agenda Item No. XII-B-1., Public Hearing Re:
                Proposed Ordinance No. 13-5044, to rezone certain real property located on the south side of
                Hampton Road west of North Tamiami (U.S. 41) with street addresses of 1174 and 1186
                Hampton Road from the Residential Multiple Family 3 (RMF-3) Zone District to the North Trail
                (NT) Zone District, per the request of the applicant; that the public hearing will be opened and
                remain open until the item is heard; that General Manager David Smith, Integration Division,
                Neighborhood and Development Services (NOS) Department will provide a continuance date
                when the item comes forward later on in the Agenda.

        General Manager David Smith, Integration Division, Neighborhood and Development Services (NOS)
        Department, came before the Commission and stated that a date will be sought from the applicant and
        presented when the item comes forward later on in the Agenda.

Mayor Atwell noted Commission consensus to continue under Quasi-Judicial Public Hearings, Agenda Item No.
XII-B-1., Public Hearing Re: Proposed Ordinance No. 13-5044, per the request of the applicant.

City Auditor and Clerk Nadalini presented the following Changes to the Order of the Day:

        C.      Add under Unfinished Business, Item No. VL1. Presentation and Discussion Re: Cyber Security
                Investigation Report, per the request of the Commissic:>n.

        D.      Add under Legislative Public Hearing, Item No. XIILA.4., Continue Public Hearing Re:
                Proposed Ordinance No. 13-5040, to vacate that certain platted 20-foot wide public alley right-

                                                                             Book 62            Page 34690
                                                                             03/04/13           2:30 P.M.

                                                                                           Page 7 of 156
      Discussion ensued about the alley being used by the Sarasota Farmer's Market.

      No one was signed up to speak and Mayor Atwell closed the public hearing.

      City Auditor and Clerk Nadalini read proposed Ordinance No. 13-5040 by title only.

      A motion was made by Commissioner Caragiulo, seconded by Vice Mayor Shaw, to pass proposed
      Ordinance No. 13-5040, to vacate that certain platted 20-foot wide public alley right-of-way generally
      described as bounded on the west by the east right-of-way line of Pineapple Avenue and bounded on
      the east by the west right-of-way line of Lemon Avenue, on first reading.

      Commissioner Caragiulo stated that he is satisfied with Staff's presentation and supports the motion.

      Commissioner Turner stated the City's Master Plan calls for intensive development and public space in
      the future will be in short supply; that as the Master Plan is developed out warrants keeping the alley in
      public hands and the motion is not supported.

      Mayor Atwell stated that she supports the sale for many reasons; that the alley is awkward and better
      use of the alley should be sought.

      Mayor Atwell called for a vote on the motion to pass proposed Ordinance No. 13-5040, to vacate that
      certain platted 20-foot wide public alley right-of-way generally described as bounded on the west by
      the east right-of-way line of Pineapple Avenue and bounded on the east by the west right-of-way line
      of Lemon Avenue, on first reading, which carried by a 3-2 vote with Commissioners Snyder and Turner
      voting no.

16.   QUASI-JUDICIAL PUBLIC HEARING (AGENDA ITEM XIII-B)

      1)      PUBLIC HEARING RE: PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 13-5044, TO REZONE CERTAIN
              REAL PROPERTY LOCATED ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF HAMPTON ROAD WEST OF
              NORTH TAMIAMI TRAIL (U.S. 41) WITH STREET ADDRESSES OF 1174 AND 1186
              HAMPTON ROAD FROM THE RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE FAMILY 3 (RMF-3) ZONE
              DISTRICT TO THE NORTH (NT) ZONE DISTRICT; PROVIDING FOR CONDITIONS OF
              SAID REZONING; ALL AS IS MORE PARTICULARLY SET FORTH HEREIN, ETC. (TITLE
              ONLY) (APPLICATION NO. 12-REN-02, APPLICANT STEVE BEDI OF REJUVENATION
              FUSION HEALTHCARE, INC., AS THE FEE SIMPLE OWNER) (AGENDA ITEM XII-B-1)

      Mayor Atwell opened the public hearing.

      General Manager David Smith, Integration Division, Neighborhood and Development Services (NOS)
      Department, came before the Commission and stated that Staff received a letter from Dr. Steve Bedi,
      Applicant wishing to continue the public hearing due to unforeseen family circumstances; that Dr. Bedi
      and the neighborhood representatives has requested to continue the meeting at the June 3, 2013,
      Regular Sarasota City Commission; that Staff agrees with the new public hearing date.

      Mayor Atwell stated that the public hearing will remain open until the June 3, 2013, Regular City
      Commission meeting.

      A motion was made by Commissioner Snyder, seconded by Commissioner Caragiulo, and carried by a
      5-0 vote to continue proposed Ordinance No. 13-5040, at the June 3, 2013, Regular City Commission
      meeting.

17.   NEW BUSINESS (AGENDA ITEM XIV)

      1)     PRESENTATION AND DISCUSSION RE: 2013 SUNCOAST SUPER BOAT GRAND PRIX
             FESTIVAL (AGENDA ITEM XIV-1)
                                                                            Book 62            Page 34704
                                                                            03/04/13           2:30 P.M.

                                                                                           Page 8 of 156
                                                                             Book 62          Page 34835
                                                                             06/03/13         2:30 P.M.
14.    QUASI-JUDICIAL PUBLIC HEARING (AGENDA ITEM XII-B)

       1)      CONTINUED PUBLIC HEARING RE: PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 13-5044, TO
               REZONE CERTAIN REAL PROPERTY LOCATED ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF
               HAMPTON ROAD WEST OF NORTH TAMIAMI TRAIL (U.S. 41) WITH STREET
               ADDRESSES OF 1174 AND 1186 HAMPTON ROAD FROM THE RESIDENTIAL
               MULTIPLE FAMILY 3 (RMF-3) ZONE DISTRICT TO THE NORTH TRAIL (NT) ZONE
               DISTRICT; PROVIDING FOR CONDITIONS OF SAID REZONING; ALL AS IS MORE
               PARTICULARLY SET FORTH HEREIN, ETC. (TITLE ONLY) (APPLICATION NO. 12-
               REN-02, APPLICANT STEVE BEDI OF REJUVENATION MEDIA, LLC, AS AGENT
               REPRESENTING FUSION HEALTHCARE, INC., AS THE FEE SIMPLE OWNER)
               (AGENDA ITEM XII-B-1)

      City Attorney Fournier stated that proposed Ordinance No. 13-5044 is a Quasi-judicial public
      hearing regarding a rezoning for property located on the south side of Hampton Road west of
      North Tamiami Trail/U.S. 41 with street addresses of 1174 and 1186 Hampton Road from the
      Residential Multiple Family-3 (RMF-3) Zone District to the North Trail (NT) Zone District; that the
      Commission's decision must be based on competent, substantial evidence which is entered into
      the record; that evidence can come from City Staff, members of the public, including those
      members of the public who qualify as Affected Persons under the procedures established in the
      City's Zoning Code; that 25 people applied for status as Affected Persons; however, only six
      signed up to speak; that three member of the general public have signed up; that the
      recommended time limits for the presentations is 15 minutes for the Applicant and Staff, five
      minutes for the Affected Persons, and three minutes for the general public; that the Applicant and
      Staff will have five minutes for rebuttal and the Affected Persons will have two minutes.

      Mayor Snyder asked if the Commission has any ex-parte communications to disclose.

      Commissioner Caragiulo stated that he had a conversation approximately two months ago with
      Jennifer Ahearn-Koch about general opinions about the rezoning.

      Commissioner Chapman stated that as a previous member on the Planning Board/Local Planning
      Agency (PBLP), the entire presentation was heard; that the matter was discussed with the Staff of
      the City Attorney's Office who advised the matter could be heard as a Commissioner since no
      pecuniary interest is involved; that an email was received from Pola Sommers about general
      opinions regarding the rezoning which was forwarded to the City's email account.

      City Attorney Fournier stated that Commission Chapman can participate in the Quasi-Judicial
      public hearing since no conflict of interest or due process issue exists.

      Mayor Snyder, Vice Mayor Shaw, and Commissioner Atwell stated that no ex-parte
      communications occurred.

      Mayor Snyder opened the public hearing.

      Dr. Monica Bedi, Applicant, and Arthur Mead, Architect for the Applicant, came before the
      Commission.

      Dr. Bedi stated that a private dermatologist practice in Sarasota has been owned for ten years;
      that a rezoning is sought to establish a medical-based spa resort-type facility for patients to be
      treated for chronic dermatitis and psoriasis and played a video rendering of the proposed
      Reflections Resort/Medical Spa facility.

      Dr. Bedi continued that the idea of the Reflections Resort/Medical Spa facility materialized due to
      the recent advances in medicine; that the association of metabolic syndrome and psoriasis with
      hypertension, diabetes, high cholesterol, smoking, alcohol and caloric intake and stress




                                                                                          Page 9 of 156
 contributes to psoriasis; that unfortunately these issues cannot be addressed in a 10- to 15-
 minute office visit; that bringing a facility of this type to Sarasota will be exciting; that issues have
 arisen from the surrounding community about the proposed facility; that a proffer statement was
 made to indicate a facility of this type would only be allowed if the rezoning is approved; that the
 City has already conducted several traffic studies which indicated the facility would not affect the
 current traffic flow; that architectural plans have not yet been developed until feed-back is
 received from the City concerning the type of facility to be built to maintain the architecture
 integrity of the area and for continued growth of North Tamiami Trail/U.S. 41.

Mr. Mead stated that specific comments about the proposed facility are still too early to make
based upon the work seen and done so far; that the proposed facility will be low-impact with a
hotel or motel use; that the proposed site location is quite adequate; that working with the City on
all the necessary requirements to make the project successful is favorably anticipated.

In response to a question from Commissioner Chapman asking if a parking plan was submitted
for the proposed site, Dr. Bedi stated no.

Discussion ensued about the proffer made by the Applicant concerning the facility's use as a
hotel or motel, heath club or spa, exercise or dance facility, office or clinic, or medical or dental
site, the number of existing facilities which currently treat metabolic syndromes, if an existing
hotel structure was considered prior to opting to build a new facility, and as part of the recently
approved North Trail Overlay District (NTOD), all parking is required to be in back of buildings
rather than the front.

General Manager David Smith, Integration Division, and Senior Planner Courtney Mendez, Building
and Zoning Division Neighborhood and Development Services (NDS) Department, came before the
Commission.

Mr. Smith stated that Christopher Hatton, Professional Engineer, Kimley-Horn and Associates,
Inc. (Kimley-Horn), is in the audience to answer any questions the Commission may have; that
Mr. Hatton conducted the traffic studies for the proposed Reflections Resort/Medical Spa facility.

Ms. Mendez stated that proposed Ordinance No. 13-5044 is a continued public hearing from the
March 4, 2013, Regular Commission meeting; that Dr. Steve Bedi proposes to rezone the
properties located at 1174 and 1186 Hampton Road from the Residential Multiple Family-3 (RMF-
3) Zone District to the North Trail (NT) Zone District to construct Reflections Resort, a medical-
spa facility to serve psoriasis and dermatitis patients; that Staff presented the Applicant with the
following two potential options, which Staff felt could be beneficial:

         1)      Staff requested the Applicant postpone the proposed plan and develop a site
                 plan for submittal and bring the site plan back with the rezoning which the
                 Applicant did not want to do because of uncertainty; that the Commission has the
                 ability to direct the Applicant to do so, if desired.
        2)       Staff requested the Applicant better define the facility's usage since a laundry list
                 of uses was submitted and most are Conditional-Uses which the Applicant says
                 would not be permitted on the property; that the Applicant has since submitted a
                 proffer which identifies hotel use, and Staff has suggested the Applicant include
                 health spa as well as medical office since a site plan has not been submitted.

Ms. Mendez continued that a half of a parking space is the standard for Downtown; that outside
the Downtown, the ratio is 1.1 parking space; that the Applicant would have to meet the parking
standard for a medical office and submit a site plan; that anything over 5,000 square feet of non-
residential requires site plan approval, which would come before the PBLP; that based on the
Applicant's revised proffers, Staff is of the opinion the appropriate transitional development could
be accomplished with the propose facility and recommends approval of the proposed project.

                                                                          Book 62          Page 34836
                                                                          06/03/13         2:30 P.M.


                                                                                       Page 10 of 156
                                                                        Book 62          Page 34837
                                                                        06/03/13         2:30 P.M.


 In response to a question from Commissioner Atwell asking if Staff considered the rezoning as a
 single application, Ms. Mendez stated yes.

In response to a question from Commissioner Chapman asking if Staff inspected the
neighborhood for the proposed facility and the manner in which the proposed facility and the
NTOD interact, Ms. Mendez stated that Staff has visited the proposed facility site and the NTOD
as adopted is an optional overlay; that the Applicant could elect to use the NTOD, which would
impact the proposed site design such as parking in the rear and other design parameters.

Discussion ensued about proffers and their purpose, the criteria for rezonings while referencing
the map of the NTOD, the question of if a drainage analysis was conducted for the site, if the
rezone is compatible with the City's Comprehensive Plan, if the City is considering the public's
welfare as related to the rezoning, if Staff inquired with the Applicant about seeking use of other
developed sites in the NT Zone District rather than new construction.

In response to a question from Vice Mayor Shaw asking if Staff took into consideration the
proposed roundabout at 14th Street concerning traffic patterns for the site, Christopher Hatton,
Professional Engineer, Kimley-Horn and Associates, Inc., came before the Commission and
stated that a more intense traffic study was conducted as if the site were being utilized for a drive-
in bank or apartment units; that the actual proposed proffered use is less intense than what was
analyzed in the traffic study.

The following Affected Persons spoke:

Stanford Ross displayed a map of the North Trail Overlay Zone District (NTOD) neighborhood on
the Chamber monitors, and indicating the proposed land use for the property was improperly
changed from the Residential Multiple Family-3 (RMF-3) Zone District without going through due
process and therefore the Commission should deny the proposed project and direct Staff to
change the land use back to multi-family.

Tom Furst, residing at 1130 Hampton Road, indicating repeated requests to obtain information
about the process, logic, and decision made in changing the land use from multi-family were met
with no success, the Commission is requested to suspend the proposed rezoning and direct Staff
to review the Future Land-Use Classification especially since the City has not been able to
provide a date as to when the change occurred.

Mary Furst, residing at 1130 Hampton Road, speaking for herself and reading from a written
statement on behalf of Ann Votta, and indicating the City's decision to consider rezoning 1174
and 1186 Hampton Road from Residential Multiple Family-3 (RMF-3) to the North Trail (NT) Zone
District is disappointing, the proposed Spa could go elsewhere, Ms.votta resides at 1176 Tahiti
Park and she and her husband are also in opposition to the proposed rezoning which will
decrease their property value and request the Commission direct Staff to change the land use
back to the RMF-3 Zone District.

Brandon Sommers, resident of the Tahiti Park neighborhood for approximately 27 years, played a
brief video on the Chamber monitors showing the current neighborhood and outlining possible
changes to the neighborhood if the change to the North Trail (NT) Zone District is implemented.

Pola Sommers displayed on the Chamber monitors a postcard received from the City of Sarasota
advising of a Parks, Recreation and Environmental Protection (PREP) Advisory Board meeting to
discuss parkland acquisition of the site, and indicating consideration should be given to making
the site part of the Whitaker Gateway Park due to the beautiful trees, great white owls and eagles
seen, the area should be left in the Residential Multiple Family-3 (RMF-3) Zone District which
would be the most logical and compatible thing to do.




                                                                                    Page 11 of 156
Jennifer Ahearn-Koch requested 15 minutes to address the concerns of Affected Persons unable
to attend.

Mayor Snyder noted Commission consensus to grant Ms. Ahearn-Koch additional time to address
the concerns of Affected Persons unable to attend.

Ms. Ahearn-Koch referenced a map and photographs displayed on the Chamber monitors, and
indicating the larger issue is the how and why the land-use change happened, the Commission is
being asked to deny the rezoning petition since any land-use change would have required a
super-majority vote of 4-1, former Mayors and Commissioners Richard Clapp and Kelly Kirschner
both testified under Oath neither had any knowledge of the change and yet unknowingly voted for
the change.

Matthew Wooddall, residing at 620 Novus Place, indicating the proposed rezoning creates the
City's desired Future Land Use Classification, the Applicant has already made changes to the
proffer twice, the project is supported based upon testimony given.

Bob Easterle, representing himself and the Coalition of City Neighborhoods Association (CCNA),
read from a prepared statement, and indicating at the May 5, 2013, Regular CCNA meeting a
Resolution was unanimously adopted concerning the land-use issues of the Tahiti Park
neighborhood which may be applicable Citywide, therefore a request is being made for the
Commission to consider the necessary appropriate actions and support CCNA's Resolution.

Melinda Delpach, two-month homeowner in the Tahiti Park neighborhood, indicating the
comments to her and her husband by the Realtor prior to purchasing their home was "this is an
old, ugly house that has no redeeming quality other than the fact that the house is in a fabulous
neighborhood", the Commission should seriously consider looking into the rezoning changes and
the Applicant's lack of a site plan.

Richard Clapp, former Mayor and Commissioner, indicating the land use on the subject property
was included in the City's Comprehensive Plan and approved while sitting on the Commission,
the statements made by Brandon Sommers and Jennifer Ahearn-Koch are confirmed, the
changes were not seen nor specifically identified by Staff in the Agenda back-up material.

Mark Jackson, residing at 1001 Tocobaga Lane, displayed photographs on the Chamber
monitors, and indicating the neighborhood's current aesthetics are quite admirable and
minimizing compatibility between residential and non-residential uses is not supported and will
not preserve the neighborhood's aesthetics.

Kelly Kirschner, former Mayor and Commissioner, congratulated Commissioner Atwell on her
reelection and Commissioner Chapman on her election, played a one-minute video on the
Chamber monitors, and indicating the Commission is encouraged to continue the item until the
matter is further investigated as previously requested by the Planning Board/Local Planning
Agency (PBLP) and the Coalition of City Neighborhoods Association (CCNA), the Commission
should focus more attention on the voluminous amount of data and information presented by Staff
since the parcel size as shown on the map going from one Future Land Use Classification to
another is disconcerting and the evidence shown is the due process procedures were flawed.

Diana Hamilton indicating the proposed site was vacant for years with someone paying taxes, the
proposed site has now been purchased by someone who relied to their detriment on the City
Commission's process, and people are complaining the former Commissioners did not know what
was going on and how a mistake was made is not the purchaser's problem since they did not
make the mistake, the change should be granted so the purchaser can move their proposed
project forward.


                                                                    Book 62         Page 34838
                                                                    06/03/13        2:30 P.M.



                                                                                Page 12 of 156
                                                                               Book 62          Page 34839
                                                                               06/03/13         2:30 P.M.
       Jeff Oldenburg, Owner, Indian Beach Plaza, indicating the only way to effectively address and
       displace criminal activities is to have legitimate revitalization projects on the North Tamiami Trail,
       the few people annoyed by the influx of traffic are wished the best, the time has come for the
       Commission to do what benefits the many and not just the few.

The Commission recessed at 7: 56 p.m. and reconvened at 8:06 p.m.

       City Attorney Fournier stated that the Commission and the neighbors are entitled to an
       explanation; that due process is a relevant concern in Quasi-Judicial public hearings with an
       emphasis on competent, substantial evidence; that the Commission has the option to move
       forward or continue the public hearing to the July 1, 2013, Regular City Commission meeting
       commencing with Staff rebuttal.

       In response to a question from Commissioner Chapman asking if the Commission would have to
       hear other testimony other than the rezone petition, City Attorney Fournier stated that no
       additional people will be able to sign-up to speak.

       A motion was made by Commissioner Caragiulo, seconded by Commissioner Atwell, and carried
       by a 5-0 vote to continue proposed Ordinance No. 13-5044 to the June 17,2013, Regular City
       Commission meeting and for rebuttal to commence with Staff.

15.    NEW BUSINESS (AGENDA ITEM XIV)

       1)      APPROVAL RE: PROPOSED ANNUAL BUDGET 2013-2014 FOR THE CITY OF
               SARASOTA BAYFRONT MOORING FIELD (AGENDA ITEM XIV-1)

       Finance Director John Lege, III, Financial Administration Department, and Sam Chavers, Director of
       Marina Operations and Harbormaster Marina Jack, LLC, came before the Commission.

       Mr. Lege stated that the Harbormaster will be presenting the fiscal year (FY) 2013/14 City of
       Sarasota Bayfront Mooring Field proposed budget for approval; that the City of Sarasota Bayfront
       Mooring Field Operation Agreement, dated January 14, 2009, was subsequently amended on
       February 15, 2012, to indicate the Harbormaster shall present to the Commission a proposed
       budget for approval by June 15th; that Staff is requesting the Commission approve the FY
       2013/14 City of Sarasota Bayfront Mooring Field proposed budget.

       Mr. Chavers stated that the Sarasota Bayfront Mooring Field currently has approximately seven
       months of revenues collected and expenses; that during the first seven months of fiscal
       operations, the Sarasota Bayfront Mooring Field exceeded expectations; that the Sarasota
       Bayfront Mooring Field business is similar to a tourism or a marina business and is very seasonal;
       that a Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) grant was obtained in February
       2013 during the infancy operational stage which has been secured for two additional years; that
       the goal is to have a first-class facility which is a self-sufficient project for the City.

      A motion was made by Vice Mayor Shaw, seconded by Commissioner Caragiulo, and carried by
      a 5-0 to approve the fiscal year (FY) 2013/14 City of Sarasota Bayfront Mooring Field budget.

      2)       PRESENTATION RE: INTRODUCTION OF NEW TELEVISION PROGRAM "CITY
               KIDS" (AGENDA ITEM XIV-2)

      City Auditor and Clerk Nadalini displayed on the Chamber monitors a video preview of the new
      television program "City Kids" and stated that exceptional kids living in or attending school within
      the City limits are highlighted by captivating unique and extraordinary accomplishments through
      civic and volunteer activities.




                                                                                           Page 13 of 156
                                                                            Book 62       Page 34875
                                                                            07/01/13      2:30 P.M.
       Commissioner Atwell stated that she is a major proponent of Payne Park; that a leash law in
       Payne Park makes sense and is pleasing.

      Mayor Snyder called for a vote on the motion to pass proposed Ordinance No. 13-5063 on first
      reading, which carried by a 5-0 vote.

14.   QUASI-JUDICIAL PUBLIC HEARING (AGENDA ITEM XII-B)

      Mayor Snyder opened the public hearing.

      1)      CONTINUED PUBLIC HEARING RE: PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 13-5044, TO
              REZONE CERTAIN REAL PROPERTY LOCATED ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF
              HAMPTON ROAD WEST OF NORTH TAMIAMI TRAIL (U.S. 41) WITH STREET
              ADDRESSES OF 1174 AND 1186 HAMPTON ROAD FROM THE RESIDENTIAL
              MULTIPLE FAMILY 3 (RMF-3) ZONE DISTRICT TO THE NORTH TRAIL (NT) ZONE
              DISTRICT; PROVIDING FOR CONDITIONS OF SAID REZONING; ALL AS IS MORE
              PARTICULARLY SET FORTH HEREIN, ETC. (TITLE ONLY) (APPLICATION NO. 12-
              REN-02, APPLICANT STEVE BEDI OF REJUVENATION MEDIA, LLC, AS AGENT
              REPRESENTING FUSION HEALTHCARE, INC., AS THE FEE SIMPLE OWNER)
              (AGENDA ITEM XII-B-1)

       City Attorney Fournier stated that proposed Ordinance No. 13-5044 is a continued Quasi-Judicial
       public hearing which was opened and continued on May 20, 2013, regarding a rezone for
      property located on the south side of Hampton Road west of North Tamiami Trail/U.S. 41 with
      street addresses of 1174 and 1186 Hampton Road to be rezoned from the Residential Multiple
      Family-3 (RMF-3) to the North Trail (NT) Zone District; that all testimony was received with the
      exception of rebuttal testimony which was continued to the current meeting; that Staff could begin
      the rebuttal at this time and present the changes to the Future Land Use Map (FLUM) which
      occurred in 2008; that Staff could address the change of the property to the Community
      Commercial Future Land Use Classification which occurred without mailed notices to the
      neighbors; that the Office of the City Auditor and Clerk received a call from Dr. Monica Bedi,
      Applicant, wishing to continue the public hearing due to her unavailability to attend the current
      continued public hearing; that Staff has called the Affected Persons to determine a possible date;
      that if the Commission desires, Staff could be allowed to proceed with an explanation of findings
      and the Commission could direct questions to the General Manager, Integration Division,
      Neighborhood and Development Services (NDS) Department; that an added advantage is allowing
      the Applicant and the Affected Persons time to respond and address what is being heard at this
      time; that after this phase is completed, the Commission could continue the public hearing for
      rebuttal testimony at the September 16,2013, Regular Sarasota City Commission meeting.

      In response to a question from Commissioner Atwell asking if the Quasi-Judicial public hearing is
      being bifurcated, City Attorney Fournier stated that the Quasi-Judicial public hearing is being
      heard in three parts.

      Mayor Snyder noted Commission consensus to continue the Quasi-Judicial public hearing to
      allow Staff input regarding proposed Ordinance No. 13-5040 and continue the public hearing to
      the September 16, 2013, Regular Sarasota City Commission meeting.

      City Attorney Fournier gave an historical overview of the land-use changes concerning the
      property which is the subject of proposed Ordinance No. 13-5044 and stated that changes to the
      FLUM were made in 2008 as part of a State-mandated process referenced as the Evaluation
      Appraisal Report (EAR); that the EAR is a requirement of the Florida Statutes and is required
      every seven years; that Staff prepared an EAR Narrative Report on the Comprehensive Plan's
      successes, challenges and failures during the previous seven years; that Staff recommends
      further amendments to the Comprehensive Plan which are called EAR-Based Amendments; that
      the EAR process consists of a two-step process; that the EAR Narrative Report is first sent to the




                                                                                        Page 14 of 156
Department of Community Affairs (DCA) for a sufficiency determination as to the content of the
report; that based upon the following narrative sentence in the EAR, changes were made to the
FLUM:

         ... Staff would reexamine the land uses along the North Trail Corridor to determine if the
         boundary between residential and non-residential Future Land Use Classifications needs
         to be adjusted.

City Attorney Fournier continued stated that since the EAR is a Citywide update to the
Comprehensive Plan, none of the applicable statutes required the mailing of individual notices to
property owners residing within 500 feet of the properties affected; that the City changed the
Future Land Use Classifications of over 1,900 separate parcels in the EAR so the City advertised
the notices of public hearings in the newspaper; that specific notice to property owners was not
required; however, the Florida Statutes indicates local procedures can be adopted to encourage
public participation; that the Commission could have adopted a local procedure to notify property
owners but did not; that the Office of the City Auditor and Clerk has a list of people registered to
received notices of meetings and open houses; that at the open houses, questions could be
addressed and maps were displayed to show the proposed Future Land Use Classification
changes.

Discussion ensued about two map errors and the requirement for four affirmative Commission
votes for any proposed changes to the Future Land Use Map.

In response to a request from Vice Mayor Shaw to display the map which outlines the affected
properties within 500 feet, General Manager David Smith, Integration Division, Neighborhood and
Development Services (NOS) Department, came before the Commission, displayed on the
Commission monitors the Future Land Use Map showing the proposed changes and stated that the
map was on display twice: 1) at the November 1, 2007, Workshop of the City Commission and 2) at
the October 6, 2008, Regular Sarasota City Commission meeting.

Vice Mayor Shaw stated that he and other property owners residing in the area of the proposed
changes shown on the FLUM were never made aware of any changes.

Mr. Smith stated that none of the owners of the 1,900 parcels were notified by mail since a
requirement did not exist to do so.

In response to a question from Vice Mayor Shaw asking if a super-majority vote is required to
return the classification from the Community Commercial to the Multiple Family Future Land Use
Classification, City Attorney Fournier stated that anything to increase density or intensity requires
a super-majority vote.

In response to a question from Commissioner Chapman asking if any Comprehensive Plan
Amendment Change requires a super-majority vote, City Attorney Fournier stated that many do
but not all; that some exemptions such as not-previously classified annexed property would be
considered an exemption.

Discussion ensued about the various instances for which a super-majority vote would be a
necessity.

A motion was made by Commissioner Caragiulo, seconded by Commissioner Atwell, and carried
by a 5-0 vote to continue the public hearing concerning proposed Ordinance No. 13-5040 to the
September 16,2013, Regular Sarasota City Commission meeting.




                                                                       Book 62        Page 34876
                                                                       07/01/13       2:30 P.M.

                                                                                    Page 15 of 156
Expanded Transportation
    Impact Analysis

     May 28, 2013




                          Page 16 of 156
May 28, 2013
                                                                                      Suite 150
                                                                                      655 North Franklin Street
                                                                                      Tampa, Florida
                                                                                      33602
Ms. Alexandrea DavisShaw, P.E.
City Engineer
City of Sarasota - City Hall
1565 1st Street
Sarasota, FL 34236

Re: 1186 and 1174 Hampton Road Supplemental Transportation Analysis

Dear Ms. DavisShaw,

A transportation impact analysis (TIA) was completed in October 2012 for the
rezoning of 1186 and 1174 Hampton Road from RMF-3 to NT zoning district. The
parcels are located in the southwest quadrant of the U.S. 41 & Hampton Road
intersection in the City of Sarasota, Florida. The assumed buildout year used for
the October 2012 analysis was 2017.

As a follow-up to the completed TIA, an expanded study area to include the
roadway segment of Hampton Road from U.S. 41 (North Tamiami Trail) to Palmetto
Lane and the intersection of U.S. 41 (North Tamiami Trail) & Hampton Road was
analyzed. As part of the expanded analysis, an existing conditions analysis, future
with project traffic analysis, alternative transportation modes review, and safety
review were completed and are presented in the sections below.

Data Collection and Existing Conditions

Vehicle turning movement volume counts were conducted at the intersection of
U.S. 41 & Hampton Road during the p.m. peak-hour period (4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.)
to quantify existing p.m. peak-hour conditions. The raw counts are attached to this
letter report.

Vehicle counts at the study intersection were modified to reflect peak-season
conditions. This modification was performed using FDOT weekly adjustment
factors for Sarasota County. The adjustment factor used for these counts was 1.01
for the counts performed in May 2013.




TEL: 813 620 1460
                                                                     Page 17 of 156
                                                         Ms. Alexandrea DavisShaw, P.E.
                                                                         May 28, 2013
                                                                                Page 2




During the p.m. peak-hour, there were 15 observed westbound vehicles and 16
observed eastbound vehicles on Hampton Road. Based on the combined two-way
volume of 31 vehicles, the Hampton Road segment from U.S. 41 to Palmetto Lane
is operating at a Level of Service (LOS) A.

The intersection at U.S. 41 & Hampton Road was analyzed using the methodology
found in the 2010 Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) using the HCS software. Based
on the result of this analysis, although an overall LOS cannot be reported for
unsignalized intersections, the minor street approach of the study intersection
(Hampton Road) operates acceptably at a LOS C with 16.3 seconds of delay. The
intersection analysis worksheet is attached to this report.

Future with Project Traffic Condition

The background traffic growth rate determined in the original study was
considered in the development of future background traffic volumes. The existing
2013 peak-season volumes were increased by a 2.0 percent per year annual growth
rate to reflect 2017 traffic volumes.

The trip generation determined previously utilizing the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE), Trip Generation, Eighth Edition, 2008, for Land Use Codes (LUC):
912 (Drive-In Bank) and 220 (Apartments) was assumed for this analysis. The
distribution from the original study was modified to reflect a conservative
approach of assigning all project traffic (100%) to Hampton Road.

Future traffic with project traffic volumes at the study intersection and roadway
segment was determined by adding project traffic volumes to the future
background traffic volumes.

For the 2017 p.m. peak-hour scenario with project traffic, it is expected that there
will be 59 westbound vehicles and 59 eastbound vehicles on Hampton Road. Based
on the combined two-way volume of 118 vehicles, the Hampton Road segment
from U.S. 41 to Palmetto Lane is expected to operate at a LOS A.

The intersection at U.S. 41 & Hampton Road with future year (2017) traffic volumes
with 100% of the project traffic assigned to Hampton Road was analyzed using the
methodology found in the 2010 Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) using the HCS
software. Based on the result of this analysis, although an overall LOS cannot be




                                                                         Page 18 of 156
                                                          Ms. Alexandrea DavisShaw, P.E.
                                                                          May 28, 2013
                                                                                 Page 3




reported for unsignalized intersections, the minor street approach of the study
intersection (Hampton Road) is expected to operate acceptably at a LOS D with
26.2 seconds of delay. The intersection analysis worksheet is attached to this
report.

Alternate Transportation Modes

Observations were made by a Professional Engineer as part of the data collection
efforts regarding the pedestrian and bicycle facilities within the study area. Based
on the field observations, there are existing sidewalks on either side of U.S. 41 and
no sidewalks on Hampton Road. The sidewalks along U.S. 41 were observed to
have obstructions such as light poles which interrupt the bicycle and pedestrian
experience. Because of the low volume and low speed on Hampton Road, bicycle
or pedestrian facilities on this roadway are not recommended.

Additionally, as observed during the data collection efforts, there were no
observed bicycles and 22 observed pedestrians along U.S. 41 in the study area.

Safety Review

Crash data was obtained from Sarasota County for the study area and surrounding
roadways for 2007 to 2009. Although there were no documented collisions at the
study area intersection or at the adjacent intersections between 2007 and 2009,
there were 14 crashes at the U.S. 41 & 10th Street intersection in 2009, 22 in 2008,
and 20 in 2007. Along the roadway segment of U.S. 41 between Dr. Martin Luther
King Way and 10th Street, approximately 1 mile in length, there were 43
documented crashes in 2007, 20 in 2008, and 21 in 2009.

Although there were no documented collisions at the intersection of U.S. 41 &
Hampton Road, converting the existing median to a raised bull nose median is
recommended as a general safety improvement. The bull nose medial will improve
pedestrian safety and will more clearly delineate storage for turning vehicles. This
median type can also reduce the head-on collision potential and will provide an
opportunity for landscaping and visual enhancements.




                                                                          Page 19 of 156
Kimley-Horn                                           Ms . Alexandrea DavisShaw, P.E.
and Associates, Inc.                                                    May 28,2013
                                                                              Page 4




Should you have any comments or questions regarding the technical analysis,
please do not hesitate from contacting us.

Very truly yours,

KIM LEY-HORN AND ASSOCIATES, INC.




Christopher C. Hatton, P.E.                  Danni H. Jorgenson, P.E.
Senior Vice President                        Transportation Engineer




                                                                         Page 20 of 156
a:QUal,i~~ ~o~nts                              ~
                                               I
                                                         ".
                                                              -


                                                                  ~

                                                                  .
                                                                                      N/S Street (speed):



                                                                                           -{
                                                                                                                U S L(
                                                                                                                             I

                                                    A~\sto
                                               ,
                                               ,"
                                                                                       .




Site Code: \ogSLi ':{O \
                                                                                                                                      1

Date: S - It..l rl 3
                                                                                                                                      i
Weather: C L- ~ ~ r-

City: :S(J..rc.-so f0....                                                 ~     ...


County:5ao..rc..soT '"                                                                     I -.-"     ,
                                                                                                           I                                                 tTl
Count Times:         L{: DOPT'" -(,;00 P f"\
                                                                                                                                               frorerl7      ---
                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                              -                                                                                              VJ
                                                                                                                                                             q-
                                                                                                                                                             (!)

                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                            .---..
                                                                                                                         I   -
                                                                                                                                                             '"
                                                                                                                                                            '0
                                                                                                                                                             (!)
                                                                                                                                                             (!)
                                                                                                                                                             0..
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                           ·                                                '--'

                                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                                           J;
                                                                                                                                                           >
                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                           \j
                                                                                                                                                           ~
                                                                                                                                                           .5

                                                                                                                     I                                      -r
                                                                                                                                                           CL...

                                                                                                          .!         '\
                                                      ~Of~r!          -
                                                                                           I     I.

                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                 .-
                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                          1'-
                                                                                                          ;I

                                                                                                           '"

                                                                                                                                          Page 21 of 156
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 41 -- Hampton Rd                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10954701
 CITY/STATE: Sarasota, FL                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, May 14 2013
                    1177          1753                           Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                1.7        1.9

                         2 1175 0
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                              50.0 1.6 0.0


       15    4                            0       0
                                                                                                                 6.7   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0             0.92           0
                                                                                                                       0.0                      0.0
       16    12                           0       0
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     13 1749 0
                                                                                                                              0.0 1.9 0.0

                    1187          1762
                                                                                                                              1.6        1.9



                            1                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                       0                          0

             15                           7                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                       0                          0

                            0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                          NA                                                                            NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min Count                 US 41                              US 41                 Hampton Rd                 Hampton Rd                   Total       Hourly
    Period                 (Northbound)                      (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left      Thru Right        U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right        U
    4:00 PM        5       333      0         0        0      343      3    0    1       0     3     0     0        0     0         0          688
    4:15 PM        3       386      0         0        0      312      0    0    0       0     5     0     0        0     0         0          706
    4:30 PM        3       432      0         0        0      295      1    0    1       0     5     0     0        0     0         0          737
    4:45 PM        3       376      0         0        0      271      0    0    1       0     1     0     0        0     0         0          652             2783
    5:00 PM        4       486      0         0        0      304      1    0    0       0     4     0     0        0     0         0          799             2894
    5:15 PM        3       455      0         0        0      305      0    0    2       0     2     0     0        0     0         0          767             2955
    5:30 PM        6       375      0         0        0      317      0    0    0       0     4     0     0        0     0         0          702             2920
    5:45 PM        4       367      0         0        0      292      2    0    1       0     1     0     0        0     0         0          667             2935




 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                          Southbound                  Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right     U               Left Thru Right    U      Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     16 1944      0     0                0 1216       4     0      0       0    16     0     0        0     0     0                      3196
 Heavy Trucks       0   12      0                      0    12      0            0       0      0          0        0     0                             24
  Pedestrians            0                                   0                           4                          0                                    4
    Bicycles        0    0      0                      0     0      0            0       0      0          0        0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/17/2013 9:00 AM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                                                                              Page 22 of 156
Two-Way Stop Control                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 1



                                                   TWO-WAY STOP CONTROL SUMMARY
General Information                                                        Site Information
                                         Kimley-Horn & Associates,
 Analyst                                                                   Intersection                         U.S. 41 & Hampton Rd.
                                         Inc.
                                                                           Jurisdiction                         City of Sarasota
 Agency/Co.                              City of Sarasota
                                                                           Analysis Year                        2013
 Date Performed                          5/28/2013
 Analysis Time Period                    PM Peak-Hour
Project Description 048120067 - Hampton Road Additional
East/West Street: Hampton Rd.                           North/South Street: U.S. 41 (Tamiami Trail)
Intersection Orientation: North-South                   Study Period (hrs): 0.25
Vehicle Volumes and Adjustments
Major Street                                                  Northbound                                        Southbound
Movement                                     1                     2            3                    4               5                   6
                                             L                     T            R                    L               T                   R
Volume (veh/h)                              13                  1766                                              1187                  2
Peak-Hour Factor, PHF                      0.92                  0.92          1.00                1.00            0.92                0.92
Hourly Flow Rate, HFR
                                             14                 1919            0                    0             1290                  2
(veh/h)
Percent Heavy Vehicles                         2                  --         --             0                       --                   --
Median Type                                                                Two Way Left Turn Lane
RT Channelized                                                                0                                                          0
Lanes                                          1                  2          0              0                       2                    0
Configuration                                  L                  T                                                 T                   TR
Upstream Signal                                                   0                                                 0
Minor Street                                                  Eastbound                                         Westbound
Movement                                     7                    8              9                   10            11                    12
                                             L                    T              R                   L              T                    R
Volume (veh/h)                               4                                  12
Peak-Hour Factor, PHF                      0.92                 1.00           0.92                1.00            1.00                1.00
Hourly Flow Rate, HFR
                                               4                     0         13                    0              0                    0
(veh/h)
Percent Heavy Vehicles                         2                  0             2                    0              0                    0
Percent Grade (%)                                                  0                                                0
Flared Approach                                                   N                                                 N
   Storage                                                           0                                              0
RT Channelized                                                                   0                                                       0
Lanes                                          0                  0             0                    0              0                    0
Configuration                                                    LR
Delay, Queue Length, and Level of Service
Approach               Northbound     Southbound                                     Westbound                            Eastbound
Movement                                  1                      4         7              8                 9     10            11            12
Lane Configuration                       L                                                                                     LR
v (veh/h)                                14                                                                                     17
C (m) (veh/h)                           532                                                                                    335
v/c                                    0.03                                                                                    0.05
95% queue length                       0.08                                                                                    0.16
Control Delay (s/veh)                  11.9                                                                                    16.3
LOS                                      B                                                                                      C
Approach Delay (s/veh)                    --                     --                                                           16.3
Approach LOS                              --                     --                                                            C
Copyright © 2010 University of Florida, All Rights Reserved                          HCS+TM   Version 5.6              Generated: 5/28/2013   3:17 PM




                                                                                                                        Page 23 of 156
file:///C:/Users/Danni.Jorgenson/AppData/Local/Temp/u2k8086.tmp                                                                        5/28/2013
Two-Way Stop Control                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 1



                                                   TWO-WAY STOP CONTROL SUMMARY
General Information                                                        Site Information
                                         Kimley-Horn & Associates,
 Analyst                                                                   Intersection                         U.S. 41 & Hampton Rd.
                                         Inc.
                                                                           Jurisdiction                         City of Sarasota
 Agency/Co.                              City of Sarasota
                                                                           Analysis Year                        2017 with Project Traffic
 Date Performed                          5/28/2013
 Analysis Time Period                    PM Peak-Hour
Project Description 048120067 - Hampton Road Additional
East/West Street: Hampton Rd.                           North/South Street: U.S. 41 (Tamiami Trail)
Intersection Orientation: North-South                   Study Period (hrs): 0.25
Vehicle Volumes and Adjustments
Major Street                                                  Northbound                                        Southbound
Movement                                     1                     2            3                    4               5                   6
                                             L                     T            R                    L               T                   R
Volume (veh/h)                              35                  1912                                              1285                  24
Peak-Hour Factor, PHF                      0.92                  0.92          1.00                1.00            0.92                0.92
Hourly Flow Rate, HFR
                                             38                 2078            0                    0             1396                 26
(veh/h)
Percent Heavy Vehicles                         2                  --         --             0                        --                  --
Median Type                                                                Two Way Left Turn Lane
RT Channelized                                                                0                                                          0
Lanes                                          1                  2          0              0                        2                   0
Configuration                                  L                  T                                                  T                  TR
Upstream Signal                                                   0                                                  0
Minor Street                                                  Eastbound                                         Westbound
Movement                                     7                    8              9                   10            11                    12
                                             L                    T              R                   L              T                    R
Volume (veh/h)                              25                                  34
Peak-Hour Factor, PHF                      0.92                 1.00           0.92                1.00            1.00                1.00
Hourly Flow Rate, HFR
                                             27                      0         36                    0               0                   0
(veh/h)
Percent Heavy Vehicles                         2                  0             2                    0               0                   0
Percent Grade (%)                                                  0                                                 0
Flared Approach                                                   N                                                  N
   Storage                                                           0                                               0
RT Channelized                                                                   0                                                       0
Lanes                                          0                  0             0                    0               0                   0
Configuration                                                    LR
Delay, Queue Length, and Level of Service
Approach               Northbound     Southbound                                     Westbound                            Eastbound
Movement                                  1                      4         7              8                 9     10            11            12
Lane Configuration                       L                                                                                     LR
v (veh/h)                                38                                                                                     63
C (m) (veh/h)                           475                                                                                    232
v/c                                    0.08                                                                                    0.27
95% queue length                       0.26                                                                                    1.06
Control Delay (s/veh)                  13.2                                                                                    26.2
LOS                                      B                                                                                      D
Approach Delay (s/veh)                    --                     --                                                           26.2
Approach LOS                              --                     --                                                            D
Copyright © 2010 University of Florida, All Rights Reserved                          HCS+TM   Version 5.6              Generated: 5/28/2013   3:17 PM




                                                                                                                        Page 24 of 156
file:///C:/Users/Danni.Jorgenson/AppData/Local/Temp/u2kC36D.tmp                                                                        5/28/2013
Hampton Road Rezone
Rezone 12-REN-02
Applicant: Steve Bedi, Rejuvenation Media, LLC
Owner: Fusion Healthcare, Inc.
Location: 1174 Hampton Road and 1186 Hampton Road
Staff Recommendation:                Approval with Conditions




                                                                       Site Location




 Land Use Classification:   Community Commercial                 Case Planner:   Courtney Mendez, AICP

   Current Zone District:   RMF-3                              Date Accepted:    May 11, 2012
                                                         Development Review
 Proposed Zone District:    NT                                                   November 14, 2012
                                                                 Committee:
          Proposed Use:     N/A                                   Report Date:   December 27, 2012

             Parcel Size:   23,968 s.f. (0.55 acres)   Planning Board Hearing:   January 9, 2013

  Quarter Section Map #:    21




                                                                                   Page 25 of 156
                             Table of Contents




A.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                    Page
     Proposal/Site Location                                 1
     Planning Board Alternative Actions                     3


B.   ANALYSIS: ZONING CODE REQUIREMENTS
     Comprehensive Plan Consistency                         4
     Zoning Analysis                                        8
     Standards for Review                                  10
     Other Applicable Codes                                13




APPENDICES
1.   Application Excerpts
2.   DRC Sign-Off
3.   Neighborhood
4.   Transportation
5.   Public Hearing Notice




                                                 Page 26 of 156
                              A. Executive Summary



Proposal/Site Location:

The applicant proposes rezone of two properties located at 1174 Hampton Road and
1186 Hampton Road from the Residential Multiple Family ­ 3 (RMF-3) zone district to
the North Trail Zone (NT) District.

Adjacent uses include residential to the west (zoned RMF-3 adjacent and RSF-2
beyond), Whitaker Gateway Park to the south (zoned RMF-3), and existing non-
residential uses to the north and east (zoned NT and CGD). The subject properties have
a Community Commercial Future Land Use designation. The NT zone district proposed
is identified as an implementing zone district for Community Commercial specific to
the North Trail corridor.

The request is a stand-alone rezone, meaning it is not associated with a Site Plan
application or other development approval request. However the applicant has
provided a proffer to the rezone restricting potential future uses from the site. These
excluded uses include: motor vehicle fueling, motor vehicle service, alcoholic beverage
store, bar, convenience store, nightclub, and industrial service uses (including printing
shop and limousine or taxi dispatch). A conceptual rendering for a medically-oriented
hotel is included, but is conceptual in nature only. Therefore analysis has been based on
the consistency of the NT district and its potential uses as a whole, less those uses that
have been specifically proffered.

Rezoning petitions require an analysis of consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. The
2030 Sarasota City Plan is composed of eleven chapters, each with its own "Action
Strategies." Those Action Strategies that apply to the proposed rezoning are provided in
greater detail under the Comprehensive Plan Consistency portion of this report and are
summarized in the following table:

      Chapter           Consistency Reason
      Neighborhood         Yes      The required neighborhood workshop was held
                                    on April 19, 2012. Fourteen residents were in
                                    attendance.
      Housing              Yes      There is no existing housing onsite. The NT
                                    district does allow for a variety of both
                                    residential and non-residential uses, which
                                    could potentially contribute to housing stock.
      Environmental        Yes      There are no relevant plan components
      Protection                    associated with this petition.
      Recreation &         Yes      The proposed rezoning would not negatively
      Open Space                    impact LOS standards.



                                                                          Page 27 of 156
      Utilities            Yes       All public facilities are available and the
                                     proposed rezoning would not negatively
                                     impact LOS standards. Additional analysis will
                                     be based on future request for development
                                     approval.
      Transportation       Yes       The project has been determined to meet
                                     transportation concurrency standards (based on
                                     a Traffic Study) and will not negatively impact
                                     LOS standards. Additional analysis will be
                                     based on future request for development
                                     approval.
      Future Land Use      Yes       The proposed NT is an implementing zoning of
                                     the Community Commercial Future Land Use
                                     and is consistent with the intent of this district.
      Governmental         Yes       The City has coordinated with the School Board
      Coordination                   of Sarasota County in the review of the rezone
                                     petition.
      Capital              Yes       The proposed rezoning would have no impacts
      Improvements                   on Capital Improvements.
      Historic             Yes       There are no existing historic resources onsite.
      Preservation
      Public School        Yes       There are no impacts on public school facilities.
      Facilities                     Additional analysis will be based on future
                                     request for development approval.

In addition to compliance with the Chapters outlined above, it is important to note that
the rezoning from RMF-3 to the NT district eliminates a zoning enclave. Elimination of
zoning enclaves, particularly through private rezone action, is specifically encouraged
by the Future Land Use Chapter. Of the available implementing districts for
Community Commercial Future Land Use, the NT district is the most appropriate in its
specific application to the North Trail.




                                                                              Page 28 of 156
Recommendation to the Planning Board for Approval with Conditions:


   ·   Adopt a motion to find Rezone 12-REN-02 consistent with Section IV-1106 of the
       Zoning Code and recommend to the City Commission approval of the Rezone
       subject to the following proffers and conditions:

          1.    The following uses, as may otherwise be permitted under Table VI-501A
               of the Zoning Code, shall be prohibited for the subject property: motor
               vehicle fueling, motor vehicle service, alcoholic beverage store, bar,
               convenience store, nightclub, and industrial service uses (including
               printing shop and limousine or taxi dispatch).

Alternative Motions

If the Planning Board determines 12-REN-02 does not satisfy the criteria specified by
the Zoning Code the Board may also move to:

   · Adopt a motion to continue the petitions if further information is required by the
     Board;
                                      - or ­

   ·   Adopt a motion to find the petition inconsistent with Section IV-1106 of the
       Zoning Code and recommend denial to the City Commission.




                                                                       Page 29 of 156
                   B. Analysis: Zoning Code Requirements



                      Section 1 ­ Comprehensive Plan Consistency



The 2030 Sarasota City Plan is composed of eleven chapters, each with its own "Action
Strategies." Those Action Strategies that apply to the proposed rezoning are listed
below, proceeded by comments that indentify positive and negative aspects of the
proposal.

1 - Neighborhood Chapter
       Positive Aspects:    The Neighborhood Chapter recognizes that the composition
                            of neighborhoods may be residential, non-residential, or
                            both. The proposed rezone will provide for expansion of
                            non-residential use at the edge of the neighborhood and the
                            existing commercial corridor. This designation and the
                            allowable uses can be fully compatible and provide an
                            appropriate transition from the residential neighborhood to
                            the more intensive non-residential uses along Tamiami Trail.
                            This transition was specifically set by the designation of the
                            subject properties as Community Commercial.
       Negative Aspects:    The proposed rezone will expand non-residential
                            development adjacent to existing single-family residential
                            development. Potential negative impacts are addressed
                            though the limitation on uses and would be further
                            examined through the Site Plan process and implementation
                            of the Zoning Code standards (setbacks, buffering, etc.).
       Applicable Policies: Action Strategy 1.1; Objective 2; Action Strategy 2.3; Action
                            Strategy 2.6; Action Strategy 2.7; Objective 4; Action Strategy
                            4.1

2 - Housing Chapter
      Positive Aspects:    The proposed rezoning provides opportunities for
                           multifamily residential, group living, or non-residential
                           uses. This may contribute in the future to providing a range
                           of housing densities or mixed-use development.
       Negative Aspects:   The proposed redevelopment will place additional non-
                           residential development adjacent to existing single-family
                           residential development to the west. Potential negative
                           impacts are addressed though the limitation on uses and
                           would be further examined through the Site Plan process




                                                                           Page 30 of 156
                               and implementation of the Zoning Code standards (setbacks,
                               buffering, etc.).
       Applicable Policies:    Objective 1; Action Strategy 1.2; Action Strategy 4.4; Action
                               Strategy 6.2

3 - Environmental & Coastal Protection Chapter
       Positive Aspects:    The proposed rezone includes a property that contains no
                            protected environmental systems and is not located within a
                            FEMA high hazard zone. Tree protection standards will
                            apply to any future development activity.
       Negative Aspects:     None.
       Applicable Policies: Action Strategy 1.1

4 - Recreation & Open Space Chapter
       Positive Aspects:    The proposed rezone implements a mixed-use district that
                            may or may not contain any residential use. Even with the
                            inclusion of a residential component, no impacts are
                            anticipated to the adopted LOS standards as a result of the
                            development.
       Negative Aspects:    None.
       Applicable Policies: None.

5 - Utilities Chapter
        Positive Aspects:      All development onsite will connect to applicable utilities.
        Negative Aspects:      None.
        Applicable Policies:   Action Strategy 1.1; Action Strategy 1.3; Action Strategy 1.7;
                               Action Strategy 1.11; Action Strategy 3.3

6 - Transportation Chapter
       Positive Aspects:    The rezone has been has been reviewed based on the most
                            intense reasonable use of the property. Based on a traffic
                            study performed, the potential development generated by
                            the rezone was found to meet all applicable LOS standards.
                            Any additional development would be subject to new
                            analysis.
       Negative Aspects:    None.
       Applicable Policies: Objective 1; Action Strategy 1.2; Action Strategy 2.2; Action
                            Strategy 2.3; Action Strategy 3.1; Action Strategy 3.3; Action
                            Strategy 4.1; Action Strategy 6.1; Action Strategy 6.4; Action
                            Strategy 7.4; Action Strategy 7.5; Action Strategy 7.14;

7 - Future Land Use Chapter
       Positive Aspects: The proposed NT zone district is an appropriate
                         implementing district of the Community Commercial Future
                         Land Use Category. Further discussion regarding Future
                         Land Use and Zoning is provided below.


                                                                             Page 31 of 156
      Negative Aspects:      None.
      Applicable Policies:   Objective 1; Action Strategy 1.3; Action Strategy 1.4; Action
                             Strategy 1.6; Action Strategy 2.3; Action Strategy 2.4; Action
                             Strategy 3.1; Action Strategy 3.2; Action Strategy 3.3; Action
                             Strategy 3.4; Action Strategy 3.6; Action Strategy 3.7; Action
                             Strategy 3.8; Action Strategy 3.9; Community Commercial
                             Land Use Description

8 - Intergovernmental Coordination Chapter
        Positive Aspects:    The City has coordinated with any necessary governmental
                             agencies in the review of the rezone petition, including the
                             School Board of Sarasota County.
        Negative Aspects:    None.
        Applicable Policies: Action Strategy 2.1

9 - Capital Improvements Chapter
       Positive Aspects:    The City has determined the rezone is consistent with
                            adopted LOS standards and does not trigger any
                            requirements for Capital Improvement.
       Negative Aspects:    None.
       Applicable Policies: Action Strategy 3.2, Action Strategy 3.3; Objective 4, Action
                            Strategies 4.1 ­ 4.5

10 - Historic Preservation Chapter
       Positive Aspects:    The proposed rezone does not impact the Historic
                            Preservation Chapter.
       Negative Aspects:    None.
       Applicable Policies: None.

11- Public School Facilities Chapter
      Positive Aspects:    The City has coordinated with the School Board of Sarasota
                           County in the review of the rezone petition. There are no
                           impacts on public school facilities.
      Negative Aspects:    None.
      Applicable Policies: Action Strategy 1.1; Action Strategy 5.3

Future Land Use Analysis

The subject property is designated as Community Commercial on the Future Land Use
Map. It should be noted that some concerns were raised by the adjacent neighborhood
regarding the timing of the change in the Future Land Use to Community Commercial.
This change was made in 2008 as part of a package of City-wide changes associated
with the update of the Sarasota City Plan, as adopted by the City Commission. We must
therefore make our analysis and findings of consistency on what the current Future
Land Use is today, and not base it on what it may have been in the past.



                                                                           Page 32 of 156
The purpose and intent of the Community Commercial Future Land Use category is to
identify areas of the City that have developed primarily with retail, office, personal
service, institutional, and government uses (e.g. - "primary" uses) that focus upon
serving near-by local markets and local attractions and areas of the City where uses
consistent with this classification can occur in the future.

It is noted that activities within neighborhoods adjacent to the perimeter of this
classification often reflect a markedly different use, intensity and scale (e.g., single
family residences) than those planned for this classification. Hence, new
development/redevelopment at the perimeter of this classification must be particularly
sensitive to these adjacent neighborhoods in order to assure compatibility with them. In
general, the more intensive or the larger scale the use, the more it needs a central
location within this classification as opposed to being at the perimeter. In-fill
development/redevelopment within this classification is encouraged. Based on its
location immediately adjacent to Tamiami Trail, the transition of the property to the
implementing NT district is appropriate. However, any future development approvals
should be closely reviewed through the Site Plan or other development approval
process to ensure the appropriate transition is made, particularly to the rear of the
property.

This edge condition is not unique to this property. The Community Commercial Future
Land Use follows along the North Trail and varies from one to several properties in
depth. The depth of the subject property falls well within the average for the
Community Commercial Future Land Use and implementing NT zoning for properties
along North Tamiami Trail. At nearly all of these intersections there is a transition from
commercial to residential use. In fact, one of the design objectives for Community
Commercial (as noted in the Future Land Use Chapter) is to "embrace concepts of `new
urbanism' by locating residences, offices, and workplaces in close proximity to one
another. Shops and offices should be located near neighborhood edges to serve
residents. Uses located along a street frontage shall be similar with dissimilar uses
meeting at rear lot lines."

Because a Site Plan has not been provided as part of the Rezone, a definitive use or uses
for the site cannot be evaluated. However, the applicant has provided a proffer
statement prohibiting several future uses from the property. These uses, such as gas
stations, convenience stores, bars, etc. are some of the more intense or objectionable uses
in terms of compatibility with the neighborhood. This speaks to the need for sensitivity
and compatibility of use for this property, as it is located at the entrance to a residential
single-family neighborhood.




                                                                            Page 33 of 156
                                     Section 2 ­ Zoning Analysis


The Community Commercial Future Land Use can be implemented by seven different
zoning districts, including Commercial Neighborhood District (CND), Commercial
Storefront District (CSD), Commercial Residential District (CRD), Commercial General
District (CGD), Commercial Shopping Center (CSC), Governmental (G, which would
not be appropriate in this case) and North Trail (NT, applies to North Trail only). Of
these, CSC would not be available because of minimum zoning lot size requirements. In
addition, neither CND nor CSC allows hotel/motels or other temporary lodging, which
has been proposed for the property. (Actual use is only limited by the proffers as
further discussed below.) Although some of these other districts would be potential
options, the North Trail district is intended to specifically apply to the North Trail area
and is a continuation of the surrounding zoning pattern. To this end, the North Trail
zoning was actually reestablished as an implementing zoning district under the Zoning
Code in 2009.

Pursuant to Section VI-501(c)(7), the intent and purpose of the NT district is as follows:

        The intent and purpose of the NT District is to permit a mix of neighborhood
        scale commercial; cultural and educational facilities; tourist accommodations and
        attractions; multifamily residential and mixed uses and to facilitate their proper
        development and use. The commercial and service activities within this zone are
        primarily oriented toward serving the needs of local residents, tourists and
        students. Development and redevelopment shall be compatible with, and preserve
        and enhance, the character of the adjoining neighborhoods. It is further intended
        that this District is to promote development and redevelopment in a manner that
        creates a safe and attractive environment for specified uses as well as cultivate an
        attractive gateway to the city.

The development standards for the NT district pursuant to Table VI-503A are
summarized below:

  Max.          Max.      Max.      Min.      Min.        Max.        Max.         Setback Requirements
Multifamily     Hotel     FAR      Zoning      Lot        Height     Building
 Density       Density               Lot      Width                  Coverage      Front      Side    Rear
                                    Area
  35 units     50 units   none      none       none       25 feet /      none        Min.     0/ 15   15 ft
   /acre        / acre                                   35 feet for                10/15*      ft
                                                           hotel,
                                                        third-floor
                                                        residential
* The larger setback requirement applies to structures fronting side streets intersecting with N Tamiami
Trail.

The proposed rezone from RMF-3 does provide for an increase in allowable density
(RMF-3 allows 13 units/acre) and the addition of non-residential floor area. Allowable
height remains essentially unchanged. The maximum height for RMF-3 is 35 feet,



                                                                                           Page 34 of 156
whereas the NT allows either 25 feet or 35 feet based on the proposed use. Setbacks
vary, primarily because the emphasis in the NT district is to place buildings closer to
the street, versus the more traditional multifamily districts where a greater setback is
desired. Based on the allowable development standards for NT, a maximum of 19
residential dwelling units or 27 hotel units could be permitted on the subject property.
The NT district does not provide maximum floor area ratios (FAR), therefore the
intensity of any development is limited by the other development standards for the
district (such as height and setback) and other Zoning Code requirements such as
minimum parking, required landscaping, etc. For purposes of transportation analysis, a
combination of a 6,000 square foot bank (which is a significant traffic generator) and
four apartment units was used. Although a traffic study was required, the study found
no impacts to the level-of-service of the roadway system.

As previously noted, there is no development application associated with the proposed
rezone. This would allow a variety of future types of development on the subject
property, as may be allowed under the NT district. The applicant has provided a proffer
indicating that the following uses will be prohibited for the subject property: motor
vehicle fueling, motor vehicle service, alcoholic beverage store, bar, convenience store,
nightclub, and industrial service uses (including printing shop or limousine or taxi
dispatch). These uses in particular may be those that are most objectionable and could
have the greatest potential impact on the adjacent neighborhood. Although the majority
of proffered uses (with the exception of the industrial service) require Minor
Conditional Use or Major Conditional Use approval, there is still value in excluding
them from the list of permitted uses for the property. By excluding them for the
property, they cannot be requested at any time in the future without also re-opening the
rezone for consideration. A copy of Table VI-501A has been attached which provides all
allowable uses within the NT district. Permitted uses generally include multifamily,
group living, office, commercial uses including retail sales and service, and institutional
uses, as specifically listed under Table VI-501A.

Although there is no specific use identified, the uses generally allowed by the NT
zoning can compatibly operate with other uses along the North Trail and adjacent to
neighboring residential. As previously noted, this transition works at numerous other
points along the North Trail as a similar transition is made from non-residential to
residential uses.

The required Site Plan approval process is the mechanism by which the City and the
public can further review a proposed use and its impacts. Pursuant to Section V-501 of
the Zoning Code, any residential development of eight or more dwelling units or 5,000
square feet of gross floor area or more require Site Plan approval, including DRC
review and a public hearing before the Planning Board. This process is also the most
appropriate time to review and recommend conditions specific to the development of
the property as the conditions would be specific to the use and development proposed.
During this review, specific attention should be paid to not only the use overall, but the
scale and location of the building, buffering, and the transition at the side property line
to help ensure a smooth transition at the edge of the neighborhood.


                                                                           Page 35 of 156
The appropriateness of the proposed rezone is primarily tied to the fact that the
applicant has requested a rezone to take a property from a zoning enclave to an
appropriate implementing district of the Community Commercial Future Land Use
classification. The applicant has provided proffers that eliminate many of the
potentially objectionable uses from occurring on the property and the required Site Plan
process will provide future opportunity for additional analysis of any potential impacts
once a final use is determined.



                            Section 3 - Standards for Review

                     ARTICLE IV - DIVISION 11 ­ REZONINGS

The City of Sarasota Zoning Code, Article IV, Division 11 establishes the standards for
rezoning property. Section IV-1101 states the overall purpose:

      The City Commission is hereby authorized to rezone property in accordance
      with the Florida Statutes and applicable case law.

Section IV-1106 lists the following Standards for Review:

      In reviewing all applications for rezoning, the Planning Board and City
      Commission shall consider whether the proposed rezoning is consistent with
      and furthers the goals, objectives and action strategies of the Sarasota City
      Plan, and shall consider whether the proposed change will further the purposes
      of these regulations and other city ordinances, regulations and actions designed
      to implement the Sarasota City Plan:

      (b) For rezonings classified as quasi-judicial under Section IV-202(b), the
          Planning Board and City Commission shall consider the following:

      (1) Whether the proposed change would be contrary to the future land use plan
          and would have an adverse effect on the Sarasota City Plan; in a non-use
          proffered rezoning, the Planning Board and City Commission shall review
          the request considering the most intense use permitted in the requested zone
          district;

          Staff Response: The proposed change is specifically intended to implement
          the Community Commercial Future Land Use designation of the subject
          property. Based on the analysis above, the proposed change was found to be
          consistent with the Sarasota City Plan. The proposal was reviewed in context
          with the proffers and most intense use permitted in the zone district.

      (2) Compatibility with the existing land use pattern;



                                                                         Page 36 of 156
   Staff Response: The subject property is located within proximity to both
   similar non-residential land uses and residentially zoned lands. The proposed
   rezone implements the Future Land Use pattern adopted as part of the
   Comprehensive Plan and provides an appropriate transition from the
   commercial corridor of Tamiami Trail to residential use.

(3) Possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby
    districts;

   Staff Response: The subject property is located adjacent to other properties
   zone NT and similar commercial CGD zoning. The surrounding districts are
   all generally related and reflect the overall nature of the Tamiami Trail
   corridor.

(4) The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of the
    land on public utilities;

   Staff Response: The proposed rezone will not alter the population density
   pattern. In addition, the City's concurrency management system will ensure
   that all necessary public infrastructure and improvements are in place to meet
   the demands of development as projects move forward.

(5) Any increase and possible overloading of the city's sewage collection,
    treatment and disposal facilities;

   Staff Response:      The City's concurrency management system will ensure
   that all necessary public infrastructure and improvements are in place to meet
   the demands of development as projects move forward.

(6) Whether existing district boundaries are illogically drawn in relation to
    existing conditions on the property proposed for change;

   Staff Response: The subject property is a zoning enclave, meaning the
   underlying zoning is not consistent with the Future Land Use designation of
   the property. In addition, most properties with direct frontage along North
   Tamiami Trail are zoned for commercial, with most zoned NT. The proposed
   rezone of the property to NT continues this existing pattern.

(7) Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed
    amendment necessary;

   Staff Response: The acquisition of the property by the applicant and Future
   Land Use designation created the conditions leading to the rezone. The
   proposed rezone is the first step towards infill development of the Site.

(8) Whether the proposed change will create a drainage problem;


                                                                  Page 37 of 156
   Staff Response: The rezone has no direct impact on drainage. Any future
   development will be reviewed to ensure that adequate stormwater retention
   is provided.

(9) Whether the proposed change will seriously reduce the flow of light and air
    to adjacent areas;

   Staff Response: The requirements of the Zoning Code, specifically the NT
   district and its height limitations, setback, and other development standards
   of the Zoning Code prevent the reduction of light and air flow to adjacent
   areas.

(10)Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the improvement or
    development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations;

   Staff Response: The proposed       change is intended to encourage the
   redevelopment and improvement      of the property within the rezone area.
   Although the surrounding area       is predominantly developed, it may
   encourage surrounding properties   to follow suite and further redevelop or
   otherwise improve the area.

(11)Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privileges to
    an individual owner as contrasted with the public welfare;

   Staff Response: There is no granting of special privilege. The proposed
   rezone is consistent with the Future Land Use and implements a designation
   that is available for any other property within the Community Commercial
   Future Land Use and are located along the North Trail.

(12)Whether the change suggested is out of scale with the needs of the
    neighborhood or the city; and

   Staff Response: The Comprehensive Plan sets the pattern for overall scale,
   intensity and types of uses. The proposed rezone implements the intent of the
   Future Land Use Chapter and allows for future development consistent with
   the Comprehensive Plan. The subject property is also generally consistent
   with the locational requirements and guiding principles for the NT district.

(13)Whether it is impossible to find other adequate sites in the city for the
    proposed use in districts already permitting such use.

   Staff Response: There are other sites potentially available that would allow
   similar uses to the NT district. This particular request does result in the
   elimination of a zoning enclave, as encouraged by the Sarasota City Plan.




                                                                Page 38 of 156
                                Other Applicable Codes

The following codes of the City Sarasota are made a part of the record by this reference:
    Zoning Code of the City of Sarasota, 2002 ed.;
    Sarasota City Code;
    2030 Sarasota City Plan;
    The City of Sarasota Engineering Design Criteria Manual;
    The 2002 Parks and Connectivity Master Plan;
    Standard Design Building Code and City of Sarasota local amendments.




                                                                          Page 39 of 156
          Map: 1174 & 1186 Hampton Road Rezone (12-REN-02)
 Location Map:
             Legend
             D      Subject Area
             c=::J Pa reels
             C=:J


                                                                                                           s
Prepared by: City of Sarasota Department of Neighborhood & Development Services, December 28 , 2012
                                                                                              Page 40 of 156
 FLU and Zoning: 1174
                 11 74 & 1186 Hampton Road Rezone (12-REN-02)
     Legend
     E222l
     I:222l Subject Area   Future Land Use                                Multiple Family (Medium Density)

     c::::J Zoning              Single Family (Very Low Density)     . . Community Commercial
     [==:J

                                                                                                             W+E
             Parcels            Single Family (Low Density)               Open Space-Recreational-Conservation   N
                           m,   Multiple Family (Moderate Density)

                                                                                                             W
                                                                                                             +E  s
Prepared by: City of Sarasota Department of Neighborhood & Development Services, December 28, 2012
                                                                                                   Page 41 of 156
                           ,
   -   - - -- - - ---'




                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                     I .~
                                                                                                                                    .,,,
                                                                                                                                   ..? ~

                                                                                                                                     I~
                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                     ,
CERTIFIED TO:

JlB6 HAMPTON ROAD.   u.c
                                                                  FLOOD DATA:
                                                                  COIIJlUNITY NO. J 251 50
                                                                  PANEL NO. 0004 B
                                                                                                                                     1m.
ORION BANK                                                        FLOOD ZONE:         -a-
OW REPUBUC TITU: INSURANCE COJIPANY                               R£IIJSE:D' 2/ 15/ 1984
BURGESS, HARREU. JlANCUSO, OLSON " COLTON, P.A-                   nJ10D Door.. 111 BII' lDII'III:D
                                                                  Ar ax.IJt1T ,.LILI.. I'UIOD
                                                                  -~




LEGAL DESCRIPTION

LOTS 1 AND 2 (LESS ADDmONAL RIGHT OF WAY FOR TAM/AMI TRAIL). AND LOT 3 AND THE
EAST 49 FEET OF LOT 4, SUBDlVlSION OF LOTS 3 & 16, BLOCK B, WHI TAKER SUBDIVISION
OF FRACTIONAL SECTION 13, TO WNSHIP 36 SOUTH, RANGE 1 7 EAST, AS PER PLAT THEREOF
RECORDED IN PLAT BOOK I , PAGE 125 1/2. PUBUC RECORDS OF SARASOTA COUNTY.
FLORIDA




                     *         RED STAKE SURVEYORS
ROBERT G. BRUCE - 7123 PROC1'OR RD. - SARASOTA, Fl
                                                                                                         *
                                                      34241 - PHONE - (941) 9 23-9 99 7 FAX (941) 925- 8884

                                                       CERTIJ'1CAtt 0' stnn'i'YOR:           I b ....b.1 ecrW'.P' Uuot UlJ. record of .urTq
                                                       ....9..-...... Bo undary      s.u-r   of the Jl1'GperV . . alit ...... _d dUlOriIled
                                                                                                                                  dUlOribed
                                                       bereo... .u... thot !..II.. - . 1 .... """"tl.1 puforMd WId" .. tnT dI.....,UOD
                                                       .... of t.It.o.t It ,. U'tIe .... d ~t Co u..
                                                                                                  u.. J)at of ~ hlo. '...,. aud belief.
                                                       I aJ... .,..rtU)' Uult it m..e16 th. MiD,.., ..... T=.I:uI/eaI StaJldant. for t.  ...'"
                                                       SurYer/nl u. the State of /I1"r/de, ... d....,ribed in Cb ..    "w      6 1GJ?',
                                                       Florid. Adm.b.ltolnU.... Cod".



                                                                                                                   11/30/2005
                                                       ROBERT G. BRUCE, P.S.kM. '4519                          DATE
                                                       nu. .o~ Do l nlid Wll_ _ I.... Irlt.ll Sum,...... ..... "-<1 HaL



                                                                                                     Page 42 of 156
§ VI-502                                  SARASOTA ZONING CODE


                     Table VI-50l. Primary Uses Allowed in the Commercial Zones

                                                         CND              CSD         CRD
 Use Categories                                          (2,3,4)          (2,3)       (2,3)          CaD          CSC
       P = Permitted        C= Major conditional use   MC = Minor conditional use           blank = Prohibited use

 RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
 Household Living                                         P(1)            pel)        pel)
 Group Living                                                                         P (1)
 COMMERCIAL CATEGORIES
 Commercial Recreation                                                                                C           C
 Commercial Parking                                        C               C            C             C
 Quick Vehicle Servicing                                                                              C
 Major Event Entertainment                                                                            C
 Office                                                    P               P             P            P           P
 Retail Sales and Service                                          Only retail sales and service as noted below
   Sales-oriented                                          P               P            P            P            P
                                                                    Exceptions to sales-oriented noted below
       Alcoholic Beverage Store                            C               C            C             C           P
       Convenience Store                                   C               C            C             C           C
       Motor vehicle/boat sales agency                                                                C
       Motor vehiclelboat showroom                                                                    P           P
   Personal service-oriented                               P               P            P             P           P
   Entertainment-oriented                                 MC          P                 P      P           P
                                                           Exceptions to entertainment-oriented noted below
       Bars, Tavern, Nightclubs                            C               C            C             C           C
       HotellMotel and Other Temporary Lodging                             P            P             P
  Repair-oriented                                          P               P            P             P           P
  Adult Use Establishments (see article Iv, division                                                              C
  4)
Self-Storage
Vehicle Repair                                                                                        C
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES
  Artist, sculptor, potter, weaver,etc. studios           MC              MC          MC             MC           MC
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES
Basic Utilities                                            P               P           P              P           P
Colleges                                                                   C           C             C            C
Community Services                                                         C           C             C            C
                                                               Exceptions to community services noted below
  Short Term Housing and Mass Shelters                                                               C
  LibrarieslMuseums                                        P               P           P              P           P
Day Care                                                 MC               MC          MC            MC            MC
Medical Centers
Parks and Open Space                                      P                P           P             P            P
Private Clubs                                            MC               MC          MC            MC            MC
Religious Institutions                                   MC               MC          MC            MC            MC
Schools                                                  MC               MC          MC            MC            MC
OTHER USE CATEGORIES
Aviation and Surface Passenger Terminals                  C                C           C             C            C



Supp. No.8                                             CD6:66
                                                                                                           Page 43 of 156
                                           ZONE DISTRICTS                                               § VI-502


                                                     CND         CSD            CRD
 Use Categories                                      (2,3,4)     (2,3)          (2,3)         CaD          CSC
       P = Permitted    C= Major conditional use   MC = Minor conditional use        blank = Prohibited use

Detention Facilities
Radio and Frequency Transmission Facilities
  Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Towers         C          C              C             C           C
Rail Lines and Utility Corridors

Notes for table 501:
   (1)   Residential use limitation.
         a.    Housing types are limited to those defined in table 502.
         b.    Residential uses on a CND or CSD zoning lot must be located above first floor of
               any building.
         c.    Residential uses on the ground floor on a CRD zoning lot must be less than 50
               percent of the total ground floor area of the project, which may consist of one or
               more buildings. In addition, non-residential portions of mixed-use projects must
               be completed and receive an occupancy permit in advance or at the same time as
               an occupancy permit for any residential portion of the project.
   (2)   Parking area location limitation. Parking areas shall not be located any closer to a
         public street right-of-way than the distance by which the principal building is set back
         from the street right-of-way. This provision shall not be construed to preclude parking
         lot access driveways. Parking areas shall not be located on street corners unless one of
         the following conditions exist.
         a.    If a zoning lot fronts on three streets, then parking may be located on only one
               corner.
         b.    If a zoning lot fronts on four streets, then parking may be located on only two
               corners.
  (3)    Drive-through facility limitation. Drive-up windows and drive-through uses are
         prohibited.
  (4)    Small business limitation. Each individual business is limited to 10,000 square feet of
         total floor area exclusive of parking area. Uses are limited in size in order to limit their
         potential impacts on residential uses and to promote a relatively local market area.

                Table VI-501-A. Primary Uses Allowed in the Commercial Zones

Use Categories                       CN      CBN   NT      CT      CP     CSC-N CSC-C CSC-R          ca
     P = Permitted use C = Major conditional use MC = Minor conditional use   blank = Prohibited use
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
Household Living                                  Only household living use types below
  Single                                       P
  Tvvo                                         P
  Townhouse                                    P    P



Supp. No.8                                         CD6:67
                                                                                               Page 44 of 156
