                                                                AGENDA ITEM D-4


                                      PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT

                                                Council Meeting Date: June 11, 2013
                                                              Staff Report #:13-096

                                                                   Agenda Item #: D-4

CONSENT CALENDAR:                Approve and Implement the Oak Knoll School
                                 Safe Routes to School Plan


RECOMMENDATION

Staff recommends the City Council approve and implement the Oak Knoll School Safe
Routes to School Plan.

BACKGROUND

Oak Knoll Elementary School is one of the schools in the Menlo Park City School
District (MPCSD) and is located on the south side of Oak Knoll Lane between White
Oak Drive and Oak Avenue. The school serves Kindergarten through 5th grade, with
students coming from both Menlo Park and Atherton. Currently, the school has 746
students enrolled.

Previously, two Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plans were prepared and
implemented in 1997 and 2002 that included improvements in the study area. However,
since the completion of these improvements, school enrollment has increased, school
boundaries have changed and portions of the school building, parking lot, and the drop-
off and pick-up areas have been reconfigured. A major renovation project was
completed in November 2010 that added more classrooms and a gymnasium.

The ultimate goals of this Safe Route to School Plan project are: 1) Enable and
encourage children, including children with disabilities, to safely walk and bicycle to
school, and per Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Guidelines, travel to school via
accessible routes; 2) Make walking and bicycling to school more appealing modes of
travel, and 3) Facilitate the planning, design, and implementation of projects that will
improve safety, the environment, and the overall quality of life.

ANALYSIS

In August 2012, staff selected Whitlock & Weinberger Transportation (W-Trans) to
update the Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan. The intent of the plan was to focus
on areas close to the school due to changes created by the renovation project.

The recommended Safe Routes to Oak Knoll Plan was developed with the support of a
Steering Committee comprised of representatives from the City of Menlo Park, MPCSD




                                                                            PAGE 51
Staff Report #: 13-096




officials, Oak Knoll School Parent-Teach Organization (PTO), Menlo Park Police
Department, Menlo Park Bicycle Commission and the two neighborhood meetings
where parents, community members and residents participated and provided their
feedback.

The improvement measures included in the recommended plan are developed with
input from the neighborhood, the Steering Committee, the Transportation Commission
and the Bicycle Commission's comments and recommendations and focus on improving
safety and accessibility for pedestrians and bicyclists, improving the overall traffic flow
near the school, enhancing awareness and promoting compliance with safe walking and
bicycling procedures, and encouraging walking and bicycling for the Oak Knoll School
students. Additionally, the plan also recommends walking and bicycle routes to Oak
Knoll School based on input received from the community, existing traffic patterns,
survey results, roadway characteristics, proximity to the school and locations of existing
traffic control, including crosswalks and stop signs.

Community outreach for the Safe Routes to Oak Knoll Plan was achieved by the
following:

     ·    Kick-Off/Steering Committee Meeting #1- October 16, 2012
     ·    Neighborhood Meeting #1- November 7, 2012
     ·    Steering Committee Meeting #2- January 10, 2013
     ·    Neighborhood Meeting # 2- January 23, 2013
          (Discussion Paper #1 presented-Appendix A)
     ·    Bicycle Commission Meeting- April 8, 2013
          (Discussion Paper #2 presented-Appendix B)
     ·    Transportation Commission Meetings- April 10, 2013
          (Discussion Paper #2 presented-Appendix B)
     ·    Transportation Commission Meeting- May 8, 2013
          (Discussion Paper #3 (Draft Plan) presented- Appendix C) *Includes plan
     ·    Bicycle Commission Meeting- May 13, 2012
          (Discussion Paper #3 (Draft Plan) presented- Appendix C)*Includes plan
     ·    Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update Website
     ·    Parent Surveys

The neighborhood meetings along with the May 8th Transportation Commission and the
May 13th Bicycle Commission meetings were noticed by sending out approximately
4,000 postcards to residents within the school boundaries along with installing signs on
barricades near the school.

The Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan recommendations are divided into five
categories. A list of those categories along with a summary of the recommendations for
those categories is as follows:

          1. Education
          2. Enforcement




PAGE 52
Staff Report #: 13-096




          3. Encouragement
          4. Engineering
          5. Evaluation

Education

To improve awareness and compliance regarding proper walking and biking procedures
among parents and children and to improve accessibility and safety for pedestrians and
bicyclists, the following potential improvements are recommended.

     ·    Organize school workshops through "Safe Moves".
     ·    Organize bike rodeos through the Menlo Park Police Department.
     ·    Create school walking and bicycling route maps to be posted on the school
          website and also distributed to parents when they enroll their children in school
          and at the beginning of each school year.
     ·    Create parking maps to be posted on the school website and also distributed to
          the parents prior to each school year.

Enforcement

One of the major concerns near the immediate school vicinity is compliance with traffic
rules and regulations, especially during the school drop-off/pick-up times. In an effort to
increase compliance with traffic rules and regulations and improve safety for bicyclists
and pedestrians, the following enforcement measures were developed.

     ·    The school should coordinate with the Menlo Park Police Department to enforce
          incidents of parking violations, U-turns (if they result in unsafe maneuvers), left-
          turns and stop sign violations.
     ·    Morning no stopping restriction time should be changed from 7:30-8:30 a.m. to
          7:45-8:15 a.m. during school days.
     ·    Afternoon no stopping restriction time should be changed from 2:30-3:15 p.m.
          and 1:00-1:45 p.m. on Thursday during school days.
     ·    The left-turn restriction time from White Oak Drive to Oak Knoll Lane should be
          changed from 7:30-8:30 a.m. to 7:45-8:15 a.m.

Encouragement

To promote walking and bicycling to school, the following important measures are
recommended:

     ·    Organize classroom activities to promote the benefits of walking and bicycling to
          school.
     ·    Organize walk and bike to school day/week, international walk to school month
          and similar activities.
     ·    Organize a "walking school bus" program.




                                                                                  PAGE 53
Staff Report #: 13-096




     ·    Provide incentives such as prizes and certificates to children who participate in
          walk/bike to school programs.
     ·    Implement a traffic assistance program.

Engineering (Short-Term)

The recommended engineering short-term improvements for the Safe Routes to Oak
Knoll School Plan Update are listed below:

     ·    Replace existing red tint in the crosswalks at the Oak Knoll Lane/Oak Avenue
          intersection with a high-visibility ladder-style crosswalks
     ·    Replace existing no stopping signs posted along Oak Knoll Lane, Oak Avenue,
          and White Oak Drive with the proposed no-stopping sign as shown in Figure 4 of
          the draft plan.
     ·    Add new no stopping signs along the roadways as shown in Figure 4 of the draft
          plan.
     ·    Replace the existing "NO LEFT-TURN" symbol sign located on the southbound
          White Oak Drive approach with a new "NO LEFT-TURN/NO U-TURN" movement
          prohibition symbol sign. Additionally, the timing for the left-turn/U-turn restriction
          should be changed from 7:30-8:30 a.m. to 7:45-8:15 a.m. as shown in Figure 5.
     ·    Install "STOP AHEAD" pavement markings on all approaches of the intersection
          of Oak Avenue/Lemon Street
     ·    Remove "SLOW SCHOOL XING" pavement markings that exist in advance of
          the school crosswalks at intersections controlled by stop signs.
     ·    School Exit Driveway - Remove the "NO PARKING DURING PICK UP AND
          DROP OFF HOURS" sign located on the east side of the exit driveway, remove
          the "RIGHT TURN ONLY" sign located below the stop sign on the west side of
          the exit driveway, remove and relocate the "STOP SIGN" that is located on the
          west side of the school exit driveway to the east side, install a "NO LEFT TURN"
          symbol sign below the stop sign on the east side of the exit driveway.
     ·    Place traffic cones on the north side of Oak Knoll Lane between White Oak Drive
          and the school crosswalk during school drop-off and pick-up times only. The
          Parents-Teachers Organization (PTO) should be responsible for placing and
          removing the cones before and after school drop-off and pick-up periods.
     ·    The vegetation along the school routes should be regularly trimmed.

Evaluation

Staff will coordinate with the MPCSD to evaluate the effectiveness of the implemented
recommendation.

Commissions Additional Comments/Motions

The Transportation Commission made the following motions regarding the Plan:




PAGE 54
Staff Report #: 13-096




     1. Recommend approval of the Oak Knoll Safe Routes to School Plan to the City
        Council for their review, contingent on a letter from the Oak Knoll School
        concurring with the recommendations. (*staff has contacted the school for a letter
        of support, but has not yet received the letter.)
     2. Initiate a future study of the Lemon/Santa Cruz Avenue intersection to improve
        bicycle and pedestrian usage. (*Staff will include the study requested as an item
        for consideration through the 5 year CIP process.)
     3. If City staff is not available, retain a coordinator to evaluate the effectiveness of
        the recommended plan after implementation. (*Staff will coordinate with the
        MPCSD to evaluate the effectiveness of the implemented recommendation.)
     4. Utilize funds from the current City's fiscal year NTMP budget for implementation
        of items #2 and #3 of the above motion. (*Any NTMP not expended through the
        current fiscal year will be placed back into Measure A funds and may be re-
        appropriated by Council.)

There were concerns raised by one commissioner at the May 8th Transportation
Commission meeting that the Commission may have violated the Brown Act. This
concern was based upon the item being agendized as, "Discuss the Oak Knoll School
Safe Routes to School Project" and not as "Recommendation to the City Council for
Approval of the Oak Knoll Safe Routes to School Plan." A memo included as an
attachment to that agenda listed the requested action to recommend approval to the
City Council. After being reviewed by the City Attorney's Office, it was determined that
the Attachment was incorporated into the Agenda, therefore there wasn't a violation of
the Brown Act.

The Bicycle Commission made the following motions regarding the Plan:

     1. Recommend approval of the Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan
     2. Initiate a future study of all Arterial crossings that affect the routes of school
        children on their way to school. (*Staff will include the study requested as an item
        for consideration through the 5 year CIP process.)
     3. Request a letter of approval of recommendations by Oak Knoll School. (*staff has
        contacted the school for a letter of support, but has not yet received the letter.)

Next Steps

If approved, implementation of the signing, striping and pavement markings listed in the
engineering recommendations would be installed over the summer. Other items are
being coordinated with the MPCSD and the Menlo Park Police Department.

IMPACT ON CITY RESOURCES

There are sufficient funds budgeted in the Oak Knoll School Safe Routes to School
project to implement the short term recommendations listed below.




                                                                                 PAGE 55
Staff Report #: 13-096




                                                  Table 1
                    Conceptual Cost Estimate ­ Short Term Engineering Recommendations
         Item                Description         Unit   Quantity     Unit Cost   Total Cost
         1           Vegetation Trimming         LS         1        $3,000.00     $3,000.00
         2                   Crosswalk           SF         2        $1,500.00     $3,000.00
         3                Signs (new post)       EA        18          $300.00     $5,400.00
         4               Signs (existing post)   EA        23          $125.00     $2,875.00
         5               Pavement Marking        SF         3          $400.00     $1,200.00
         6               Removal/Relocation      LS         1        $2,000.00     $2,000.00
         Subtotal                                                                 $17,475.00
         Contingency (20%)                                                         $3,500.00
         Total (rounded)                                                          $21,000.00
         Notes: LS = Lump Sum; SF = square foot; EA = each

POLICY ISSUES

The recommendation does not represent any change to existing City policy.

ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW

The project is categorically exempt under Class I of the current State of California
Environmental Quality Act Guidelines.

PUBLIC NOTICE

Public Notification was achieved by posting the agenda, with this agenda item being
listed, at least 72 hours prior to the meeting.

ATTACHMENTS

        A. Safe Routes to Oak Knoll Plan
           Appendix A.     Discussion Paper #1
           Appendix B.     Discussion Paper #2
           Appendix C.     Discussion Paper #3

Report prepared by:
Rich Angulo
Traffic Technician II

Jesse Quirion
Transportation Manager




PAGE 56
                                ATTACHMENT A




                                  Whitlock & Weinberger
                                  Transportation, Inc.

                                  490 Mendocino Avenue
                                  Suite 201
                                  Santa Rosa, CA 95401
                                  voice (707) 542-9500
                                  fax (707) 542-9590

                                  475 14th Street
                                  Suite 290
                                  Oakland, CA 94612
                                  voice (510) 444-2600

                                  website   www.w-trans.com




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update

                                              for the


                          City of Menlo Park

                                       Draft Plan

                                  May 28, 2013




                                            PAGE 57
PAGE 58
                                                                 Table of Contents

                                                                                                                                                                Page

Executive Summary .......................................................................................................................................... 1 

Public Outreach Process ................................................................................................................................. 2 

Recommended Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ............................................................. 4 

Conceptual Cost Estimate ............................................................................................................................18 

Safe Routes to School Funding ....................................................................................................................19 

Figures

      1     Recommended Walking and Biking Routes to School............................................................................... 5 
      2     Parent Volunteers-Key Locations ................................................................................................................... 8 
      3     Oak Knoll Lane and Oak Avenue Crosswalks............................................................................................. 9 
      4     No-Stopping/No Parking Restriction Signs and Locations ...................................................................... 10 
      5     Oak Knoll Lane and White Oak Drive Left-Turn/U-Turn Restriction ................................................ 12 
      6     STOP AHEAD Pavement Marking Locations............................................................................................. 13 
      7     Existing SLOW SCHOOL XING Pavement Markings and Locations .................................................. 14 
      8     School Exit Driveway Signage ........................................................................................................................ 15 
      9     Traffic Cones Placement ................................................................................................................................. 16 

Tables

      1     Conceptual Cost Estimate ­ Short Term Engineering Recommendations ......................................... 18 

Appendices

      A Safe Routes To School Funding Details




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

                                                                                                                                                   PAGE 59
PAGE 60
                                         Executive Summary

Oak Knoll Elementary School is a part of the Menlo Park City School District (MPCSD) and is located
on the south side of Oak Knoll Lane between White Oak Drive and Oak Avenue in the City of Menlo
Park. The school serves Kindergarten through 5th grades and currently has 746 students enrolled from
both Menlo Park and Atherton. Following changes in the attendance area, increased enrollment, and a
series of physical improvements at the school, the City of Menlo Park initiated a review of
transportation conditions including traffic flow and pedestrian and bicyclist activity.

This draft plan presents the recommended Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update including an
overview of the public involvement process, recommended improvements, conceptual cost estimate and
funding resources. As part of the plan, two discussion papers have been prepared previously. The first
discussion paper provided an assessment of the existing conditions and identified transportation issues
related to the Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update. The second discussion paper addressed the
safety concerns and issues of the parents, neighbors, and Steering Committee members as well as school
officials, and provided an evaluation of the potential improvement measures for the Safe Routes to Oak
Knoll School Plan Update.

The recommended Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update was developed with the support of a
Steering Committee comprised of representatives from the City of Menlo Park, Menlo Park School
District, Oak Knoll School officials, Oak Knoll School Parent-Teacher Organization (PTO), Menlo Park
Police Department, Menlo Park Bicycle Commission and the two neighborhood meetings where
parents, community members and residents participated and provided their feedback.

The recommended Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update includes five components for a successful
Safe Routes to School Plan: Education, Enforcement, Encouragement, Engineering and Evaluation. The
improvement measures included in the recommended plan focus on improving safety and accessibility
for pedestrians and bicyclists, improving the overall traffic flow near the school, enhancing awareness
and promoting compliance with safe walking and bicycling procedures, and encouraging walking and
bicycling for the Oak Knoll School students. Additionally, the plan also recommends walking and bicycle
routes to Oak Knoll School based on input received from the community, existing traffic patterns,
survey results, roadway characteristics, proximity to the school and locations of existing traffic control,
including crosswalks and stop signs.




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

                                                                                             PAGE 61
                                      Public Outreach Process

Kick-Off/Steering Committee Meeting #1

A kick-off meeting was held on October 16, 2012, with the Steering Committee comprised of
representatives from the City of Menlo Park, Menlo Park School District, Menlo Park Police
Department, Oak Knoll School PTO, Oak Knoll School, and Bicycle Commission. The purpose of this
meeting was to gather information from the Steering Committee so that the goals and objectives of the
Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update are met.

Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update Website

The City created and maintained a link on the City's website dedicated to the Safe Routes to Oak Knoll
School Plan Update so that Parents, PTO members, residents and others could use the website link to
access information about the project.

Neighborhood Meeting #1

The first neighborhood meeting was held on November 7, 2012. The purpose of this meeting was to
educate neighbors and parents about the proposed Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update and
gather feedback on the existing traffic issues and potential improvement alternatives.

Parent Surveys

A transportation survey was distributed to all the participants at the first neighborhood meeting. The
survey was also made available to parents and the community via the SurveyMonkey website by the City
of Menlo Park. The information collected from the surveys was used to evaluate traffic issues in the
study area, understand the children's travel pattern to/from school and develop the potential
improvements measures required to improve the safety and accessibility for pedestrians and bicyclists so
that parents are comfortable allowing their children walk or bike to school.

Steering Committee Meeting #2

The second Steering Committee meeting was held on January 10, 2013. The purpose of this meeting
was to present the potential improvement measures for the Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update
to the Steering Committee and gather feedback.

Neighborhood Meeting # 2

The second neighborhood meeting was held on January 23, 2013. The potential improvement measures
were updated based on the feedback received from the second Steering Committee Meeting and
presented to the neighbors, parents and residents to get their feedback.

Bicycle Commission Meeting

A presentation was made to Bicycle Commission on April 8, 2013. The presentation included the
potential improvement measures and the draft recommended plan.




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

PAGE 62
Transportation Commission Meeting

At the Transportation Commission meeting held on April 10, 2013, a presentation of the Safe Routes to
Oak Knoll School Plan Update was made. The presentation included a summary of comments from the
Bicycle Commission as well as potential improvement measures and the draft recommended plan.




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

                                                                                        PAGE 63
              Recommended Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update

This section presents the recommended plan including improvements to address safety concerns and
improve traffic issues near the school vicinity. The Plan is divided into five categories as follows:

1.   Education
2.   Enforcement
3.   Encourage
4.   Engineering ­ Short-Term
5.   Evaluation

Education

Parents and residents have expressed concerns that bicyclists and pedestrians are not following the rules
of the road. Bicyclists do not stop to take turns with the motorists at stop-controlled intersections.
During field observations, several pedestrians and bicyclists were observed crossing Oak Knoll Lane at
various locations other than the school crosswalk and parents were seen texting and talking on the
phone while crossing the street with their children. Lack of maps that show pedestrian and bicycle
routes to school was also identified as an issue during the development of this plan. To improve
awareness and compliance regarding proper walking and biking procedures among parents and children
and to improve accessibility and safety for pedestrians and bicyclists, the following potential
improvements are recommended.

·    Organize school workshops through "Safe Moves," especially during the beginning of the school
     year, to increase awareness of pedestrian and bicycle safety among parents and children.

·    Organize bike rodeos through the City of Menlo Police Department to educate parents and children
     about proper riding behavior and the importance of helmet usage.

·    Create school walking and bicycling route maps to be posted on the school website and also
     distributed to parents when they enroll their children in school and at the beginning of each school
     year.

·    Create parking maps to be posted on the school website and also distributed to the parents prior to
     each school year.

It is important that these education programs are updated and continued every year to reinforce the
safety skills. The pedestrian and bicycling route maps should be updated annually as necessary to reflect
any changes in school infrastructure, school boundary and traffic patterns.

The recommended Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update includes walking and bicycle routes to
school based on input from the community, existing traffic patterns, survey results, roadway
characteristics, proximity to the school and locations of existing traffic controls, including crosswalks
and stop signs. The recommended walking and bicycling routes to Oak Knoll School are shown in
Figure 1.

Enforcement

One of the major concerns near the immediate school vicinity is compliance with traffic rules and
regulations, especially during the school drop-off/pick-up time when parents are looking for the fastest
and easiest way to the school. Parents illegally park cars in front of driveways and in the no-stopping

Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

PAGE 64
               Recommended Walking Routes to School            Recommended Biking Routes to School




North

Not to Scale
                                                                                                 007mpa DP#3.ai   4/13


Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan - Update                                                 Figure 1
City of Menlo Park                                    Recommended Walking and Biking Routes to School
                                                                                              PAGE 65
zones to drop-off/pick-up their kids, blocking the paths for residents or pedestrians and bicyclists.
Motorists do not yield to pedestrians and bicyclists at stop-controlled crossings. Several residents have
complained about left-turn violations at the school entrance and exit driveways and U-turns at the
intersections of White Oak Drive/Oakfield Lane and Oak Knoll Lane/White Oak Drive. In an effort to
increase compliance with traffic rules and regulations and improve safety for bicyclists and pedestrians,
the following enforcement measures were developed.

·   The school should coordinate with the City of Menlo Park Police Department to enforce incidents
    of parking violations, U-turns (if they result in unsafe maneuvers), left-turns and stop sign violations.
    Police officers should monitor the school area on a regular basis to ensure that traffic laws are
    obeyed.

·   Morning no stopping restriction should be changed from 7:30-8:30 a.m. to 7:45-8:15 a.m. during
    school days.

·   Afternoon no stopping restriction should be changed from 2:30-3:15 p.m. and 1:00-1:45 p.m. on
    Thursday during school days.

·   The left-turn restriction from White Oak Drive to Oak Knoll Lane should be changed from 7:30-
    8:30 a.m. to 7:45-8:15 a.m.

Encouragement

Many parents do not see walking and biking to school as an acceptable mode of transportation due to
safety concerns and lack of programs aimed at walking and bicycling to school. To promote walking and
bicycling to school, the following important measures are recommended:

·   Organize classroom activities to promote the benefits of walking and bicycling to school.

·   Organize walk and bike to school day/week, international walk to school month and similar activities
    where parents can accompany their children to school and assess the school route as well as their
    child's walking and bicycling abilities.

·   Organize a "walking school bus" program where groups of children walk along the designated
    routes to school and pick up additional children along the way accompanied by adult supervision.
    Allowing children to walk/bike in groups increases their visibility and safety.

·   Provide incentives such as prizes and certificates to children who participate in walk/bike to school
    programs in order to motivate them to continue walking and bicycling to school.

Traffic Assistance Program

During the field visits, it was observed that the drop-off lane is being underutilized resulting in delays and
queues. During the Fall of 2012, there was no staff support along the drop-off lane during the morning
time to move the traffic forward and tell drivers when to stop. Various other behavioral issues related
to traffic were observed. Since police enforcement is not consistent near the school due to limited
resources, it was recommended that the PTO initiate a traffic assistance program in collaboration with
the City of Menlo Park Police Department to train parent volunteers and student valets in areas of
traffic safety and assistance.

·   A traffic assistance program began at Oak Knoll Elementary School in January 2013 to help children
    who walk or bike to school safely cross the streets, improve traffic flow near the school vicinity,
Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

PAGE 66
    discourage bad driving behaviors and assist with enforcement issues. The goal is that eventually
    parent volunteers would be stationed at key locations during school drop-off/pick-up to discourage
    illegal parking, left-turn violations, and stop sign violations, prohibit school access from the parking
    lot and assist with pedestrian and bicyclist safety at crosswalks. Additionally, student valets (5th
    Grade) would help by opening cars doors to get students out of the vehicle more quickly during
    school drop-off. It is recommended that parent volunteers be stationed at the locations shown in
    Figure 2.

·   During the first neighborhood and Steering Committee meeting, W-Trans discussed the need and
    benefits of a traffic assistance program at Oak Knoll School and encouraged the PTO to implement
    the program. Based on the suggestion, the PTO initiated the traffic assistance program in January
    2013 with the help of parent volunteers who are monitoring the drop-off operation and assisting
    with other traffic issues near the school vicinity during the school drop-off period. In early 2013,
    the Safe Routes to School Coordinator from the San Mateo County Office of Education visited Oak
    Knoll School to train the crossing guard and parent volunteers who are part of the program. Since
    the implementation of the Traffic Assistance Program, traffic flow and compliance with regulations
    has improved during the school drop-off period.

Engineering (Short-Term)

Engineering improvements create physical and operational changes near the school that improve safety
and accessibility for pedestrians and bicyclists as well as reduce conflicts with motor vehicle traffic.
Some of the traffic issues related to Oak Knoll School could be reduced through the Education and
Encouragement measures discussed previously. However, engineering improvements are necessary to
enhance safety for pedestrians and bicyclists as well as for local residents driving in the area. Short-term
engineering improvements are generally low cost and can be accomplished in a short time. The
recommended engineering short-term improvements for the Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update
are discussed below:

High Visibility Crosswalks: The existing red tint in the crosswalks at the Oak Knoll Lane/Oak Avenue
intersection is ineffective and not visible from a distance. It is recommended that the existing
crosswalks be upgraded to high-visibility ladder-style crosswalks as shown in Figure 3 to improve safety
and alert motorists about students crossing at this location.

No Stopping Signs: During the community and Steering Committee meetings, members and residents
have expressed concern that the existing no stopping restriction timings near the school vicinity is very
inconvenient and should be reduced. Based on the feedback received, it recommended that the existing
no stopping signs posted along Oak Knoll Lane, Oak Avenue, and White Oak Drive be removed and
replaced with a new no-stopping sign (same locations). The proposed no-stopping sign details and
locations of existing signs are as shown in Figure 4.

In order to provide a clear path for pedestrians and bicyclists to and from school, it is recommended
that additional new no stopping signs be installed along the roadways as shown in Figure 4. It should be
noted that additional no-stopping signs are recommended on Oak Avenue south of Oak knoll Lane even
though it is not a designated school route because parents currently park their cars and walk their
children to school which is not safe due to the morning commute traffic heading on Oak Avenue
towards Sand Hill Road. During the community meetings, residents have expressed concern that
parents park their cars in front of the water hydrant located on the east side of White Oak Drive just
north of Oakfield Lane. To discourage this behavior, it was recommended to extend the proposed no-
stopping restriction on the east side of White Oak Drive beyond the water hydrant.

Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

                                                                                              PAGE 67
North

Not to Scale
                                                                      007mpa DP#3.ai   4/13


Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan - Update                          Figure 2
City of Menlo Park                              Parent Volunteers-Key Locations
       PAGE 68
               Existing Crosswalk




                                                     Crosswalk Locations


North          Proposed Crosswalk
Not to Scale
                                                                                007mpa DP#3.ai   4/13


Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan - Update                                    Figure 3
City of Menlo Park                              Oak Knoll Lane and Oak Avenue Crosswalks
                                                                              PAGE 69
               Proposed No-Stopping Sign Details




                                                          No-Stopping/No-Parking Signs Locations
                            LEGEND
                     Additional No-Stopping Restriction
North                Existing No-Stopping Restriction
                     Existing No-Parking Restriction
Not to Scale
                                                                                                   007mpa DP#3.ai   4/13


Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan - Update                                             Figure 4
City of Menlo Park                          No-Stopping/No Parking Restriction Signs and Locations
       PAGE 70
U-Turn Restriction Sign: Motorists make a U-turn from White Oak Drive at Oak Knoll Lane to park on
the south side of White Oak Drive resulting in unsafe conditions for all modes of travel. To discourage
this turning maneuver, it is recommended that the existing "NO LEFT-TURN" symbol sign located on
the southbound White Oak Drive approach be replaced with a new "NO LEFT-TURN/NO U-TURN"
movement prohibition symbol sign. Additionally, the timing for the left-turn/U-turn restriction should
be changed from 7:30-8:30 a.m. to 7:45-8:15 a.m. as shown in Figure 5.

Install Pavement Markings: The community has expressed concern that motorists violate the stop signs
at the all-way stop-controlled Oak Avenue/Lemon Street intersection. To improve safety and reinforce
the existing stop signs, it is recommended that "STOP AHEAD" pavement markings be installed on all
approaches to the intersection as shown in Figure 6. Per the California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (CA-MUTCD) 2012, "STOP AHEAD" pavement markings provide additional emphasis to a stop
sign and can be helpful to road users.

Remove Pavement Marking: The "SLOW SCHOOL XING" pavement markings exist in advance of
school crosswalks controlled by a stop sign at the following locations:

·   Oak Knoll Lane west of White Oak Drive
·   White oak Drive north of Oak Knoll Lane
·   Oak Avenue north of oak Knoll Lane

Per the CA-MUTCD, "SLOW SCHOOL XING" pavement markings shall not be used where the
crossing is controlled by a stop sign; therefore, it is recommended that these pavement markings be
removed from the above locations and as shown in Figure 7.

School Exit Driveway: During various field visits it was observed that the existing "STOP SIGN" at the
school exit driveway is located on the wrong side of the driveway. Additionally, the "RIGHT TURN
ONLY" sign posted below the stop sign is smaller in size and posted at an angle which is not clearly
visible to the exiting motorists. As a result, a few motorists were observed violating the left-turn
restriction at the school exit driveway. In order to make the signs more visible and clear and discourage
the left-turn violation, the following improvements are recommended as indicated in Figure 8:

·   Remove the "NO PARKING DURING PICK UP AND DROP OFF HOURS" sign located on the
    east side of the exit driveway.

·   Remove the "RIGHT TURN ONLY" sign located below the stop sign on the west side of the exit
    driveway.

·   Remove and Relocate the "STOP SIGN" that is located on the west side of the school exit driveway
    to the east side.

·   Install a "NO LEFT TURN" symbol sign below the stop sign on the east side of the exit driveway.

·   Traffic Cones: Place traffic cones on the north side of Oak Knoll Lane between White Oak Drive
    and the school crosswalk as shown in Figure 9 during school drop-off and pick-up times only to
    provide a separation between the motor vehicles and pedestrian/bicycle traffic. The PTO should be
    responsible for placing and removing the cones before and after school drop-off and pick-up
    periods.

Trim Vegetation: To improve visibility of signs, pedestrians and bicyclists, it is recommended that
vegetation along the school routes be regularly trimmed.

Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

                                                                                           PAGE 71
North

Not to Scale
                                                                                        007mpa DP#3.ai   4/13


Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan - Update                                           Figure 5
City of Menlo Park                Oak Knoll Lane and White Oak Drive Left-Turn/U-Turn Restriction
       PAGE 72
North

Not to Scale
                                                                             007mpa DP#3.ai   4/13


Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan - Update                                Figure 6
City of Menlo Park                              STOP AHEAD Pavement Marking Locations
                                                                           PAGE 73
North

Not to Scale
           e
                                                                                   007mpa DP#
                                                                                   007    DP#3.ai   4/13


Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan - Update                                      Figure 7
City of Menlo Park                Existing SLOW SCHOOL XING Pavement Markings and Locations
       PAGE 74
                Existing Signage                Proposed Signage


North

Not to Scale
                                                                         007mpa DP#3.ai   4/13


Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan - Update                             Figure 8
City of Menlo Park                                    School Exit Driveway Signage
                                                                      PAGE 75
North

Not to Scale
                                                               007mpa DP#3.ai   4/13


Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan - Update                   Figure 9
City of Menlo Park                              Traffic Cones Placement
       PAGE 76
Evaluation

·   Upon the implementation of the recommended Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update, the
    School District should coordinate with the City of Menlo Park to evaluate the effectiveness of the
    engineering improvements as well as behavioral and attitudinal changes.




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

                                                                                         PAGE 77
                                      Conceptual Cost Estimate

The conceptual cost estimates for the short-term engineering improvements as discussed in the
recommended plan are summarized in Table 1.

                                          Table 1
            Conceptual Cost Estimate ­ Short Term Engineering Recommendations
        Item          Description             Unit         Quantity   Unit Cost Total Cost
        1          Vegetation Trimming         LS             1       $3,000.00    $3,000.00
        2              Crosswalk               SF             2       $1,500.00    $3,000.00
        3            Signs (new post)          EA             18        $300.00    $5,400.00
        4          Signs (existing post)       EA             23        $125.00    $2,875.00
        5           Pavement Marking           SF             3         $400.00    $1,200.00
        6          Removal/Relocation          LS             1       $2,000.00    $2,000.00
        Subtotal                                                                  $17,475.00
        Contingency (20%)                                                          $3,500.00
        Total (rounded)                                                           $21,000.00
        Notes: LS = Lump Sum; SF = square foot; EA = each




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

PAGE 78
                                  Safe Routes to School Funding

Safe Routes to School Programs are funded via State, Federal and Regional programs. The State-
legislated program referred to as SR2S and Federal program referred to as SRTS are administered by
Caltrans, while the regional programs are administered by the Metropolitan Transportation Commission
(MTC). Federal funding for the SRTS program is through the Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st
Century (MAP-21) transportation bill. Under MAP-21, SRTS was consolidated into the Transportation
Alternative Program (TAP), but it remains eligible for Surface Transportation Program (STP) and
Highway Safety Improvement Program (HSIP) funds. In addition to the State and Federal funding, MTC
has a newly-established Safe Routes to School Program within the Climate Initiatives Program. A total
of $17 million will be distributed to the nine Bay Area counties proportionately according to their share
of total school enrollment in the region. Details of the above funding programs and the project eligibility
criteria are provided in Appendix A.




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 28, 2013

                                                                                             PAGE 79
PAGE 80
                                              Appendix A




                                  Safe Routes To School Funding Details




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Draft Plan
for the City of Menlo Park
May 2013

                                                                          PAGE 81
PAGE 82
Safe Routes to School                                                                                    Page 1 of 3




 Caltrans > Business > Local Assistance > Programs > Safe Routes to School



Safe Routes to School Programs




Announcements:
     On March 11, 2013, Caltrans and the SRTS Technical Assistance Resource Center will be hosting a statewide
     webinar that focuses on how SRTS projects may be eligible in the HSIP Program. Reserve your Webinar seat
     now at:
     https://www3.gotomeeting.com/register/781322358
     September 27, 2012, Caltrans proposed funding SRTS from a $21 million set aside in the STP. This concept
     was approved by the CTC as a one year policy. Future funding for SRTS will be determined through the MAP-
     21 Implementation process.
     July 6, 2012, MAP-21, the Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act was signed into law. Under
     MAP-21, SRTS was consolidated into the Transportation Alternatives Program (TAP), but is eligible for Surface
     Transportation Program (STP) and Highway Safety Improvement Program (HSIP) funds.
     June 29, 2012, Cycle 10 SR2S Approved Project List was announced. 139 projects worth $48.5 million were
     funded this cycle out of 336 project applications submitted. $7 million of the funds were awarded in rural
     counties with $28 million awarded to projects that included at least one low-income school.
     April 9, 2012, The National Center for SRTS has announced the first National Bike to School Day as May 9,
     2012. For additional information, please visit the new website at: www.walkbiketoschool.org. For California, find
     more information at: http://www.casaferoutestoschool.org/whats-happening-in-california/national-bike-to-school
     -day/
     October 17, 2011, The Cycle 3 SRTS Approved Project List was announced. 139 projects worth $66 million
     were funded this cycle out of 332 project applications submitted.
     Program assistance is available through a California specific SRTS website at:
     http://www.casaferoutestoschool.org/. The website was funded through a Non-Infrastructure SRTS statewide
     grant to help communities plan, develop, and implement successful SRTS projects




http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/LocalPrograms/saferoutes/saferoutes.htm
                                                                                                    PAGE  83
                                                                                                       4/25/2013
Safe Routes to School                                                                                        Page 2 of 3



Quick Links to:
       State-legislated SR2S Program
       Federal SRTS Program




What is Safe Routes to School?
Safe Routes to School is an international movement that has taken hold in communities throughout the United States.
The concept is to increase the number of children who walk or bicycle to school by funding projects that remove the
barriers that currently prevent them from doing so. Those barriers include lack of infrastructure, unsafe infrastructure,
lack of programs that promote walking and bicycling through education/encouragement programs aimed at children,
parents, and the community.

Why is Safe Routes to School important?
Thirty years ago, 60% of children living within a 2-mile radius of a school walked or bicycled to school. Today, that
number has dropped to less than 15%. Roughly 25% commute by school bus, and well over half are driven to or from
school in vehicles. And back then, 5% of children between the ages of 6 and 11 were considered to be overweight or
obese. Today, that number has climbed to 20%. These statistics point to a rise in preventable childhood diseases,
worsening air quality and congestion around schools, and missed opportunities for children to grow into self reliant,
independent adults.
Safe Routes to School Programs are intended to reverse these trends by funding projects that improve safety and
efforts that promote walking and bicycling within a collaborative community framework. It is through local champions
working with a coalition of parents, schools, professionals in transportation, engineering, health, and law enforcement,
that the most sustainable projects are expected to emerge.

State and Federal Safe Routes to School Programs
There are two separate Safe Routes to School Programs administered by Caltrans.

There is the State-legislated program referred to as SR2S and there is the Federal Program referred to as SRTS.

While both programs are intended to achieve the same basic goal of increasing the number of children walking and
bicycling to school by making it safer for them to do so, they differ in the following respects.

      Program              State-Legislated              Federal Program - SRTS                Federal Program ­
      Features             Program - SR2S                   (SAFETEA-LU)                        SRTS (MAP-21)

                                                                                             Section 1122 in MAP-21;
    Legislative       Streets & Highways Code
                                                   Section 1404 in SAFETEA-LU
     Authority        Section 2330-2334                                                      Eligible in Section 1112; or
                                                                                             Section 1108
                                                   Pending SAFETEA-LU
                      AB 57 extended program       reauthorization. Extensions have          MAP-21 expires September
      Expires
                      indefinitely                 been granted through September 30,        30, 2014
                                                   2011.
                                                   State, local, and regional agencies
                                                   and Native American Tribes
                                                   experienced in meeting federal
                                                   transportation requirements. Non-         Same as defined in
     Eligible
                      Cities and counties          profit organizations, school districts,   SAFETEA-LU
    Applicants
                                                   and public health departments must
                                                   partner with a city, county, MPO, or
                                                   RTPA to serve as the responsible
                                                   agency for their project.




    PAGE 84
http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/LocalPrograms/saferoutes/saferoutes.htm                                               4/25/2013
Safe Routes to School                                                                                        Page 3 of 3



 Eligible Projects    Infrastructure projects        Stand-alone infrastructure or non-       Same as defined in
                                                     infrastructure projects                  SAFETEA-LU
    Local Match       10% minimum required           None                                     TBD
      Project         Within 4 ½ years after                                                  Within 4 ½ years after
                                                  Within 4 ½ years after project is
    Completion        project funds are allocated                                             project is amended into
                                                  amended into FTIP
     Deadline         to the agency                                                           FTIP
   Restriction on                                    Infrastructure projects must be within
                      Must be located in the                                                  Same as defined in
   Infrastructure                                    2 miles of a grade school or middle
                      vicinity of a school                                                    SAFETEA-LU
      Projects                                       school
     Targeted                                                                                 Same as defined in
                      Children in grades K-12        Children in grades K-8
   Beneficiaries                                                                              SAFETEA-LU
     Cycles
                      10 cycles                      3 cycles                                 NONE
    Completed
                      Cycle 10 Final Project List    Cycle 3 Final Project List dated
  Current Status                                                                              TBD
                      dated 06/29/2012               10/11/2011
      Funding         $24.25M annual funding         $21-25M annual funding                   TBD



How to get started
While every community is unique, the basic steps to consider prior to submitting an application for Safe Routes to
School funds are:

      Identify community stakeholders and form a multidisciplinary team of partners committed to working together in
      developing a community vision, developing project applications, and implementing those projects if selected for
      funding.

      Inventory and identify safety needs/hazards around schools; get information and seek out resources; and
      propose alternatives that would correct those needs/hazards.

      Prioritize alternatives and select the best alternative that proposes short-term and long-term safety solutions in
      the form of projects.

      Develop a plan for the project.

      Submit an application to compete for funding for the project when a call for projects cycle is underway.



Program Assistance
 If you have any questions regarding the funding or implementation of SRTS/SR2S Projects, please contact your
Caltrans District Safe Routes to School Coordinator. The SRTS Technical Assistance Resource Center (TARC) at the
California Department of Public Health (CDPH) is available to assist communities with SRTS program related
questions.
If you have any problems downloading files or other questions, please e-mail Local.Programs@dot.ca.gov or see the
Local Programs Help Page.

Continue to check this site periodically for any program updates.

This page last updated on April 17, 2013.

                                             Conditions of Use | Privacy Policy
                                            Copyright © 2012 State of California




http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/LocalPrograms/saferoutes/saferoutes.htm
                                                                                                        PAGE  85
                                                                                                           4/25/2013
Safe Routes to School                                                                                      Page 1 of 1




 Caltrans > Business > Local Assistance > Programs > Safe Routes > SR2S


Safe Routes to School
State-legislated Safe Routes To School (SR2S) Program
California was the first state in the country to legislate a Safe Routes to School program with the enactment of AB
1475 in 1999. Eight years later, in 2007, AB 57 extended the program indefinitely with funding provided from the State
Highway Account. On September 7, 2011, AB 516 amended the Safe Routes to School program by revising the rating
factors in scoring project applications. For additional information, please refer to the Official California Legislative
Information website located at: http://www.leginfo.ca.gov

Section 2333.5 of the Streets and Highways Code calls for the Department of Transportation, in consultation with the
California Highway Patrol (CHP), to make grants available to local governmental agencies under the program based
upon the results of a statewide competition. To date, there have been nine program cycles released under the SR2S
program.

On June 29, 2012, Cycle 10 SR2S Approved Project List was announced. 139 projects worth $48.5 million was funded
this cycle out of 336 project applications submitted. $7 million of the funds were awarded in rural counties with $28
million awarded to projects that included at least one low-income school.

      Approved Project Lists ­ Cycles 1 through 10

      Delivery Status of SR2S Projects

      Cycle 10 SR2S Program Guidelines and Application Form

      Project Implementation Instructions

      Program Research and Evaluations

      Environmental Justice Desk Guide [pdf]

      More Information and Useful Links


Back to Safe Routes to School Home Page

Continue to check this site periodically for any program updates.

If you have questions or are experiencing problems downloading, you can get help by sending an email to
dawn.foster@dot.ca.gov



                                              Page Last Updated: 8/15/12
                                           Conditions of Use | Privacy Policy
                                          Copyright © 2012 State of California




    PAGE 86
http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/LocalPrograms/saferoutes/sr2s.htm                                                  4/25/2013
Safe Routes to School                                                                                     Page 1 of 2




 Caltrans > Business > Local Assistance > Programs > Safe Routes > SRTS



Safe Routes to School
Federal Safe Routes To School (SRTS) Program
Authorized by Section 1404 of SAFETEA-LU (the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A
Legacy for Users), the SRTS Program came into effect in August of 2005. This federal funding program emphasizes
community collaboration in the development of projects, and projects that incorporate elements of the 5 E's ­
education, encouragement, engineering, enforcement, and evaluation.

After successful applicants are notified that their project has been selected for funding, that project must first be
programmed into a Federal Transportation Improvement Program (FTIP). The FTIP is managed by the Metropolitan
Planning Organization (MPO) or Regional Transportation Planning Agency (RTPA) in their region. It is incumbent on
the awardee to contact their MPO/RTPA to find out when they can expect their project to be amended into the FTIP.

When the Division of Local Assistance is provided copies of amendments through the Division of Programming at
Headquarters, awardees will be alerted so they can initiate their Request for Authorization to Proceed.

      SRTS Program Guidelines

      Cycle 3 SRTS Informational Webinar Information
            Webinar Powerpoint
            Webinar Follow-Up Q&A

      SRTS Approved Project Lists

      Delivery Status of SRTS Projects

      Federal-Aid Process for SRTS Program

      Data Collection and Evaluation

      Environmental Justice Desk Guide [pdf]

      SRTS Directives and Important Documents

      Federal Transportation Improvement Program (FTIP) Information and Links

      More Information and Useful Links


Back to Safe Routes to School Homepage

Continue to check this site periodically for any program updates.

This page last updated on October 18, 2011

If you have questions or are experiencing problems downloading, you can get help by sending an email to
localprograms@dot.ca.gov.




http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/LocalPrograms/saferoutes/srts.htm
                                                                                                     PAGE  87
                                                                                                        4/25/2013
Attachment C: Safe Routes to School Programs Comparison
                                 State SR2S Program                             Federal SRTS Program                                   MTC SR2S Program
                                                                     State, local, and regional agencies experienced in State, local, and regional agencies
                                                                     meeting federal transportation requirements.       experienced in meeting federal
                                                                     Non profit organizations, school districts, public transportation requirements. Non profit
 Eligible Applicants      Cities and counties                        health departments, and Native American Tribes organizations, school districts, public health
                                                                     must partner with a city, county, MPO, or RTPA departments, and Native American Tribes
                                                                     to serve as the responsible agency for their       must partner with a federally eligible
                                                                     project.                                           recipient for their project.
                                                                     · Enable and encourage children, including those
                                                                       with disabilities, to walk and bicycle to school;     · Build upon SR2S efforts funded by
                                                                     · Make bicycling and walking to school a safer and        federal, state, and locally funded
                                                                       more appealing transportation alternative, thereby      programs
                          Reduce injuries and fatalities to school     encouraging a healthy and active lifestyle from an    · CMAQ Program objectives also need to
                          children and to encourage increased          early age; and
 Program Purpose                                                                                                               be met: reduce criteria pollutants while
                          walking and bicycling among                · Facilitate the planning, development, and
                                                                       implementation of projects and activities that will     reducing congestion
                          students.
                                                                       improve safety and reduce traffic, fuel               · Each county will collaboratively tailor
                                                                       consumption, and air pollution in the vicinity of       the objective of this program led by the
                                                                       schools.                                                congestion management agencies.

                          Infrastructure projects Must be located    Stand-alone infrastructure or non-infrastructure        Infrastructure or non-infrastructure projects
 Eligible Projects (See   in the vicinity of a school. Incidental    projects (10-30% of program). Infrastructure            (Focus on non-infrastructure- For
 Table 2 for details)     "soft" costs (i.e. education, outreach)    projects must be within 2 miles of a grade school       discussion)
                          are permitted up to 10%                    or middle school

 Local Match              10%                                        None                                                    11.47%

 Targeted Beneficiaries   Children in grades K-12                    Children in grades K-8                                  Children in grades K-12
                                                                                                                             $5 million per year available for Region in
                                                                     $20 million per year in CA (future levels subject       Cycle 1, or $15 million total; $2 million
 Funding                  $24 million per year in CA
                                                                     to federal reauthorization)                             available for innovative approaches
                                                                                                                             Distribution to counties based on total
                                                                                                                             school enrollment in counties, except for the
 Distribution formula     Competitive                                Competitive
                                                                                                                             innovative approaches component which is
                                                                                                                             regionally competitive.




         PAGE 88
                                              Safe Routes to Schools Project Eligibility Matrix
(1Language from CMAQ Guidance. Note that CMAQ can fund all specific improvements that are eligible in the State and Federal SR2S Programs with the
following exceptions: walking audits and other planning activities, crossing guards and vehicle speed feedback devices, traffic control that is primarily oriented
to vehicular traffic rather than bicyclists and pedestrians, and material incentives that lacking an educational message or exceeding a nominal cost.)
                                                                                                                                                                   1
          State SR2S Program                                       Federal SRTS Program                                  MTC SR2S Program (CMAQ)
Non-Infrastructure Improvements                           Non-Infrastructure Improvements                        Non-Infrastructure Improvements
Public Outreach and                                         x Public awareness campaigns and outreach to         Public Education and Outreach Activities
Education/Encouragement/Enforcement:                         press and community leaders,                          x Public education and outreach can help communities
   x Includes preparing and distributing safety             x Traffic education and enforcement in the               reduce emissions and congestion by inducing drivers
     awareness materials to school personnel, students,      vicinity of schools,                                    to change their transportation choices.
     drivers, and neighboring home and/or business          x Student sessions on bicycle and pedestrian           x Activities that promote new or existing
     owners. Includes outreach efforts that promote          safety, health, and environment, and                    transportation services, developing messages and
     walking and bicycling, to and from school, along       x Funding for training, volunteers, and managers         advertising materials (including market research,
     the designated school routes. Includes                  of safe routes to school programs.                      focus groups, and creative), placing messages and
     coordinating bicycle rodeos with law enforcement                                                                materials, evaluating message and material
     agencies or forming "walking school buses"                                                                      dissemination and public awareness, technical
     within neighborhoods. These activities are                                                                      assistance, programs that promote the Tax Code
     considered `incidental' and limited to 10% of the                                                               provision related to commute benefits, and any other
     construction costs.                                                                                             activities that help forward less-polluting
                                                                                                                     transportation options.
                                                                                                                   x Air quality public education messages: Long-term
                                                                                                                     public education and outreach can be effective in
                                                                                                                     raising awareness that can lead to changes in travel
                                                                                                                     behavior and ongoing emissions reductions;
                                                                                                                     therefore, these activities may be funded indefinitely.
                                                                                                                   x Non-construction outreach related to safe bicycle
                                                                                                                     use
                                                                                                                   x Travel Demand Management Activities including
                                                                                                                     traveler information services, shuttle services,
                                                                                                                     carpools, vanpools, parking pricing, etc.
Infrastructure Improvements                               Infrastructure Improvements                            Infrastructure Improvements
Pedestrian facilities:                                      x Sidewalk improvements: new sidewalks,              Bicycle/Pedestrian Use:
   x Includes new sidewalks, sidewalk widening,              sidewalk widening, sidewalk gap closures,              x Constructing bicycle and pedestrian facilities (paths,
    sidewalk gap closures, curbs, gutters, and curb          sidewalk repairs, curbs, gutters, and curb ramps.       bike racks, support facilities, etc.) that are not
    ramps. Also includes new pedestrian trails, paths       x Pedestrian and bicycle crossing improvements:          exclusively recreational and reduce vehicle trips
    and pedestrian over- and under-crossings. Note:          crossings, median refuges, raised crossings,           x Programs for secure bicycle storage facilities and
    Sidewalk repairs are ineligible. Applicants that         raised intersections, traffic control devices           other facilities, including bicycle lanes, for the
    propose sidewalk repairs will need to explain why        (including new or upgraded traffic signals,             convenience and protection of bicyclists, in both
    the procedures contained in Streets and Highways         pavement markings, traffic stripes, in-roadway          public and private areas
    Code Section 5611 cannot be exercised to repair          crossing lights, flashing beacons, bicycle-            x new construction and major reconstructions of paths,
    the sidewalk. This section allows municipalities         sensitive signal actuation devices, pedestrian          tracks, or areas solely for the use by pedestrian or
    to instruct property owners to repair sidewalks on,      countdown signals, vehicle speed feedback signs,        other non-motorized means of transportation when



                                                                                                                                                       PAGE 89
                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                State SR2S Program                                             Federal SRTS Program                                           MTC SR2S Program (CMAQ)
     or fronting, their property.                                     and pedestrian activated signal upgrades), and                    economically feasible and in the public interest
                                                                      sight distance improvements.
Bicycle facilities:                                                  x On-street bicycle facilities: new or upgraded
   x Includes new or upgraded bikeways, trails, paths,                bicycle lanes, widened outside lanes or roadway
    geometric improvements, shoulder widening, and                    shoulders, geometric improvements, turning
    bicycle parking facilities, racks and lockers.                    lanes, channelization and roadway realignment,
                                                                      traffic signs, and pavement markings.
                                                                     x Off-street bicycle and pedestrian facilities:
                                                                      exclusive multi-use bicycle and pedestrian trails
                                                                      and pathways that are separated from a roadway.
                                                                     x Secure bicycle parking facilities: bicycle
                                                                      parking racks, bicycle lockers, designated areas
                                                                      with safety lighting, and covered bicycle shelters.

Traffic calming:                                                     x Traffic diversion improvements: separation of              Other:
   x Includes roundabouts, bulb-outs, speed humps,                    pedestrians and bicycles from vehicular traffic                x Traffic calming measures
     raised crosswalks, raised intersections, median                  adjacent to school facilities, and traffic diversion
     refuges, narrowed traffic lanes, lane reductions,                away from school zones or designated routes to a
     full- or half-street closures, and other speed                   school.
     reduction techniques. Note: Improvements to                     x Traffic calming and speed reduction
     pick-up and drop-off areas are ineligible. The goal              improvements: roundabouts, bulb-outs, speed
     of this program is to encourage students to walk                 humps, raised crossings, raised intersections,
     and bicycle to school. Exceptions may be granted                 median refuges, narrowed traffic lanes, lane
     if the project increases walking and bicycling by                reductions, full- or half-street closures,
     students and reduces                                             automated speed enforcement, and variable speed
                                                                      limits.
Traffic control devices:
   x Includes new or upgraded traffic signals,
     crosswalks, pavement markings, traffic signs,
     traffic stripes, in-roadway crosswalk lights,
     flashing beacons, bicycle-sensitive signal
     actuation devices, pedestrian countdown signals,
     vehicle speed feedback signs, pedestrian activated
     signal upgrades, and all other pedestrian- and
     bicycle related traffic control devices.


J:\PROJECT\Funding\T4 - New Act\T4 - STP-CMAQ\T4 Cycle Programming\T4 First Cycle\T4 Policy Development\CCI - Climate Change Initiatives\SRTS\SR2S Eligibility Matrix.doc




        PAGE 90
                            APPENDIX A




                           Whitlock & Weinberger
                           Transportation, Inc.

                           490 Mendocino Avenue
                           Suite 201
                           Santa Rosa, CA 95401
                           voice (707) 542-9500
                           fax (707) 542-9590

                           475 14th Street
                           Suite 290
                           Oakland, CA 94612
                           voice (510) 444-2600

                           website   www.w-trans.com




  Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School
Plan Update ­ Discussion Paper #1
                                       for the


                   City of Menlo Park

                           Draft Report

                      December 31, 2012




                                     PAGE 91
PAGE 92
                                                                     Table of Contents

                                                                                                                                                                             Page

Introduction ....................................................................................................................................................... 1 

Data Collection and Review........................................................................................................................... 4 

Existing Conditions........................................................................................................................................... 8 

Field Reconnaissance......................................................................................................................................13 

Public Involvement Process ..........................................................................................................................16 

Figures

      1     Oak Knoll School Attendance Boundary ...................................................................................................... 2 
      2     Study Area ............................................................................................................................................................ 3 
      3     Oak Knoll School Residences .......................................................................................................................... 5 
      4     Existing Traffic Volumes .................................................................................................................................... 7 


Appendices

      A     Kick-off Meeting Notes
      B     Traffic Data
      C     Neighborhood Meeting #1 Meeting Notes
      D     Transportation Survey Form




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Discussion Paper #1
for the City of Menlo Park
December 31, 2012

                                                                                                                                                              PAGE 93
PAGE 94
                                             Introduction

In August 2012, the City of Menlo Park selected Whitlock & Weinberger Transportation (W-Trans) to
update the Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan. Oak Knoll Elementary School is a part of the Menlo
Park City School District (MPCSD) and is located on the south side of Oak Knoll Lane between White
Oak Drive and Oak Avenue in the City of Menlo Park. The school serves Kindergarten through 5th
grade, with students coming from both Menlo Park and Atherton. Currently, the school has 746
students enrolled. The Oak Knoll Elementary School attendance boundary and surrounding roadway
network are shown in Figure 1.

Previously, two Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plans were prepared and implemented in 1997 and
2002 that included improvements in the study area. However, since the completion of these
improvements, school enrollment has increased, school boundaries have changed and portions of the
school, the parking lot, and the drop-off and pick-up areas have been reconfigured. A major renovation
was completed in November 2010 that added more classrooms and a gymnasium. The Oak Knoll
Neighborhood Association has requested that the school provide additional efforts to improve traffic
flow and facilitate safe pedestrian and bicycle movements.

This discussion paper provides an evaluation of existing conditions, and identification of transportation
issues related to Oak Knoll School and on roadways near the vicinity of the school, as shown in Figure
2. The evaluations were based on demographic data and transportation policies provided by the school,
data provided by the City of Menlo Park, feedback provided by the residents and additional data
collected by W-Trans. The additional data included field reconnaissance, traffic counts, and observations
of drop-off/pick-up operations, pedestrians, bicyclists and driver behavior.




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Discussion Paper #1
for the City of Menlo Park
December 31, 2012

                                                                                           PAGE 95
                                                                        El
                                                                             Ca
                                                                               m
                                                                                  ino
                                                                                        Re
                                                                                          al




                                               e
                                            nu
                                         ve
                                       nA
                                     rto
                                 he
                                At




                                                                                            e
                                                                                         nu
                                                                                      ve
                                                                   e
                                                                nu




                                                                                    zA
                                                             ve




                                                                                   ru
                                                           oA




                                                                                  aC
                                                       ais




                                                                              nt
                                                     ar




               A                                                             Sa
                                                      lp




                   lam
                                                   Va




                         ed
                            a   De
                                     La
                                        Pu
                                          lga                                                                 oad
                                             s                           Oak Knoll
                                                                                                        il lR
                                                                        Elementary                     H
                                                                          School                  nd
                                                             Sant




                                                                                                Sa
                                                                 a Cr
                                                                 uz
                                                                   Av




                                                                             ue
                                                                        en




North

Not to Scale
                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                        007mpa.ai
                                                                                                                                        000         12/12


Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update                                                                                             Figure 1
City of Menlo Park                                                                                         Oak Knoll School Attendance Boundary
       PAGE 96
                          LEGEND
               Crosswalk
               Sidewalk
               Parking Restrictions
               Stop Controlled Intersection
               Oak Knoll School Attendence Boundary




                                                                          Ol
                                                                            ive
                                                                                  St
                                                                                     re
                                                                                        et




                                                                                  ive
                                          Le
                                                                                Dr
                                            m
                                                on                             ell
                                                      St
                                                                           kd

                                                        re
                                                           e t
                                                                       Oa




                                                                                                     ue
                                                                                                   en
                                                                                                 Av
                                                                                             ak
                                                                                             O
                                                                           ive
                                                                          Dr
                                                                      ak
                                                                     eO
                                                O Lan
                                                 ak




                                                        e
                                                                 hit




                                                      e ld
                                                   fi


                                                                 W




                                    Oa
                                       kK
                                           no
                                               ll L
                                                   an
                                                       e




North

Not to Scale
                                                                                                               007mpa.ai   12/12



   Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update                                                                 Figure 2
   City of Menlo Park                                                                                       Study Area

                                                                                                          PAGE 97
                                   Data Collection and Review

Kick-off Meeting

A kick-off meeting was held on October 16, 2012, with the Steering Committee which is comprised of
representatives of the City of Menlo Park, Menlo Park School District, Menlo Park Police Department,
Oak Knoll School PTO, and Oak Knoll School. The purpose of this meeting was to gather information
from the Steering Committee so that the goals and objectives of the Safe Route to Oak Knoll School
Plan Update are met. At the meeting the key objectives and milestones of the project were reviewed.
Notes from the kick-off meeting are included in Appendix A.

Collision Data Analysis

The collision histories for the intersections and roadways adjacent to the school site were reviewed to
determine any trends or patterns that may indicate a safety issue during school drop-off and pick-up
times. Collision data were obtained from the City of Menlo Park Police Department and the California
Highway Patrol as published in their Statewide Integrated Traffic Records System (SWITRS) reports. A five-
year period between April 1, 2006 and March 31, 2011, for the time periods of 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. and
2:00 to 4:00 p.m. was used in the analysis.

During the five-year period, one collision was reported at the intersection of Olive Street/Oakdell Drive
intersection during the 2:00 to 4:00 p.m. time frame. The collision did not involve pedestrians or
bicyclists. There were no other collisions reported at the other intersections and study roadways
adjacent to the school vicinity during the time periods analyzed. However, recently the residents
reported a collision that occurred on Oak Avenue east of Bay Laurel Drive on Tuesday, November 20
at 8:00 a.m. The collision involved a parent bicyclist who was heading back home from Oak Knoll
School and was thrown into the street by a motorist opening their car door. The bicyclist suffered
significant injuries.

Additionally, the City staff provided a map showing the collisions that were reported near the Oak Knoll
School vicinity area between year 2010 and 2012. The collision map is provided in Appendix B.

School Residency

Student enrollment information, including addresses, for Oak Knoll Elementary School was obtained
from the Menlo Park City School District. This information helps to identify the main routes that
students take to walk or bike to and from the school and to prioritize improvements on those routes.
Of the current student population 667 students reside within the Menlo Park City Limit and 75 reside
outside the City limit. Figure 3 shows the residence locations for the students enrolled at Oak Knoll
Elementary School. A majority of the students reside south of Santa Cruz Avenue and west of
University Drive. These students mostly use Middle Avenue and Santa Cruz Avenue to access Olive
Street and Lemon Street and then use Oakdell Drive, White Oak Drive and Oak Avenue to arrive at
Oak Knoll School.

Speed Surveys

Speed surveys conducted for Olive Street and Middle Avenue by the City of Menlo Park in October
2007 were reviewed and summarized as these streets provide access to/from the Oak Knoll School.



Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Discussion Paper #1
for the City of Menlo Park
December 31, 2012

PAGE 98
                              Full Attendance Area




North

Not to Scale                Immediate School Vicinity              007mpa.ai   12/12



   Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update                    Figure 3
   City of Menlo Park                          Oak Knoll School Residences

                                                             PAGE 99
Speed limits are generally established at or near the 85th percentile speed, which is defined as the speed
at or below 85 percent of the traffic is moving.

Olive Street has a posted speed limit of 30 mph. Vehicles travelling on Olive Street between Santa Cruz
Avenue and Middle Avenue were found to travel at an 85th percentile speed of 32.0 mph, which is near
the posted speed limit of 30 mph. The survey on Olive Street was conducted at 2:00 p.m.
approximately 0.75 miles north of the Oak Knoll School.

Middle Avenue has a posted speed limit of 30 mph. Vehicles travelling on Middle Avenue between Olive
Street and El Camino Real were found to travel at an 85th percentile speed of 34.0 mph, which is slightly
higher than the posted speed limit of 30 mph. The survey on Middle Avenue was conducted at 3:00
p.m. approximately 0.70 miles north of the Oak Knoll School. The speed survey data are provided in
Appendix B.

Traffic Volumes

Daily traffic volumes (ADT) that represent 24-hour two-way traffic were collected on the following
roadways in 2007.

·   Oak Knoll Lane between Oakdell Drive and White Oak Lane
·   Oak Knoll Lane between White Oak Lane and Oak Avenue
·   Oak Avenue between Oak Knoll Lane and Vine Street

Vehicle turning movement counts were collected at the following locations in 2007 and 2012 during the
a.m. and p.m. peak traffic periods. The daily traffic volumes and the vehicle turning movement counts
were obtained from City staff and the Oak Knoll Elementary School Traffic Impact Analysis Report, DKS
Associates, March 2008. Additionally, a new turning movement count was collected in December 2012
at the Oak Knoll Lane/Oak Avenue intersection during the school a.m. peak period (7:30-8:30 a.m.).

·   Oak Knoll Lane/Oak Avenue
·   White Oak Drive/Oak Knoll Lane
·   Vine Street/Oakdell Drive
·   Oak Avenue/Vine Street
·   Sand Hill Road/Oak Avenue

Pedestrian counts and bicycle counts were also collected in December 2012 during the school a.m. peak
period (7:30 to 8:30 a.m.) at the following intersections:

·   Oak Knoll Lane/Oak Avenue
·   Oak Knoll Lane/White Oak Drive
·   Oak Knoll Lane/Oakdell Drive

Figure 4 illustrates the daily traffic volumes, turning movement counts, pedestrian counts and bicycle
counts at the above listed locations. The turning movement, pedestrian and bicycle counts are provided
in the Appendix B.




Safe Routes to Oak Knoll School Plan Update ­ Discussion Paper #1
for the City of Menlo Park
December 31, 2012

PAGE 100
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Vine St/Oak Ave -- Sand Hill Rd                                                                                     QC JOB #: 10756313
 CITY/STATE: Menlo Park, CA                                                                                                    DATE: Wed, May 09 2012
                      241            37                            Peak-Hour: 7:35 AM -- 8:35 AM                                0.8        2.7

                      170      0     71
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 8:05 AM -- 8:20 AM
                                                                                                                                0.6 0.0 1.4

       851    1                            36    717
                                                                                                                   2.9   0.0                       2.8      3.5
              1725            0.95        681
                                                                                                                         1.4                       3.5
       1726   0                             0   1796
                                                                                                                   1.4   0.0                       0.0      1.4

                          0    0     0
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                          0          0
                                                                                                                                0.0        0.0



                               7                                                                                                1     15   10


                                                                                                                         0                          1

              9                             0                                                                            27                        13

                                                                                                                         1                          0


                               1                                                                                                0     1    0




                              NA                                                                                                      NA




              NA                          NA                                                                             NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count              Vine St/Oak Ave                     Vine St/Oak Ave          Sand Hill Rd                 Sand Hill Rd
     Period                (Northbound)                        (Southbound)            (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                   Left     Thru Right     U           Left     Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right      U    Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     7:00 AM         0        0      0     0             5        0      7    0     0   86       0     0      0       20      0       0          118
     7:05 AM         0        0      0     0             2        0      5    0     0   71       0     0      0       42      0       0          120
     7:10 AM         0        0      0     0             1        0      8    0     1   95       0     0      0       35      1       0          141
     7:15 AM         0        0      0     0             2        0     11    0     0   84       0     0      0       34      2       0          133
     7:20 AM         0        0      0     0             7        0     15    0     0  124       0     0      0       23      2       0          171
     7:25 AM         0        0      0     0             5        0     11    0     1  125       0     0      0       56      3       0          201
     7:30 AM         0        0      0     0             4        0      4    0     0  128       0     0      0       33      2       0          171
     7:35 AM         0        0      0     0             9        0     11    0     0  134       0     0      0       56      1       0          211
     7:40 AM         0        0      0     0             9        0     11    0     0  136       0     0      0       61      1       0          218
     7:45 AM         0        0      0     0             3        0      8    0     0  157       0     0      0       62      2       0          232
     7:50 AM         0        0      0     0             3        0     16    0     0   95       0     0      0       62      5       0          181
     7:55 AM         0        0      0     0             4        0     16    0     0  161       0     0      0       41      6       0          228             2125
     8:00 AM         0        0      0     0             3        0     14    0     1  146       0     0      0       41      5       0          210             2217
     8:05 AM         0        0      0     0             7        0     14    0     0  142       0     0      0       66      3       0          232             2329
     8:10 AM         0        0      0     0             7        0     22    0     0  140       0     0      0       41      4       0          214             2402
     8:15 AM         0        0      0     0             9        0     13    0     0  170       0     0      0       67      5       0          264             2533
     8:20 AM         0        0      0     0            10        0     15    0     0  145       0     0      0       50      1       0          221             2583
     8:25 AM         0        0      0     0             4        0     17    0     0  126       0     0      0       68      2       0          217             2599
     8:30 AM         0        0      0     0             3        0     13    0     0  173       0     0      0       66      1       0          256             2684
     8:35 AM         0        0      0     0             5        0     10    0     0  134       0     0      0       45      1       0          195             2668
     8:40 AM         0        0      0     0             8        0     13    0     0  127       0     0      0       50      3       0          201             2651
     8:45 AM         0        0      0     0             2        0     19    0     0  136       0     0      0       40      3       0          200             2619
     8:50 AM         0        0      0     0             4        0     11    0     1  148       0     0      0       42      2       0          208             2646
     8:55 AM         0        0      0     0             3        0      8    0     0  135       0     0      0       63      6       0          215             2633
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                         Southbound              Eastbound                     Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates        Left     Thru Right     U           Left     Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right      U    Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       0        0      0     0            92        0    196    0     0 1808       0     0      0      696     48       0                  2840
 Heavy Trucks        0        0      0                   0        0      0          0   28       0            0       24      0                           52
  Pedestrians                 0                                   4                     12                             0                                  16
   Bicycles          0        0      0                   4        4      0          0    7       0            0        4      1                           20
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/7/2012 12:14 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212



                                                                                                                                      PAGE 129
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Vine St/Oak Ave -- Sand Hill Rd                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10756314
 CITY/STATE: Menlo Park, CA                                                                                                   DATE: Wed, May 09 2012
                      144            90                             Peak-Hour: 4:20 PM -- 5:20 PM                              2.1        0.0

                      110      0     34
                                                                   Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                               2.7 0.0 0.0

       1793   0                             90   1773
                                                                                                                  0.9   0.0                       0.0      0.8
              920             0.94        1683
                                                                                                                        2.0                       0.8
       920    0                              0    954
                                                                                                                  2.0   0.0                       0.0      1.9

                          0    0     0
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                          0          0
                                                                                                                               0.0        0.0



                               5                                                                                               0     1    0


                                                                                                                        0                          5

              9                              0                                                                          21                        17

                                                                                                                        0                          0


                               0                                                                                               0     1    0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




              NA                           NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count              Vine St/Oak Ave                      Vine St/Oak Ave          Sand Hill Rd              Sand Hill Rd
     Period                (Northbound)                         (Southbound)            (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                   Left     Thru Right     U            Left     Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right         U                      Totals
     4:00 PM         0        0      0     0              1        0      2    0     0   61       0     0      0   138      4        0          206
     4:05 PM         0        0      0     0              2        0      8    0     0   65       0     0      0   121     10        0          206
     4:10 PM         0        0      0     0              4        0     10    0     0   63       0     0      0   141      3        0          221
     4:15 PM         0        0      0     0              5        0      8    0     0   56       0     0      0   136      3        0          208
     4:20 PM         0        0      0     0              6        0      3    0     0   75       0     0      0   142      6        0          232
     4:25 PM         0        0      0     0              4        0      9    0     0   72       0     0      0   153      6        0          244
     4:30 PM         0        0      0     0              1        0     19    0     0   61       0     0      0   116      7        0          204
     4:35 PM         0        0      0     0              2        0     11    0     0   73       0     0      0   141      8        0          235
     4:40 PM         0        0      0     0              2        0     12    0     0   91       0     0      0   131      6        0          242
     4:45 PM         0        0      0     0              4        0      3    0     0   74       0     0      0   150      8        0          239
     4:50 PM         0        0      0     0              2        0      5    0     0   74       0     0      0   123     11        0          215
     4:55 PM         0        0      0     0              5        0      7    0     0   90       0     0      0   140      6        0          248             2700
     5:00 PM         0        0      0     0              1        0     15    0     0   54       0     0      0   148      7        0          225             2719
     5:05 PM         0        0      0     0              2        0      6    0     0   99       0     0      0   134      5        0          246             2759
     5:10 PM         0        0      0     0              5        0     10    0     0   84       0     0      0   136     11        0          246             2784
     5:15 PM         0        0      0     0              0        0     10    0     0   73       0     0      0   169      9        0          261             2837
     5:20 PM         0        0      0     0              1        0     18    0     0   53       0     0      0   121     11        0          204             2809
     5:25 PM         0        0      0     0              4        0     12    0     0   67       0     0      0   125     10        0          218             2783
     5:30 PM         0        0      0     0              2        0      6    0     0   84       0     0      0   136      9        0          237             2816
     5:35 PM         0        0      0     0              4        0      4    0     0   78       0     0      0   140     11        0          237             2818
     5:40 PM         0        0      0     0              4        0      7    0     0   72       0     0      0   149      7        0          239             2815
     5:45 PM         0        0      0     0              6        0     10    0     0   73       0     0      0   138      8        0          235             2811
     5:50 PM         0        0      0     0              3        0      9    0     0   82       0     0      0   120     13        0          227             2823
     5:55 PM         0        0      0     0              1        0      9    0     0   56       0     0      0   104      5        0          175             2750
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                          Southbound              Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates        Left     Thru Right     U            Left     Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       0        0      0     0             28        0    104    0     0 1024       0     0      0 1756    100         0                  3012
 Heavy Trucks        0        0      0                    0        0      0          0   20       0            0     8      0                            28
  Pedestrians                 0                                    8                      4                          0                                   12
   Bicycles          0        0      0                    0        0      0          0    5       0            0     9      1                            15
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/7/2012 12:14 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212



      PAGE 130
