                         AGENDA and Notice of Special Meeting
                             of the Newport City Council

The City Council of the City of Newport will hold a Special Meeting on Monday, December
9, 2013, at 7:00 P.M., in the Council Chambers, of the Newport City Hall, 169 S.W. Coast
Highway, Newport, Oregon 97365. A copy of the agenda follows.

The meeting location is accessible to persons with disabilities. A request for an interpreter
for the hearing impaired, or for other accommodations for persons with disabilities, should
be made at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting to Peggy Hawker, City Recorder
541.574.0613.

The City Council reserves the right to add or delete items as needed, change the order of
the agenda, and discuss any other business deemed necessary at the time of the work
session and/or meeting.


                       Special Meeting of the Newport City Council
                         Monday, December 9, 2013 ­ 6:00 P.M.
                                City Council Chambers

I.     Call to Order

II.    Pledge of Allegiance

III.   Roll Call

IV.    Public Comment on Items Not on the Agenda

V.     Consent Calendar

       A. Approval of Minutes of Special City Council Meeting ­ December 2, 2013
          (Hawker)

VI.    Action Items

       A. Consideration of Resolution No. 3657 ­ Continuing Disclosure Policy and
          Procedures (Gazewood)
VII.    Discussion Items

        A. Tax-Exempt Bond Post-Issuance Compliance Policy (Gazewood)

VIII.   Council Comments (time permitting, otherwise this item will occur after the public
        hearing)

IX.     Public Hearing ­ 7:00 P.M.

        A. Public Hearing on the LUBA Remand on the Teevin Brothers Traffic Impact
           Analysis (Tokos)

X.      Public Comment on Items Not on the Agenda

XI.     Adjournment
                                                                       December 2, 2013
                                                                              6:00 P.M.
                                                                        Newport, Oregon


    The City Council of the City of Newport met in a Special Meeting, on the above date,
in the Council Chambers of the Newport City Hall. On roll call, Allen, Roumagoux,
Sawyer, Busby, Beemer Saelens, and Swanson were present.
    Also attending were Ted Smith, Interim City Manager, Peggy Hawker, City Recorder,
Tim Gross, Public Works Director, and Jim Protiva, Parks and Recreation Director.
    Also in attendance was Dave Morgan from News Lincoln County, Larry Coonrod
from the Lincoln County Dispatch, and Wyatt Haupt from the Newport News-Times.

                               PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE

   Council, staff, and the audience participated in the Pledge of Allegiance.

                                     ACTION ITEMS

    CANVASS OF BALLOTS ­ NOVEMBER 5, 2013 MUNICIPAL ELECTION ON
MEASURE NO. 21-152 ­ GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS FOR NEW INDOOR
MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL. Hawker reported that the issue before Council is post-
election housekeeping, and includes the approval of the canvass of the ballots of the
November 5, 2013 municipal election on Measure No. 21-152, general obligation bonds
for a new indoor municipal swimming pool. She noted that the abstract of votes, which
was included in the Council packet, is prepared and issued by the Council Clerk, and
Council's "canvass" is a review/scrutiny of the abstract and approval of the abstract.
MOTION was made by Swanson, seconded by Sawyer and Allen, to approve the
canvass of the ballots of the November 5, 2013 election at which Measure No. 21-152
was approved by the voters of the City of Newport. The motion carried unanimously in a
voice vote.

    CONSIDERATION OF RESOLUTION NO. 3655 AUTHORIZING THE ISSUANCE,
SALE, EXECUTION, AND DELIVERY OF NOT TO EXCEED $7,900,000 GENERAL
OBLIGATION BONDS, SERIES 2013; AUTHORIZING A SPECIAL AD VALOREM TAX
LEVY; DESIGNATING AN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE; DELEGATING THE
APPROVAL AND AUTHORIZATION OF DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRELIMINARY AND
FINAL OFFICIAL STATEMENTS; EXECUTION AND DELIVERY OF A BOND
PURCHASE AGREEMENT; CLASSIFYING TAXES; AND RELATED MATTERS. Smith
reported that the issue before Council is the consideration of Resolution No. 3655 which
authorizes the sale of the $7,900,000 of General Obligation Bonds approved by the
voters on November 5, 2013, and provides for related matters. He explained the three
options related to the estimated tax rate of the bonds. Allen noted that the upper limit of
$ .49 per $1,000 of assessed value was a placeholder. He added that after the last work
session, he reviewed other resolutions associated with the city's past bond measures,
and found that there was an estimate for the water treatment plant bonds, but not an
estimate on the wastewater treatment plant bonds. He reported that both resolutions did
not reflect an upper limit rate, but authorized the bonds be sold at competitive rates and
using staff's best judgment. He added that bond counsel suggested rates that reflect
current market conditions. Allen stated that he does not support including an upper limit
rate. Sawyer noted that Interim Finance Director Gazewood was confident the rate
would be $ .43 or $ .44 per $1,000 of assessed value.
    Roumagoux read a letter from Elaine Karnes stating that "it is only appropriate to
spend no more per thousand than stated in the voters' literature and promotional
information, and that it is not appropriate to add on any further amenities (i.e. slide or
roof garden) than promoted."
    Further discussion ensued regarding the options related to the estimated tax rate of
the bonds. Protiva noted that all the information is contained in Gazewood's staff report.
Saelens reported that he had participated in all conversations with bond counsel and
was comfortable with either option B. or C. as contained in Gazewood's staff report.
    Alice Vachss addressed Council as a resident and pool user. She reported that her
research indicates that $7,000,000 for the construction of the building is insane. She
suggested that since the vote was so close, the voters be allowed another opportunity to
vote on the issue.
    Rhonda Harman addressed Council as one of the fundraising co-chairs. She noted
that she is proud of the job the group did, and while there was a small voter turnout, the
measure passed.
    Lou Limbrunner stated that he hates seeing this money spent on wasteful things,
and suggested that the measure be presented again in a "real" election. He added that
the existing pool could be rehabilitated for under a million dollars.
    Vachss stated that Oregon Constitutional protections do not have to do with the
number of votes. She noted that she is asking for an election during a general election
year. Allen reported that the city's attorneys and bond counsel had reviewed the
measure and had not seen a legal issue with what the city is doing. He added that
regardless of whether the election was close, the voters have spoken, the measure
passed, and he is ready to move forward.
    MOTION was made by Allen, seconded by Beemer, to adopt Resolution No. 3655, a
resolution authorizing sale of $7,900,000 in general obligation bonds approved by the
voters of the City of Newport, Oregon, on November 5, 2013, and providing for related
matters, and incorporating in Section 3 the words "incoming City Manager" and adding
to Subsection 3.(5), fourth line, following the words "20 years," the phrase "and the rates
and prices at which the bonds are sold reflect current market condition s." The motion
carried unanimously in a voice vote.
    Saelens reported that there was extensive vetting by the community regarding
whether a new pool was wanted. He noted that there were extensive monthly meetings,
an open house, meetings of the Parks and Recreation Committee, at which the issue
was discussed. He added that it is not unusual for contentious issues to come out
closely as that is the nature of the community.

    CONSIDERATION OF RESOLUTION NO. 3656 SUSPENDING THE ANNUAL
INCREASE IN PARKS AND RECREATION USER FEES. Smith reported that the issue
before Council is consideration of Resolution No. 3656 which would suspend the annual
increase in parks and recreation user fees for one year. He noted that the day pass user
would be paying $3.36 per use with the increase, and that it would be better to thank
people for supporting the bond measure by not increasing the rates this year. Protiva
reported that the resolution is supported by the Parks and Recreation Committee. Allen
noted a typo on the effective date of the resolution.
   MOTION was made by Beemer, seconded by Saelens, to adopt Resolution No.
3656, suspending the increase of Recreation Center and Swimming Pool user fees for
one year, as amended. The motion carried unanimously in a voice vote.

                                  PUBLIC COMMENT

   Carla Perry noted that the city has contracted with a grant researcher and
understands that the chance of finding money to support the swimming pool
construction is low. She asked that if money is found, it be applied toward the
construction cost or to pay down the debt as opposed to funding additional special
features.

                                COUNCIL COMMENTS

    Busby reported that there has been discussion regarding the creation of a task force
to look at the business licensing issue. He noted that a discussion will be held regarding
this matter at the December 16 work session. He added that the initial plan is for a group
to be comprised of Saelens, Busby, and staff from the enforcement side, planning, and
finance, and the goal is to gather information and make recommendations for changing
the ordinance.
    Beemer complimented the organization that supported passage of the pool bond. He
added that the big difference between this election and the previous election is the
organized support and ensuring that the information was distributed.
    Allen reported that the Infrastructure Task Force met on November 21 and will hold
meeting on December 5 and 19. He added that the new City Manager will be able to
attend the final meeting.
    Roumagoux thanked the pool bond measure supporters.
    Roumagoux read a letter from Isabel Solano, a sophomore at Newport High School,
who urged Council to support mitigation of plastic shopping bags.
    Smith reported that a special meeting will be held on December 9 with a public
hearing at 7 P.M., and possible presentations beginning at 6:00 P.M.

                                    ADJOURNMENT

   Having no further business, the meeting adjourned at 6:42 P.M.



___________________________________             ________________________________
Margaret M. Hawker, City Recorder               Sandra N. Roumagoux, Mayor
                                                              Agenda Item # Resolution No. 3657
                                                              Meeting Date December 9, 2013



                            CITY OF NEWPORT AGENDA ITEM SUMMARY
                                    City Of Newport, Oregon

Issue/Agenda Title: Resolution regarding Continuing Disclosure Policy and Procedures

Prepared By: Gazewood      Dept Head Approval:            City Mgr Approval:

Issue Before the Council: Prior to selling the $7,900,000 General Obligation Bonds, the City's
contracted Financial Advisor is required to take a comprehensive look at the City's continuing
disclosure undertakings and filing history, and then make sure any filings missed over the last
five years are taken care of. When the City issues debt in the public market, the City enters into
a continuing disclosure agreement to provide ongoing financial information to investors. The
agreement requires the City to provide its annual financial statements and certain financial
information, as well as notice of material events. The Financial Advisor determined from their
review of the City's continuing disclosure undertakings and history that the City failed to it make
its annual disclosure filings for multiple years on multiple bond issues. The disclosure filing
deficiencies were required to be disclosed in the Preliminary Official Statement (POS) related
to the sale and issuance of the $7,900,000 General Obligation Bonds (GOB). These
deficiencies are described in the POS on pages 37 and 38 as shown in the attached Addendum
I. Further, the City was required to develop a Policy to ensure future compliance in continuing
disclosure requirements. The Policy detailed in EXHIBIT A and attached to Resolution No. 3657
was accepted by the Financial Advisor and was incorporated in the POS on page 38 in
summary format. The Policy was forwarded to Bond Counsel and received their acceptance,
also. The comments, changes and/or additions to the Policy suggested by the Financial Advisor
and Bond Counsel have been incorporated into the Policy.

For information purposes, the continuing disclosure requirements that the City commits to for
the $7,900,000 GOB is detailed on pages 1 to 5, in the attached Addendum II.

Staff Recommendation:         Staff recommends adoption of this resolution.

Proposed Motion:     I move to adopt Resolution No. 3657, a resolution regarding Continuing
Disclosure Policy and Procedures.

Other Alternatives Considered: None

Fiscal Notes: Continued disclosure filing deficiencies could jeopardize future City bond sales
as investors may not want to bid on City offerings. The intent of this Policy is to ensure future
compliance. The Policy sets forth staff levels of accountability with reporting requirements.
                               CITY OF NEWPORT

                       RESOLUTION NO. 3657
           A RESOLUTION ADOPTING CONTINUING DISCLOSURE
                      POLICY AND PROCEDURES



     WHEREAS, the City is in the process of selling recently voter approved General
Obligation Bonds of $7,900,000 to finance the costs of a new indoor municipal
swimming pool and related systems, facilities, improvements and to pay for the costs
of issuance of the bonds;

    WHEREAS, the City has contracted with Piper Jaffray & Company, Seattle-
Northwest Division, to act as Financial Advisor in the preparation and sale of the
Bonds;

    WHEREAS, prior to selling the General Obligation Bonds, the Financial Advisor
is required to take a comprehensive look at the City's continuing disclosure
undertakings and history, and then make sure any filings missed over the last five
years are taken care of;

    WHEREAS, when the City issues debt in the public market, the City enters into a
continuing disclosure agreement to provide ongoing financial information to investors.
The agreement requires the City to provide its annual financial statements and certain
financial information, as well as notice of material events;

    WHEREAS, the Financial Advisor determined from their review of the City's
continuing disclosure undertakings and history that the City failed to make its annual
continuing disclosure filings for multiple years on multiple bond issues; and

    WHEREAS, the Financial Advisor needed to mention in the Preliminary Official
Statement, for the sale of the $7,900,000 General Obligation Bonds, the steps the
City is taking to ensure compliance in the future;

    WHEREAS, the City has developed a Continuing Disclosure Policy and
Procedures statement and provided such to the Financial Advisor for inclusion in the
Preliminary Official Statement in summary form. The Continuing Disclosure Policy
and Procedures statement is incorporated herewith as Exhibit A.

    THE CITY OF NEWPORT RESOLVES AS FOLLOWS: The attached Continuing
Disclosure Policy and Procedures (Exhibit A) is hereby adopted.

This resolution will become effective immediately upon passage.

Adopted by the Newport City Council on December 9, 2013.
_____________________________________
Sandra N. Roumagoux, Mayor



ATTEST:

____________________________________
Margaret M. Hawker, City Recorder
                                                                   EXHIBIT A




               CONTINUING DISCLOSURE POLICY AND PROCEDURES
                     FOR THE CITY OF NEWPORT, OREGON

Requirement: When the City issues debt in the public market, the City enters into a
continuing disclosure agreement to provide ongoing financial information to investors,
The agreement requires the City to provide its annual financial statements and certain
financial information, as well as notice of certain material events, including a rating
change. These required filings are currently required to be made at the Municipal
Securities Rulemaking Board's website at EMMA (Electronic Municipal Market Access).
EMMA is the official depository for information on municipal bonds providing public access
to official statements, trade data, credit ratings and other information about the municipal
securities market. Continuing disclosure of current financial information and timely
disclosure of certain events with respect to bonds is required by the Securities and
Exchange Commission Rule 15c-12.

Purpose: The purpose of establishing this Policy is to ensure future compliance in
continuing disclosure requirements. As noted by the City's financial advisor, the City failed
to make its annual Continuing Disclosure filings for multiple years on multiple bond issues.
The filing deficiencies are set forth in the Preliminary Official Statement (POS), at the
heading "Continuing Disclosure" for the $7,900,000, City of Newport, General Obligation
Bonds, Series 2013.

Disclosure Events: Information required to be disclosed at EMMA includes updated
financial or operating information about the City and notices that disclose the occurrence
of specific events that may impact the Bonds issued by the City. The exact information
that the City must disclose for each borrowing will be stated in the continuing disclosure
agreement for that borrowing, and the person preparing the City's continuing disclosure
reports should review those agreements carefully and comply with their requirements.
Those agreements generally require the City to give notice of the following specific
events:

   a.   Principal and interest payment delinquencies;
   b.   Non-payment related defaults, if any;
   c.   Unscheduled draws on debt service reserves reflecting financial difficulties;
   d.   Unscheduled draws on credit enhancements reflecting financial difficulties;
   e.   Substitution of credit or liquidity providers, or their failure to perform;
   f.   Adverse tax opinions, certain notices from the IRS or determinations with respect
        to rights of security holders, if material;
Continuing Disclosure Policy and Procedures                                           Page 1
   g. Modifications to rights of security holders, if material;
   h. Bond calls, if material, and tender offers;
   i. Defeasances;
   j. Release, substitution, or sale of property securing repayment of the securities, if
      material;
   k. Rating changes;
   l. Failure of the City to provide annual financial information, including annual audited
      financials, certain financial and/or statistical schedules, as required by the
      individual Bond/Loan issue and disclosure agreement; and
   m. Other disclosures that may be required at EMMA.

Staff Assignments: The primary responsibility for maintaining Continuing Disclosure and
required filings at EMMA is assigned to the City's Assistant Finance Director. Should
circumstances such as prolonged absences from work arise that the Assistant Finance
Director is not available, then the City's Finance Director shall file the required disclosure
information. To ensure disclosure filing compliance following required filings by the
Assistant Finance Director and notice thereof, the Finance Director shall review the
EMMA site for completeness of filings prior to the applicable filing deadline for annual and
material event filings. The Finance Director shall then provide notice to those on the
Distribution List below of the updated required filings.

Distribution List: The Distribution List shall include the following:

   1.   Financial Advisor and Bond Counsel;
   2.   Mayor and Chairperson of the City Audit Committee;
   3.   City Manager and City Recorder; and
   4.   Responsible City Finance Department staff.

Disclosure Filing Timelines: Annual Filings. For the City's outstanding debt issues
through LOCAP, the annual financial information is to be available and filed at EMMA no
later than 270 days after the end of the preceding fiscal year, this date being March 27th
in non- leap years. For the City's outstanding General Obligation Bond and Full Faith
and Credit Obligation debt, the annual financial information is to be available and filed at
EMMA no later than 9 months after the end of the preceding fiscal year, this date being
March 31st. Such information includes audited financial statements and such other
financial and/or statistical schedules that are specified in the "Continuing Disclosu re
Certificate" for the particular bond issue. If audited financial statements are not available
by the deadlines mentioned above, unaudited financial statements must be filed at EMMA
prior to the filing deadline with audited statements to be filed at EMMA as soon as
available.

Material Event Filings. Other disclosure events, such as rating changes, are required to
be filed at EMMA within 10 business days of occurrence. Disclosure filings are required
for City issued bonds as well as bonds issued by the Newport Urban Renewal Agency.
All outstanding bond issues must be updated in their entirety.
Continuing Disclosure Policy and Procedures                                            Page 2
                                                                              Agenda Item #
                                                                              Meeting Date       December 9, 2013

                                    CITY COUNCIL AGENDA ITEM SUMMARY
                                                    City of Newport, Oregon


Issue/Agenda Title Public Hearing and Possible Action on LUBA Remand of the Teevin Bros. Traffic Impact Analysis

Prepared By: Derrick Tokos Dept Head Approval: DT    City Mgr Approval:

ISSUE BEFORE THE COUNCIL: A public hearing to consider whether or not analysis contained in a November
26, 2013 memorandum from Kittelson & Associates, Inc. adequately responds to a remand from the Oregon Land Use
Board of Appeals (LUBA) and satisfies city criteria for evaluating Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) applications as it
pertains to the intersection of SE Running Springs Road and SE Yaquina Bay Road.

STAFF RECOMMENDATION: If the City Council concludes that the relevant standards have been met then it
must approve the TIA application. A draft order and findings of fact have been prepared should the Council elect to
proceed in this manner.

PROPOSED MOTION: I move to adopt Order No. 2013-4, establishing that the November 26, 2013 memorandum
from Kittelson & Associates, Inc. has addressed deficiencies in the Teevin Bros. log yard traffic impact analysis
application, as identified in LUBA Final Opinion and Order No. 2013-057, and that the application satisfies applicable
approval criteria contained in the Newport Municipal Code.

KEY FACTS AND INFORMATION SUMMARY: On November 6, 2013, LUBA issued Final Opinion and
Order No 2013-057 remanding the City of Newport's decision to approve a TIA application submitted by Teevin
Brothers Land and Timber Company, LLC for a proposed log yard at 1650 SE Bay Boulevard. The rationale for
LUBA's remand was limited to the narrow issue of the TIA having failed to adequately address the intersection of SE
Running Springs Road and SE Yaquina Bay Road. Criteria that the City of Newport applies to TIA applications are
discretionary. This requires that a land use decision be made applying the relevant criteria at Newport Municipal Code
(NMC) Section 14.45.050 to the intersection of SE Running Springs Road and SE Yaquina Bay Road.

Teevin Brothers Land and Timber Company, LLC, through its agent Kittelson & Associates, Inc., submitted a
supplemental memorandum dated November 26, 2013 analyzing traffic operations at the affected intersection. Said
analysis was duly reviewed and accepted by the City Engineer by memorandum of that same date.

Notice of the December 9, 2013 public hearing was provided to the applicant, appellants, property owners within 200
feet of the proposed log yard, persons who provided written testimony on the application prior to the remand, and
affected utilities and city departments. It was mailed on November 19, 2013, 20-days prior to the hearing. Notice of
the hearing was also published in the Newport News-Times on November 30, 2013.

A copy of the draft final order, findings of fact, November 26, 2013 Kittelson & Associates, Inc. memorandum, and the
City Engineer's response, was available for public inspection seven days in advance of the December 9, 2013 hearing.

OTHER ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED: None.

CITY COUNCIL GOALS: There are no applicable Council goals.

                                                                                                             Page 1 of 2
ATTACHMENT LIST:
   Draft Order No. 2013-4
   Findings of Fact in Support of the Draft Order
   November 26, 2013 Memorandum from Kittelson & Associates, Inc. (Attachment A)
   November 26, 2013 Memorandum from Timothy Gross, City Engineer (Attachment B)
   LUBA Final Opinion and Order No. 2013-057
   Public Notices and Mailing List for the December 9, 2013 hearing

FISCAL NOTES: There are no direct impacts to the City's budget associated with this application.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 2
                    THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NEWPORT,
                      COUNTY OF LINCOLN, STATE OF OREGON


In the Matter of:

LAND USE FILE NO. 1-TIA-13-A                             )
SUPPLEMENTAL FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS                       )   ORDER NO.
ADDRESSING MATTERS REMANDED WITH                         )   2013-4
LUBA FINAL OPINION AND ORDER NO. 2013-057                )
AND APPROVING THE TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS                )
FOR THE TEEVIN BROTHERS LOG YARD                         )
______________________________________________________________________

   WHEREAS, on November 6, 2013, the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA) issued
Final Opinion and Order No 2013-057 remanding the City of Newport's decision to
approve a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) application submitted by Teevin Brothers Land
and Timber Company, LLC for a proposed log yard at 1650 SE Bay Boulevard; and

   WHEREAS, the rationale for LUBA's remand was limited to the narrow issue of the
TIA having failed to adequately address the intersection of SE Running Springs Road and
SE Yaquina Bay Road; and

   WHEREAS, the City of Newport's TIA criteria are discretionary, requiring a land use
decision applying the relevant criteria at Newport Municipal Code (NMC) Section
14.45.050 to the intersection of SE Running Springs Road and SE Yaquina Bay Road;
and

    WHEREAS, the applicant, through its agent Kittelson & Associates, Inc., submitted a
supplemental memorandum dated November 26, 2013 analyzing traffic operations at the
affected intersection; and

  WHEREAS, said analysis was duly reviewed and accepted by the City Engineer by
memorandum of that same date; and

    WHEREAS, a public hearing before the Newport City Council was held on December
9, 2013 to consider whether or not said analysis satisfies TIA approval; and

     WHEREAS, 20 days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing was provided to the
applicant, appellants, property owners within 200 feet of the proposed log yard, persons
who provided written testimony on the application prior to the remand, and affected
utilities and city departments; and

   WHEREAS, the public was further afforded an opportunity to review the November 26,
2013 Kittelson & Associates, Inc. memorandum, the City Engineer's response, and draft
findings of fact and a draft of this final order prepared for City Council consideration, seven
days in advance of the December 9, 2013 hearing; and

   WHEREAS, at the conclusion of said hearing, after consideration and discussion,
upon a motion duly seconded, the City Council accepted the analysis contained in the
November 26, 2013 Kittelson & Associates, Inc., memorandum as satisfying criteria for
the approval of a TIA contained in NMC Chapter 14.45 with respect to the intersection of
SE Running Springs Road and SE Yaquina Bay Road.


NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY OF NEWPORT ORDERS AS FOLLOWS:

1. All of the foregoing recitals are hereby confirmed and adopted as findings of fact in
support of this order.

2. The City Council of the City of Newport hereby accepts the Supplemental Findings of
Fact (Exhibit "A"), including all associated attachments, as having satisfied deficiencies in
the TIA application submitted by Teevin Brothers Land and Timber Company, LLC, as
identified in LUBA Final Opinion and Order No. 2013-057.

3. The Planning Commission's findings of fact and final order accepted with City Council
Order No. 2013-1 is hereby supplemented as described herein, and the conditions of
approval contained in those documents remain in full effect.

SO ORDERED this 9th day of December, 2013.



______________________________________
Sandra N. Roumagoux, Mayor

ATTEST:



_______________________________________
Margaret M. Hawker, City Recorder
                                                                EXHIBIT "A"
                                                       Case File No. 1-TIA-13-A
                                                           SUPPLEMENTAL
                                                          FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On June 3, 2013, the Newport City Council, by Order No. 2013-1, accepted the Planning
   Commission's final order and findings of fact approving a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
   submitted by Teevin Bros. Land and Timber Co., LLC, for the construction of a log yard on
   approximately 15 acres of land located at 1650 SE Bay Blvd (Lincoln County Assessor's Map
   11-11-09D, Tax Lots 100 and 101).

2. Criteria for the review and approval of TIA applications are listed at Section 14.45.050 of the
   Newport Municipal Code (NMC); those criteria incorporate the additional criteria at NMC
   Section 14.45.020.

3. City of Newport's approval of the TIA was appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA)
   by the Oregon Coast Alliance, The Landing at Newport Condominium Association and Nancy
   Smock. On November 6, 2013, LUBA issued Final Opinion and Order No. 2013-057 denying
   two of the three grounds for appeal. One of the grounds for appeal was affirmed, and the
   application was remanded back to the City for further consideration on that point.

4. Specifically, LUBA found in favor of appellants' second assignment of error in which they
   argued that the TIA did not clearly address the intersection of SE Running Springs Road and SE
   Yaquina Bay Road as required by NMC 14.45.030(A) and; therefore, did not constitute
   substantial evidence upon which the City could base its approval.

5. On November 26, 2013, applicant's traffic engineering firm, Kittelson & Associates, Inc.,
   supplemented the TIA with a memorandum analyzing traffic operations at SE Running Springs
   Road and SE Yaquina Bay Road in response to the remand.

6. Pursuant to NMC Section 14.45.050/ "Approval Criteria," when a TIA is required, a
   development proposal is subject to the following criteria, in addition to all criteria otherwise
   applicable to the underlying proposal:

     A. The analysis complies with the requirements of NMC 14.45.020;

     B. The TIA demonstrates that adequate transportation facilities exist to serve the proposed
        development or indentifies mitigation measures that resolve the traffic safety problems in a
        manner that is satisfactory to the City Engineer and, when state highway facilities are
        affected, to ODOT; and

     C. Where a proposed amendment to the Newport Comprehensive Plan or land use regulation
        would significantly affect an existing or planned transportation facility, the TIA must
        demonstrate that solutions have been developed that are consistent with the provisions of
        OAR 660-012-0060; and

1. EXHIBIT "A," FINDINGS OF FACT: TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS, No. 1-TIA-13-A, Remand ~ Teevin Bros.
     D. For affected non-highway facilities, the TIA establishes that any Level of Service standards
        adopted by the City have been met, and development will not cause excessive queuing or
        delays at affected intersections, as determined in the City Engineer's sole discretion; and

     E. Proposed public improvements are designed and will be constructed to the standards
        specified in NMC Chapter 14.44 (Transportation Standards) or Chapter 13.05 (Subdivision
        and Partition), as applicable.

7. NMC Section 14.45.020/"Traffic Impact Analysis Requirements" lists the following
   requirements for a Traffic Impact Analysis:

     A. Pre-application conference. The applicant shall meet with the City Engineer prior to
        submitting an application that requires a TIA. This meeting will be coordinated with ODOT
        when an approach road to US-101 or US-20 serves the property so that the completed TIA
        meets both City and ODOT requirements.

     B. Preparation. The submitted TIA shall be prepared by an Oregon Registered Professional
        Engineer that is qualified to perform traffic engineering analysis and will be paid for by the
        applicant.

     C. Typical Average Daily Trips and Peak Hour Trips. The latest edition of the Trip Generation
        Manual, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used to gauge
        PM peak hour vehicle trips; unless a specific trip generation study that is approved by the
        City Engineer indicates an alternative trip generation rate is appropriate. An applicant may
        choose, but is not required, to use a trip generation study as a reference to determine trip
        generation for a specific land use which is not well represented in the ITE Trip Generation
        Manual and for which similar facilities are available to count.

     D. Intersection-level analysis. Intersection-level analysis shall occur at every intersection where
        50 or more peak hour vehicle trips can be expected as a result of the proposal.

     E. Transportation Planning Rule compliance. The TIA shall comply with the requirements of
        OAR 660-012-000.

     F. Structural conditions. The TIA shall address the condition of the impacted roadways and
        identify structural deficiencies or reduction in the useful life of existing facilities related to
        the proposed development.

     G. Heavy vehicle routes. If the proposal includes an increase in 10 or more of the vehicles
        described in Section 14.45.010(D), the TIA shall address the provisions of Section
        14.45.020(F) for the routes used to reach US-101 or US-20.

8. A public hearing before the Newport City Council was held on December 9, 2013 to consider
   whether or not analysis contained in the November 26, 2013 Kittelson & Associates
   memorandum satisfied criteria, above, for the review and approval of TIA applications, as they
   pertain to the intersection of SE Running Springs Road and SE Yaquina Bay Road. Issues
   unrelated to this intersection were not considered because they were outside the scope of the
   remand.
2. EXHIBIT "A," FINDINGS OF FACT: TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS, No. 1-TIA-13-A, Remand ~ Teevin Bros.
9. Notice of the public hearing was mailed on November 19, 2013 to the applicant, appellants,
   adjoining property owners within 200 feet of the subject site, persons who provided written
   testimony prior to the remand, and affected utilities and city departments. Notice of the hearing
   was also published in the Newport News-Times on November 30, 2013.

10. This set of supplemental findings of fact, the associated final order, the November 26, 2013
    Kittelson & Associates memorandum, a November 26, 2013 memorandum from Tim Gross,
    P.E., City Engineer, and LUBA Final Opinion and Order No. 2013-57 served as the City
    Council's staff report and all of the documents were available for public inspection on the City's
    website and at City Hall on December 2, 2013, seven days prior to the hearing.

11. At the hearing, a prepared statement was read advising those in attendance of the procedure the
    City Council would use to conduct the hearing. The City Council received the staff report and
    took testimony from persons testifying in favor and in opposition to the application. The minutes
    of the December 9, 2013 hearing are hereby incorporated by reference.

12. The Planning Commission's decision, accepted by the City Council with Order No. 2013-1,
    establishes that the TIA satisfied criteria contained in NMC Chapter 14.45 for aspects of the
    application that are beyond the scope of the LUBA remand, and is therefore a part of the City's
    final decision on the application that is no longer at issue.

                                                              CONCLUSIONS

1. Section 14.45.020/"Traffic Impact Analysis Requirements" outlines requirements for a Traffic
   Impact Analysis (TIA). This is intended to ensure that the City has sufficient information to
   establish whether or not the approval criteria listed under NMC Section 11.45.050 have been
   met. The applicant has satisfied the requirements of Section 14.45.020 as follows:

     A. A pre-application meeting was conducted between Matt Hughart with Kittleson and
        Associates, Inc. and Tim Gross, City Engineer, via conference call on November 30, 2012;
        therefore, an additional pre-application meeting is not required in order for the City to
        consider the supplemental analysis contained in Kittelson & Associates, Inc.'s, November
        26, 2013 memorandum. The property does not take access off of US-20 or US-101, so it was
        not necessary that the meeting be coordinated with the Oregon Department of Transportation
        (ODOT). This finding was made in the City's original approval of the application and was
        not challenged at LUBA.

     B. The Kittelson & Associates, Inc. memorandum, dated November 26, 2013, was prepared by
        Diego Arguea, P.E., and Chris Brehmer, P.E., both of whom are Oregon Registered
        Professional Engineers qualified to perform traffic engineering analysis (Attachment A). The
        firm, Kittleson and Associates, Inc., was founded in 1985 and specializes in transportation
        engineering and planning work. The report was prepared at the expense of the applicant, as
        is required. This finding was made in the City's original approval of the application and was
        not challenged at LUBA.

3. EXHIBIT "A," FINDINGS OF FACT: TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS, No. 1-TIA-13-A, Remand ~ Teevin Bros.
     C. Given the unique nature of a log yard facility, an independent trip generation profile was
        developed by Kittleson and Associates, Inc. based upon the projected maximum operating
        capacity of the log yard facility. This specific "trip generation study" was discussed and
        approved by the City Engineer at the pre-application meeting. NMC Section 14.45.020(C)
        allows use of a "trip generation study," as has been prepared by Kittleson and Associates,
        Inc., to serve as an alternative to an applicant using the 9th Edition of the Institute of
        Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual to gauge PM peak hour trips
        associated with a proposed use. This finding was made in the City's original approval of the
        application and was not challenged at LUBA.

           The November 26, 2013 Kittelson & Associates, Inc. memorandum notes that trip generation
           and assignment for the SE Running Springs Road/SE Yaquina Bay Road analysis is based
           upon the January 2013 TIA. This earlier version of the TIA contains the above referenced
           "trip generation study."

     D. Intersection-level analysis was performed at the intersection of SE Running Spring Road and
        SE Yaquina Bay Road, as documented in the Kittelson & Associates, Inc., November 26,
        2013 memorandum. NMC 14.45.020(D), requires such analysis where 50 or more peak hour
        vehicle trips can be expected as a result of a development project. Figure 1 to the Kittelson
        memorandum identifies the expected number of vehicle trips at this intersection. It shows a
        total of 14 new vehicle trips during the weekday a.m. peak hour, and 8 additional trips during
        the weekday p.m. peak hour. While this amounts to less than 50 vehicle trips during a peak
        hour period, the applicant has nonetheless performed intersection level analysis at this
        location in response to the determination by LUBA that NMC 14.45.030(A) requires the
        intersection be addressed.

     E. The November 26, 2013 memorandum prepared by Kittelson & Associates, Inc., does not
        address compliance with the Transportation Planning Rule (OAR 660-012-0060) because the
        City decision adopted with Council Order No. 2013-1 established that this rule need only be
        addressed in circumstances where a functional plan, acknowledged comprehensive plan, or
        land use regulation must be amended in order for a project to proceed and that none of those
        circumstances exist with the subject proposal. This finding was made in the City's original
        approval of the application and was not challenged at LUBA.

     F. The structural condition of SE Yaquina Bay Road, was assessed as part of the prior City
        decision (ref: Order No. 2013-1). The adequacy of that analysis was challenged by
        appellants in their LUBA appeal and LUBA considered and denied those arguments and
        affirmed the City's decision on this point. SE Running Springs Road will not be
        impacted because the truck traffic will not, and cannot reasonably, utilize that road to
        access the log yard because it is a dead-end residential street. The November 26, 2013
        memorandum prepared by Kittelson & Associates, Inc. does not revisit the structural
        analysis issue because it has already been performed for SE Yaquina Bay Road, which is
        the only leg of the intersection that the trucks will utilize.

     G. Section 14.45.020(G) clarifies that structural analysis for projects generating 10 or more
        vehicle trips that exceed 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight must address the routes that

4. EXHIBIT "A," FINDINGS OF FACT: TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS, No. 1-TIA-13-A, Remand ~ Teevin Bros.
           will be used by the vehicles to reach US 101 or US 20. As noted above, that analysis for SE
           Yaquina Bay Road was performed by the applicant and accepted and approved by the City
           Council with Order No. 2013-1. The adequacy of that analysis is not at issue in the remand,
           and it is; therefore, not addressed in the Kittelson & Associates, Inc., November 26, 2013
           memorandum. SE Running Springs Road is not a part of the route that the applicant
           proposes to use to reach US-101 or US-20, nor would it be feasible to do so given that it is a
           dead-end roadway that does not connect to US-20. Therefore, it is not necessary for
           structural analysis to be performed for this segment of the SE Running Springs Road/SE
           Yaquina Bay Road intersection.

2. Section 14.45.050/ "Approval Criteria" sets out the criteria that a TIA must satisfy. With regard
   to those criteria, the following conclusions can be drawn:

     A. Subsection 14.45.050(A) requires that the TIA study contain all of the required elements
        listed under Section 14.45.020. Compliance with those requirements is addressed above
        under Conclusion No. 1.

     B. Subsection 14.45.050(B) requires a TIA demonstrate that adequate transportation facilities
        exist to serve the proposed development or indentify mitigation measures that resolve the
        traffic safety problems in a manner that is satisfactory to the City Engineer and, when state
        highway facilities are affected, to ODOT. The subject intersection does not access directly
        onto a state highway; therefore, ODOT approval is not required. For the reasons stated in the
        memo dated November 26, 2013, from City Engineer Timothy Gross, P.E., the information
        contained in Kittleson & Associates, Inc.'s, November 26, 2013 memorandum demonstrates
        that the roadway intersection at SE Running Springs Road and SE Yaquina Bay Road is
        adequate as currently constructed (Attachment B, incorporated into the City's findings by this
        reference).

     C. Subsection 14.45.050(C) notes that where a proposed amendment to the Newport
        Comprehensive Plan or land use regulation would significantly affect an existing or planned
        transportation facility, the TIA must demonstrate that solutions have been developed that are
        consistent with the provisions of OAR 660-012-0060. As earlier noted, this project does not
        require an amendment to the Newport Comprehensive Plan or land use regulations in order
        for it to proceed; therefore, compliance with this administrative rule is not required. This
        finding was made in the City's original approval of the application and was not challenged at
        LUBA.

     D. Subsection 14.45.050(D) applies to affected non-highway facilities. It requires that the TIA
        establish that any level-of-service standards adopted by the City have been met, and
        development will not cause excessive queuing or delays at affected intersections, as
        determined in the City Engineer's sole discretion. The City of Newport has not adopted
        level-of-service standards. The November 26, 2013 Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
        memorandum nonetheless assesses the level-of-service at the SE Running Springs Road and
        SE Yaquina Bay Road intersection. It identifies that the intersection is expected to perform
        at level-of-service "A." Attachment A to the memorandum describes level-of-service "A" as
        "Nearly all drivers find freedom of operation with very little time spent waiting for an
5. EXHIBIT "A," FINDINGS OF FACT: TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS, No. 1-TIA-13-A, Remand ~ Teevin Bros.
           acceptable gap." and "Very seldom is there more than one vehicle in queue." It further
           describes the average control delay per vehicle as being less than or equal to 10 seconds. In
           his November 26, 2013 memorandum (incorporated into these findings), the City Engineer
           determines that the analysis contained in the November 26, 2013 Kittelson & Associates,
           Inc., submittal demonstrates that traffic attributed to the Teevin Bros. project will not cause
           excessive queuing or delays at the intersection of SE Running Springs Road and SE Yaquina
           Bay Road. This satisfies the criterion.

     E. Subsection 14.45.050(E) requires that proposed public improvements be designed and
        constructed to the standards specified in NMC Chapter 14.44 (Transportation Standards) or
        Chapter 13.05 (Subdivision and Partition), as applicable. The November 26, 2013
        supplemental analysis for the intersection of SE Running Springs Road and SE Yaquina Bay
        Road, as reviewed and accepted by the City Engineer, indicates that the intersection is
        adequate as constructed. Therefore, improvements to this intersection are not needed.

3. Section 14.45.060(F) notes that the City may impose conditions of approval needed to meet
   operations, structural, and safety standards and provide the necessary right-of-way and
   improvements to ensure consistency with the City's Transportation System Plan. Neither the
   November 26, 2013 supplemental memorandum prepared by Kittelson & Associates, Inc., nor
   the City Engineer's review of that analysis indicates a need for conditions of approval to be
   imposed with respect to the intersection of SE Running Springs Road and SE Yaquina Bay
   Boulevard.

                                                     OVERALL CONCLUSION

       The supplemental analysis prepared by Kittelson & Associates Inc., dated November 26,
2013, establishes that criteria for approval of a Traffic Impact Analysis as outlined in Newport
Municipal Code Chapter 14.45 have been satisfied with respect to the intersection of SE Running
Springs Road and SE Yaquina Bay Road.




6. EXHIBIT "A," FINDINGS OF FACT: TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS, No. 1-TIA-13-A, Remand ~ Teevin Bros.
                                                                                               ATTACHMENT A




MEMORANDUM
Date:         November 26, 2013                                                                  Project #: 13132



To:           Derrick Tokos, AICP
              Community Development Director
              City of Newport
              169 SW Coast Highway
              Newport, OR 97365
From:         Diego Arguea, PE and Chris Brehmer, PE, Kittelson & Associates
Project:      Teevin Bros. Log Yard
Subject:      Land Use Board of Appeals - Traffic Impact Analysis Response to Comments


This memorandum provides a supplemental analysis of traffic operations at the SE Yaquina Bay
Road/SE Running Spring intersection for the proposed Teevin Bros. Log Yard development located in
Newport, Oregon. A traffic impact analysis for the proposed development was first submitted in
January 2013, and the project was subsequently appealed to the Oregon Land Use Board of Appeals
(LUBA) by local residents. This memorandum addresses the second assignment of error identified in
the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA No. 2013-057) Final Opinion and Order dated November 6, 2013.


LUBA REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL ANALYSIS
As shown on Page 9 (beginning on Line 17) of the LUBA Final Opinion and Order (Reference 1), the
following language summarizes the request for additional analysis at the SE Yaquina Bay Road/SE
Running Spring intersection:

The proposed log yard fronts Yaquina Bay Road, an arterial or collector street that meets SE Running
Springs Road and, together, they form an intersection that is "along the site frontage and within the
access spacing distance[] extending out from the boundary of [the proposed log yard's] frontage." NMC
14.45.030(A). Accordingly, the TIA was required to include and address that intersection. The city's
finding that the supplemental TIA addresses the SE Running Spring Road/SE Yaquina Bay Boulevard
intersection is not supported by substantial evidence in the record. The city's finding that the SE Running
Spring Road/SE Yaquina Bay Boulevard intersection need not be considered, simply because it was not
included under city staff scoping, is inconsistent with the text of NMC 14.45.030(A).

The second assignment of error is sustained.

The requested analysis is summarized in the following sections.



FILENAME: H:\PROJFILE\13132 - NEWPORT LUMBER YARD\REPORT\FINAL\LUBA\13132_LUBA ANALYSIS MEMO_FINAL.DOCX
Teevin Bros. Log Yard ­ LUBA Supplemental Analysis                                             Project #: 13132
November 26, 2013                                                                                        Page 2



INTERSECTION OPERATIONS THRESHOLDS
Traffic operations at unsignalized intersections are generally described using a measure known as
"level-of-service" in accordance with Highway Capacity Manual analysis procedures. Level of service
represents ranges in the average amount of delay that motorists experience when passing through the
intersection. Level-of-service is measured on an "A" (best) to "F" (worst) scale. At two-way stop-
controlled intersections, level-of-service is reported based on the average delay experienced by the
critical movement at the intersection, typically a left-turn (or a right-turn if no left-turns are present)
from a stop-controlled street. A detailed description of level of service is provided in Attachment A.

Per conversations with City of Newport staff, the City has not adopted level-of-service standards for
streets that are under its jurisdiction. Rather, City staff depends on the traffic engineer's assessment of
intersection level-of-service, volume-to-capacity ratio, and queuing analysis to assess intersection
operations. This assessment is provided herein.


SE YAQUINA BAY ROAD/SE RUNNING SPRING INTERSECTION ANALYSIS
A supplemental analysis was prepared that addresses the anticipated level-of-service and volume-to-
capacity ratio impacts at the SE Yaquina Bay Road/SE Running Spring intersection. Traffic volumes were
collected on a typical mid-week day in November 2013 during the weekday a.m. (7:00-9:00 a.m.) and
weekday p.m. (4:00-6:00 p.m.) commuter peak hours. The data is shown in Attachment B. Consistent
with the January 2013 TIA, operations analyses were conducted with the traffic engineering software
package Synchro.


Existing Conditions Analysis
An existing conditions analysis was prepared for the SE Yaquina Bay Road/SE Running Spring
intersection based on the traffic volume data collected. The intersection level-of-service evaluation
uses the peak 15-minute flow rate during the weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hours. Using the peak 15-
minute flow rate ensures that this analysis is based on a reasonable worst-case scenario. For this
reason, the analysis reflects conditions that are only likely to occur for 15 minutes out of each average
peak hour. The transportation system will likely operate under conditions better than those described
in this memorandum during all other time periods.

The 2013 existing conditions analysis is summarized in Figure 1. As shown in Figure 1, the SE Yaquina
Bay Road/SE Running Spring intersection operates at level-of-service "A" and volume-to-capacity ratios
of 0.02 and 0.01 under weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hour conditions, respectively. The existing traffic
operations output sheets are provided in Attachment C.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                   Portland, Oregon
Teevin Bros. Log Yard ­ LUBA Supplemental Analysis                                                                               Project #: 13132
November 26, 2013                                                                                                                          Page 4


Trip Generation
The trip generation and assignment for this analysis is based on the January 2013 TIA1. The added trips
through the SE Yaquina Bay Road/SE Running Spring intersection were added in the eastbound and
westbound direction for the weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hours and are summarized in Figure 1.


Total Conditions Analysis
The total traffic conditions analysis forecasts how the SE Yaquina Bay Road/SE Running Spring
intersection is forecast to operate with the traffic generated by the proposed development. The
estimated site-generated traffic was added to the existing traffic volumes during the weekday a.m. and
p.m. peak hours (shown in Figure 1) to arrive at the total traffic volumes, also shown in Figure 1. As
shown, the SE Yaquina Bay Road/SE Running Spring intersection is forecast to continue to operate
acceptably during the weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hours. Table 1 below summarizes the impact of the
added traffic to the SE Yaquina Bay Road/SE Running Spring intersection.

Table 1        Summary of Traffic Impacts at the SE Yaquina Bay Road/SE Running Spring intersection ­ Weekday PM Peak Hour

                                         Existing Traffic Operations (without site)              Total Traffic Operations (with site)

        Performance Measure              AM Peak Hour               PM Peak Hour              AM Peak Hour               PM Peak Hour
        Critical Movement                 Southbound                 Southbound                Southbound                 Southbound
        Level-of Service             A (Delay = 9.0 seconds)    A (Delay = 8.9 seconds)   A (Delay = 9.1 seconds)    A (Delay = 8.9 seconds)
        Volume-to-Capacity Ratio              0.02                       0.011                     0.02                       0.011
        Southbound Queue                      252                         252                      252                         252
    1   Note: v/c ratio rounded up to the nearest 0.01
    2   Note: queues rounded up to the nearest 25 feet

As shown in Table 1, the SE Yaquina Bay Road/SE Running Spring intersection is forecast to continue to
operate similarly to the existing conditions during both the weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hours. The
total traffic operations output sheets are provided in Attachment D.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The analysis shown herein demonstrates that the SE Yaquina Bay Road/SE Running Spring intersection
operates at level-of-service "A" both under both existing conditions and under total traffic conditions
(includes the traffic impacts of the Teevin Bros. development). As such, the analysis complies with NMC
14.45.050(D) because the projected impacts are not forecast to cause excessive queuing or delays at
the affected intersection, resulting in no significant impact.




1
    Refer to the January 2013 TIA: Table 4 ­ Estimated Trip Generation, and Figure 5 ­ Estimated Trip Distribution Pattern
and Site Generated Trips

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                                    Portland, Oregon
           Attachment A
Level-of-Service Description
Teevin Bros. Log Yard ­ LUBA Supplemental Analysis                                                              Project #: 13132
Attachment A ­ Level-of-Service at Unsignalized Intersections                                                          Page A-2




LEVEL-OF-SERVICE AT UNSIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS
Unsignalized intersections include two-way stop-controlled (TWSC) and all-way stop-controlled (AWSC)
intersections. The 2000 Highway Capacity Manual provides models for estimating average control delay
at both TWSC and AWSC intersections. Table B3 provides a qualitative description of each LOS category
as it applies to unsignalized intersections, and Table B4 identifies the average control delay threshold
point used as the boundary for each LOS category. LOS thresholds for the specific reviewing
jurisdiction(s) are described in the body of the report.


                                                      Table A1
                               Level of Service Criteria for Unsignalized Intersections
    Level of
                                                  Average Delay per Vehicle to Minor Street
    Service
                             Nearly all drivers find freedom of operation with very little time spent waiting for an
         A                   acceptable gap.
                             Very seldom is there more than one vehicle in queue.
                             Some drivers begin to consider the average control delay an inconvenience, but acceptable
         B                   gaps are still very easy to find.
                             Occasionally there is more than one vehicle in queue.
                             Average control delay becomes noticeable to most drivers, even though acceptable gaps are
                             found on a regular basis.
         C
                             It is not uncommon for an arriving driver to find a standing queue of at least one additional
                             vehicle.
                             Average control delay is long enough to be an irritation to most drivers. Average control
         D                   delay is long because acceptable gaps are hard to find, because there is a standing queue of
                             vehicles already waiting when the driver arrives, or both.
                             Drivers find the length of the average control delay approaching intolerable levels.
                             Average control delay is long because acceptable gaps are hard to find, because there is a
          E                  standing queue of vehicles already waiting when the driver arrives, or both.
                             There may or may not be substantial excess capacity remaining at the intersection when this
                             condition is encountered.
                             Most drivers encountering this condition consider the length of the average control delay to
                             be too long.
                             Average control delay is long because acceptable gaps are hard to find, because there is a
          F
                             standing queue of vehicles already waiting when the driver arrives, or both.
                             There may or may not be substantial excess capacity remaining at the intersection when this
                             condition is encountered.

                                                      Table A2
                               Level of Service Criteria for Unsignalized Intersections
       Level of Service                                 Average Control Delay per Vehicle (Seconds)
                   A                                                          10
                   B                                                      >10 and 15
                   C                                                      >15 and 25
                   D                                                      >25 and 35
                   E                                                      >35 and 50
                   F                                                          >50
     Attachment B
November 2013 Traffic
          Count Data
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Running Springs Dr -- Yaquina Bay Rd                                                                 QC JOB #: 11377601
 CITY/STATE: Newport, OR                                                                                           DATE: Thu, Nov 14 2013
                     11          5                       Peak-Hour: 7:35 AM -- 8:35 AM                              0.0        0.0

                     11    0     0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                    0.0 0.0 0.0


       100   2                        3   92
                                                                                                       2.0   0.0                      0.0       2.2
             48           0.64       89
                                                                                                             2.1                      2.2
       50    0                        0   48
                                                                                                       2.0   0.0                      0.0       2.1

                     0     0     0
                                                                                                                    0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0           0
                                                                                                                    0.0        0.0



                           0                                                                                         0    0    0



                                                                                                             0                          0

             0                        0                                                                      0                          1

                                                                                                             0                          0

                           0                                                                                         0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                              NA




             NA                      NA                                                                      NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                              NA



 5-Min Count        SE Running Springs Dr        SE Running Springs Dr       Yaquina Bay Rd            Yaquina Bay Rd                Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     1      0      0     0     1      0    0                2
     7:05 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     3      0      0     0     6      0    0                9
     7:10 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     0      0      0     0     2      0    0                2
     7:15 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      1     0    0     3      0      0     0     2      0    0                6
     7:20 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      1     0    0     3      0      0     0     2      0    0                6
     7:25 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     0      0      0     0     4      0    0                4
     7:30 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     3      0      0     0     3      0    0                6
     7:35 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     3      0      0     0     5      0    0                8
     7:40 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      1     0    0     4      0      0     0     9      0    0               14
     7:45 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      3     0    0     5      0      0     0    10      2    0               20
     7:50 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     6      0      0     0    14      0    0               20
     7:55 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      2     0    0     5      0      0     0    13      0    0               20              117
     8:00 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      1     0    0     7      0      0     0    10      0    0               18              133
     8:05 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      1     0    0     2      0      0     0     5      1    0                9              133
     8:10 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      1     0    0     0      0      0     0     4      0    0                5              136
     8:15 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      1     0    1     4      0      0     0     4      0    0               10              140
     8:20 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    1     2      0      0     0     6      0    0                9              143
     8:25 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     6      0      0     0     7      0    0               13              152
     8:30 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      1     0    0     4      0      0     0     2      0    0                7              153
     8:35 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     2      0      0     0     6      0    0                8              153
     8:40 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     0      0      0     0     5      0    0                5              144
     8:45 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     3      0      0     0     4      0    0                7              131
     8:50 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    0     2      0      0     0     5      0    0                7              118
     8:55 AM       0      0      0     0        0       0      0     0    1     2      0      0     0     3      0    0                6              104
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound              Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0      0      0     0        0       0     20     0    0    64      0      0     0   148      8    0                      240
 Heavy Trucks      0      0      0              0       0      0          0     0      0            0     4      0                            4
  Pedestrians             0                             0                       0                         0                                   0
    Bicycles       0      0      0              0       0      0          0     0      0            0     0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/19/2013 3:30 PM                               SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Running Springs Dr -- Yaquina Bay Rd                                                                QC JOB #: 11377602
 CITY/STATE: Newport, OR                                                                                          DATE: Thu, Nov 14 2013
                     2          9                       Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                              0.0        0.0

                     2    0     0
                                                       Peak 15-Min: 5:45 PM -- 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0


       56    9                       0   54
                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             98          0.49       54
                                                                                                            0.0                      0.0
       107   0                       0   98
                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                     0    0     0
                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0          0
                                                                                                                   0.0        0.0



                          0                                                                                         0    0    0



                                                                                                            0                          0

             0                       0                                                                      0                          0

                                                                                                            0                          0

                          0                                                                                         0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                              NA




             NA                     NA                                                                      NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                              NA



 5-Min Count        SE Running Springs Dr       SE Running Springs Dr       Yaquina Bay Rd            Yaquina Bay Rd                Total       Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U      Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0    6      0      0     0     5      0    0               11
    4:05 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     1    8      0      0     0     3      0    0               12
    4:10 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      1     0     1    5      0      0     0     4      0    0               11
    4:15 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     1    4      0      0     0     4      0    0                9
    4:20 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0   10      0      0     0     7      0    0               17
    4:25 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0    8      0      0     0     3      0    0               11
    4:30 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     1    6      0      0     0     1      0    0                8
    4:35 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0    5      0      0     0     6      0    0               11
    4:40 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      1     0     1    5      0      0     0     7      0    0               14
    4:45 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0    4      0      0     0     0      0    0                4
    4:50 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0    4      0      0     0     6      0    0               10
    4:55 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0    6      0      0     0     2      0    0                8              126
    5:00 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     1    6      0      0     0     3      0    0               10              125
    5:05 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0    2      0      0     0     6      0    0                8              121
    5:10 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      1     0     0    9      0      0     0     1      0    0               11              121
    5:15 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0   13      0      0     0     4      0    0               17              129
    5:20 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0    1      0      0     0     3      0    0                4              116
    5:25 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     1    5      0      0     0     3      0    0                9              114
    5:30 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      1     0     0    3      0      0     0     4      0    0                8              114
    5:35 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0    5      0      0     0     2      0    0                7              110
    5:40 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     2    1      0      0     0     2      0    0                5              101
    5:45 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     3    8      0      0     0     9      0    0               20              117
    5:50 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     2   15      0      0     0    10      0    0               27              134
    5:55 PM        0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0     0   30      0      0     0     7      0    0               37              163
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                   Southbound              Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U      Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0      0      0     0       0       0      0     0    20  212      0      0     0   104      0    0                      336
 Heavy Trucks      0      0      0             0       0      0           0    0      0            0     0      0                            0
  Pedestrians             0                            0                       0                         0                                   0
    Bicycles       0      0      0             0       0      0           0    0      0            0     0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/19/2013 3:31 PM                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
          Attachment C
Existing Traffic Operations
             Output Sheets
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis                                             2013 Existing Traffic Operations
13: Yaquina Bay Blvd & SE Running Spring                                                                    Weekday AM Peak Hour



Movement                            EBL      EBT      WBT     WBR        SBL      SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                         2      48        89      3           0       11
Sign Control                                Free      Free               Stop
Grade                                        0%        0%                 0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.64    0.64      0.64    0.64       0.60     0.64
Hourly flow rate (vph)                 3      75       139       5          0       17
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                 None     None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume               144                                  223      141
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   144                                  223      141
tC, single (s)                        4.1                                  6.4      6.2
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                2.2                                  3.5      3.3
p0 queue free %                      100                                  100        98
cM capacity (veh/h)                 1451                                  768      912
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1    WB 1      SB 1
Volume Total                           78     144        17
Volume Left                             3        0        0
Volume Right                            0        5       17
cSH                                 1451    1700       912
Volume to Capacity                   0.00    0.08     0.02
Queue Length 95th (ft)                  0        0        1
Control Delay (s)                     0.3      0.0      9.0
Lane LOS                                A                 A
Approach Delay (s)                    0.3      0.0      9.0
Approach LOS                                              A
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                           0.8
Intersection Capacity Utilization                    14.9%           ICU Level of Service               A
Analysis Period (min)                                    15




Kittelson & Associates, Inc. - Project 12521                                                                    Synchro 7 - Report
11/19/2013                                                                                                                  Page 1
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis                                              2013 Existing Traffic Operations
13: Yaquina Bay Blvd & SE Running Spring                                                                     Weekday PM Peak Hour



Movement                            EBL       EBT      WBT     WBR        SBL      SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                          9      98        60      0           0        2
Sign Control                                 Free      Free               Stop
Grade                                         0%        0%                 0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.49     0.49      0.49    0.49       0.49     0.49
Hourly flow rate (vph)                18      200       122       0          0        4
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                  None     None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume               122                                   359      122
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   122                                   359      122
tC, single (s)                        4.1                                   6.4      6.2
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                2.2                                   3.5      3.3
p0 queue free %                        99                                  100      100
cM capacity (veh/h)                 1477                                   635      934
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1     WB 1      SB 1
Volume Total                          218      122         4
Volume Left                             18        0        0
Volume Right                             0        0        4
cSH                                 1477     1700       934
Volume to Capacity                   0.01     0.07     0.00
Queue Length 95th (ft)                   1        0        0
Control Delay (s)                      0.7      0.0      8.9
Lane LOS                                 A                 A
Approach Delay (s)                     0.7     0.0       8.9
Approach LOS                                               A
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                            0.6
Intersection Capacity Utilization                     22.3%           ICU Level of Service               A
Analysis Period (min)                                     15




Kittelson & Associates, Inc. - Project 12521                                                                     Synchro 7 - Report
11/19/2013                                                                                                                   Page 1
       Attachment D
Total Traffic Operations
          Output Sheets
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis                                             Total Traffic Operations
13: Yaquina Bay Blvd & SE Running Spring                                                           Weekday AM Peak Hour



Movement                            EBL      EBT      WBT     WBR        SBL      SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                         2      56        95      3           0       11
Sign Control                                Free      Free               Stop
Grade                                        0%        0%                 0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.64    0.64      0.64    0.64       0.60     0.64
Hourly flow rate (vph)                 3      88       148       5          0       17
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                 None     None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume               153                                  245      151
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   153                                  245      151
tC, single (s)                        4.1                                  6.4      6.2
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                2.2                                  3.5      3.3
p0 queue free %                      100                                  100        98
cM capacity (veh/h)                 1440                                  747      901
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1    WB 1      SB 1
Volume Total                           91     153        17
Volume Left                             3        0        0
Volume Right                            0        5       17
cSH                                 1440    1700       901
Volume to Capacity                   0.00    0.09     0.02
Queue Length 95th (ft)                  0        0        1
Control Delay (s)                     0.3      0.0      9.1
Lane LOS                                A                 A
Approach Delay (s)                    0.3      0.0      9.1
Approach LOS                                              A
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                           0.7
Intersection Capacity Utilization                    15.2%           ICU Level of Service      A
Analysis Period (min)                                    15




Kittelson & Associates, Inc. - Project 12521                                                           Synchro 7 - Report
11/19/2013                                                                                                         Page 1
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis                                              Total Traffic Operations
13: Yaquina Bay Blvd & SE Running Spring                                                            Weekday PM Peak Hour



Movement                            EBL       EBT      WBT     WBR        SBL      SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                          9     100        66      0           0        2
Sign Control                                 Free      Free               Stop
Grade                                         0%        0%                 0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.49     0.49      0.49    0.49       0.49     0.49
Hourly flow rate (vph)                18      204       135       0          0        4
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                  None     None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume               135                                   376      135
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   135                                   376      135
tC, single (s)                        4.1                                   6.4      6.2
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                2.2                                   3.5      3.3
p0 queue free %                        99                                  100      100
cM capacity (veh/h)                 1462                                   622      920
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1     WB 1      SB 1
Volume Total                          222      135         4
Volume Left                             18        0        0
Volume Right                             0        0        4
cSH                                 1462     1700       920
Volume to Capacity                   0.01     0.08     0.00
Queue Length 95th (ft)                   1        0        0
Control Delay (s)                      0.7      0.0      8.9
Lane LOS                                 A                 A
Approach Delay (s)                     0.7     0.0       8.9
Approach LOS                                               A
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                            0.5
Intersection Capacity Utilization                     22.4%           ICU Level of Service      A
Analysis Period (min)                                     15




Kittelson & Associates, Inc. - Project 12521                                                            Synchro 7 - Report
11/19/2013                                                                                                          Page 1
ATTACHMENT B
