                                September 2011



KLAMATH FALLS
URBAN       AREA
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM PLAN
UPDATE

                TECHNICAL APPENDIX VOLUME 2


                             DRAFT
                                 Appendix 2A
Technical Memorandum #1: Plans and Policy Review
Date:          November 30, 2010
To:            Mark Willrett, City of Klamath Falls
               Stan Strickland, Klamath County
cc:            Project Management Team, Technical Advisory Committee,
               Citizens Advisory Committee

From:          Cathy Corliss, Darci Rudzinski, and Becky Dann

Re:            Klamath Falls Urban Area Transportation System Plan Update
               Technical Memorandum #1: Plans and Policy Review



I.      Introduction

This memorandum provides an overview of federal, state, regional, and local documents that
comprise the policy framework for transportation planning in the Klamath Falls Urban Area. Although
each document reviewed contains many policies, only the policies and information most pertinent to
the Klamath Falls Urban Area Transportation System Plan (TSP) Update are included to help focus
this work. The information in this memorandum is meant to provide a framework for this planning
process. New policies considered for inclusion in the updated Draft TSP should be consistent with
the currently adopted policies reviewed here.

Section II of this memorandum is an assessment of how adopted City and County plans and
ordinances meet the Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) OAR 660, Division 12. Table 1 in this
section serves as the basis for identifying City and County polices or requirements that may be out-
of-date or inconsistent with each other. This table reviews the requirements of TPR Section -0045,
Implementation of the Transportation System Plan, lists the applicable implementation elements of
the TPR, and demonstrates where the adopted City or County regulations comply and where
amendments to code language are needed to comply with the TPR.

Section III provides summaries of regulatory documents that contain information pertinent to the
development and adoption of an updated TSP for the City Klamath Falls Urban Area. State
documents and requirements were reviewed for applicability to transportation planning within the
Klamath Falls Urban Growth Boundary (UGB). Regional planning documents that contain policies or
regulations with potential impacts to the City and County's transportation system are also reviewed.
In the final subsection of this memorandum, the City and County's adopted land use and
transportation policies and regulations are summarized

The following documents are reviewed in Section III for policies and regulations applicable to the City
and County's transportation planning and resulting TSP Update. The page number where each
document's review begins in this memorandum is included for quick reference in the following list.
                                                           City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                    TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                          11/30/10

STATE OF OREGON                                                                                                27 

  Transportation System Planning Guidelines (2008)                                                             27 
  Oregon Transportation Plan (2006)                                                                            28 
  Oregon Highway Plan (1999, last amended 2006)                                                                29 
  Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan (1995)                                                                    38 
  Oregon Rail Plan (2001)                                                                                      39 
  Oregon Public Transportation Plan (1997)                                                                     40 
  Access Management Rule (OAR 734051)                                                                          41 
  Freight Moves the Oregon Economy (1999)                                                                      41 
  Oregon Aviation Plan (2007)                                                                                  41 
  State Transportation Improvement Program (2000present)                                                       42 

REGIONAL AND COUNTY PLANS                                                                                      45 

  Klamath County Comprehensive Plan (2010)                                                                     45 
  Klamath County Rural Transportation System Plan (2010)                                                       47 
  Klamath County Land Development Code                                                                         51 
  Basin Transit Service Transit Development Plan (1995)                                                        52 
  Klamath Falls Urban Area Economic Opportunity Analysis (2009)                                                55 

LOCAL PLANS AND ORDINANCES                                                                                     58 

  City of Klamath Falls Comprehensive Plan (1981)                                                              58 
  Klamath Falls Urban Area Transportation System Plan (1998)                                                   59 
  Klamath Falls West Side Refinement Plan (2006)                                                               61 
  Orindale/Balsam SubArea Transportation Master Plan (2007)                                                    61 
  Campus Area SubArea Master Plan (2008)                                                                       63 
  Klamath Falls Community Development Ordinance                                                                65 
  Basin View Planned Unit Development Standards (1990)                                                         66 
  City of Klamath Falls Public Works Engineering Standards Manual (2003)                                       66 
  Klamath Falls, Oregon Parks Master Plan (1998)                                                               66 
  Klamath Falls Airport Master Plan (2005)                                                                     68 
  2020 Klamath Vision (2010)                                                                                   69 




                                                            2
                                                  City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                           TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                 11/30/10

II.      TRANSPORTATION PLANNING RULE COMPLIANCE

Statewide Planning Goal 12, Transportation, requires cities, counties, metropolitan planning
organizations, and ODOT to provide and encourage a safe, convenient, and economic transportation
system. This is accomplished through development of Transportation System Plans (TSPs) based
on inventories of local, regional and state transportation needs. The Transportation Planning Rule
(TPR) implements the state's transportation policies and requires all jurisdictions to complete a
transportation system plan (TSP), including local policies and ordinances to implement that plan.
Klamath Falls Urban Area TSP was adopted in 1998. The City and County are updating the TSP to
accurately reflect the current transportation system and plan for Klamath Falls UGB's future
transportation needs. The goal of the update is to establish a set of land use and transportation
measures and plans that incorporate recent and planned state and local transportation investments
and to reflect the existing population and expected future growth. Specifically, amendments to the
TSP will address new development and plans for development within the City's Urban Growth
Boundary (UGB).

The City's adopted Community Development Ordinance (CDO) implements transportation policy
within city limits and is the principal focus of the following TPR compliance assessment. The
County's adopted Land Development Code (LDC) implements transportation policy in the county,
including areas within the City's Urban Growth Boundary (UGB), but outside of the city limits. A
similar compliance review has been conducted for County ordinances. The tables below list TPR
implementation requirements, related existing code language, and, where relevant, TSP and other
regulatory provisions that address the requirements. Table 1 reviews City compliance with the TPR;
Table 2 contains the County review. These tables include recommendations for changes to the CDO
and LDC that will likely be needed to fully implement the updated TSP for the Klamath Falls Urban
Area and bring City and County regulations into compliance with the TPR. Recommended changes
to local regulatory documents, indicated in bold text, are intended to provide guidance to project staff
during the update of the TSP. Proposed amendments to the CDO and LDC will be drafted during the
planning process and become implementation recommendations for inclusion in the draft TSP.1

The applicable portion of the TPR is found in OAR Section 660-12-0045, Implementation of the
Transportation System Plan. In summary, the Transportation Planning Rule requires that local
governments revise their land use regulations to implement the TSP. The following TPR
requirements are paraphrased from Section -0045:


         Amend land use regulations to reflect and implement the Transportation System
         Plan.
         Adopt land use or subdivision ordinance measures, consistent with applicable
         federal and state requirements, to protect transportation facilities, corridors and
         sites for their identified functions, to include the following topics:
         -   access management and control;


1
  Draft implementation language will be prepared as part of Task 6: Draft TSP and Implementing
Ordinances (WOC #7 under PA #27456), which will include proposed text amendments to the CDO that
will implement the updated TSP and address TPR compliance. Note that the City of Klamath Falls is in
the process of updating the CDO and that some of the recommendations in Table 1 may be addressed
through this process.



                                                   3
                                                     City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                              TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                    11/30/10

        -   protection of public use airports;
        -   coordinated review of land use decisions potentially affecting transportation
            facilities;
        -   conditions to minimize development impacts to transportation facilities;
        -   regulations to provide notice to public agencies providing transportation
            facilities and services of land use applications that potentially affect
            transportation facilities;
        -   regulations assuring that amendments to land use applications, densities, and
            design standards are consistent with the Transportation System Plan.
        Adopt land use or subdivision regulations for urban areas and rural communities to
        provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle circulation and bicycle parking,
        and to ensure that new development provides on-site streets and accessways that
        provide reasonably direct routes for pedestrian and bicycle travel.
        In MPO areas, adopt land use and subdivision regulations to reduce reliance on the
        automobile.
        Identify improvements to facilitate bicycle and pedestrian trips in developed areas.
        Establish street standards that minimize pavement width and total right-of-way.



Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
          TPR Requirement                                 Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
(1) Each local government shall amend its
land use regulations to implement the
TSP.

   (b) To the extent, if any, that a           The table in CDO Section 12.005, Uses Permitted by Zone,
   transportation facility, service, or        does not specifically list transportation-related improvements
   improvement concerns the application        as a permitted use.
   of a comprehensive plan provision or
                                               Recommendations: The CDO should be amended to allow
   land use regulation, it may be allowed
                                               transportation improvements in all zones, provided that
   without further land use review if it is
                                               the proposed improvements implement the transportation
   permitted outright or if it is subject to
                                               system plan and/or can be shown to be consistent with
   standards that do not require
                                               adopted policy.
   interpretation or the exercise of
   factual, policy or legal judgment.          In contemplating this change to the permitted use table, the
                                               City should also consider if there is a need to differentiate
                                               between the types of street improvements allowed outright
                                               and those that will be permitted conditionally (e.g.,
                                               surfaced travel lanes, curbs, gutters, drainage ditches,
                                               sidewalks, transit stops, landscaping and related structures
                                               and facilities located within rights-of-ways controlled by a
                                               public agency; expansion, widening or adding
                                               improvements within the right-of-way.)



                                                      4
                                                   City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                            TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                  11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
         TPR Requirement                                Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
      (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
   (c) Where a transportation facility,      TPR Section -0050 addresses project development and
   service or improvement is determined      implementation - how a transportation facility or improvement
   to have a significant impact on land      authorized in a TSP is designed and constructed. Project
   use or requires interpretation or the     development may or may not require land use decision-
   exercise of factual, policy or legal      making. The TPR directs that during project development,
   judgment regarding the application of     projects authorized in an acknowledged TSP will not be
   a comprehensive plan or land use          subject to further justification with regard to their need, mode,
   regulation, the local government shall    function, or general location. Through the update project, the
   provide a review and approval process     Klamath Falls Urban Area TSP will make decisions about
   that is consistent with 660-012-0050      transportation need, mode, function and general location for
   (Transportation Project Development).     facilities or improvement as required by the TPR.
   Local governments shall amend
                                             Project development may involve land use decision-making to
   regulations to provide for consolidated
                                             the extent that determining compliance with applicable local
   review of land use decisions required
                                             requirements involves policy or legal interpretations.
   to permit a transportation project.
                                             Examples include regulations protecting or regulating
                                             development within floodways and other hazard areas,
                                             identified Goal 5 resource areas, and local regulations
                                             establishing land use standards or processes for selecting
                                             specific alignments.
                                             A local review and approval process that is consistent with this
                                             TPR requirement needs to include public notice and hearing
                                             requirements where transportation projects involve land use
                                             decision-making. The local approval process needs to include
                                             notice to affected transportation facility and service providers,
                                             MPOs, and ODOT. Chapter 10, General Provisions, of the
                                             CDO includes Section 10.815, Agency Involvement. This
                                             Section allows, but does not require, the City to refer any
                                             application to the appropriate local, state, and federal agencies
                                             for their review and comment.
                                             For applications that require a transportation impact study
                                             (TIS), which includes proposals for sites that directly access a
                                             state highway, submittal of the TIS to ODOT is required
                                             (Section 14.050).
                                             CDO Section 10.535, Concurrent Applications, allows
                                             multiple land use requests to be processed concurrently, a
                                             provision that indicates that the local process required to
                                             permit a transportation project will be streamlined.
                                             The 1998 TSP also documents the coordinated review
                                             procedures outlined in Section 9 of the Urban Growth
                                             Management Agreement (1981) between the City and the
                                             County (See TSP Appendix G). This document establishes
                                             procedures between the two jurisdictions for land use actions



                                                    5
                                                       City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                      11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
          TPR Requirement                                   Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
                                                 on land outside city limits but within the UGB. The UGMA
                                                 also states that the City and County will cooperatively develop
                                                 standards for these areas, including those for roads so that they
                                                 will be compatible with City street alignments and extensions
                                                 (Section 7 of the UGMA).
                                                 Recommendations: Section 10.815 should be amended to
                                                 state that agencies will be notified of applications that may
                                                 have an impact on their facilities. This section could also
                                                 indicate what types of agencies (ODOT, DEQ, etc.) and
                                                 could be expanded to include special districts (e.g. Basin
                                                 Transit).
                                                 The CDO does not contain specific requirements for notice
                                                 to ODOT for applicable land use applications. Section
                                                 10.610, Notice of Hearing, could include provisions to
                                                 notice ODOT when a proposal may impact state facilities.
                                                 For example, under current requirements the City would
                                                 not be required to notify ODOT of a proposal to modify a
                                                 land use designation. Proposals that allow more intensive
                                                 development and are in the vicinity of a State facility, but
                                                 may not take direct access onto a highway (thereby
                                                 triggering a traffic impact study and ODOT notice), may
                                                 still have potential or projected impacts that are of interest
                                                 to ODOT.

(2) Local governments shall adopt land
use or subdivision ordinance regulations,
consistent with applicable federal and
state requirements, to protect
transportation facilities for their identified
functions.

    (a) Access control measures.                 CDO Chapter 14, Private Site and Public Facility Standards,
                                                 contains access control standards. Section 14.050 Access and
                                                 Driveways specifies the minimum spacing requirements for
                                                 access (public or private) on highways (based on category) and
                                                 arterial streets.
                                                 The 1998 TSP's Access Management Plan (Chapter 10)
                                                 includes recommended guidelines for preliminary site plan
                                                 requirements addressing access for development proposals that
                                                 directly or indirectly access a state highway or an arterial. The
                                                 TSP also recommended applying local access spacing
                                                 standards as part of the site review process (Appendix G, Plans
                                                 and Policies Review).




                                                        6
                                               City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                        TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                              11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
         TPR Requirement                            Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
      (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
                                         Recommendations: The requirements of the CDO
                                         currently control access on arterials. Access measures
                                         could be expanded to include limiting access onto
                                         collectors, as well as standards for driveway and public
                                         road spacing, median control, and signal spacing standards
                                         on local facilities. Additional access control measures to
                                         consider include limiting the number of access points based
                                         on land use type and enabling the City to require shared
                                         access as a condition of land division approval or design
                                         review.
                                         CDO standards should be updated to implement the
                                         recommendations of the TSP and be consistent with the
                                         functional classification of roads. The updated TSP's
                                         Access Management Plan will be used as a guide to develop
                                         updated code language.

   (b) Standards to protect the future   The CDO requires a traffic impact study (TIS) for all proposed
   operations of roadways and transit    zone changes, subdivisions, partitions, new development and
   corridors                             or/redevelopment if the proposal is for a site that directly
                                         accesses a state highway, if a comprehensive plan amendment
                                         is required, or if there is a traffic safety or operational
                                         deficiency recognized in the adopted TSP and the proposal
                                         exceeds specific generation or mitigation thresholds (Section
                                         14.050.10). Proposals that require a TIS must submit the
                                         information to both the City of Klamath Falls and ODOT for
                                         review. CDO Section 14.051, Traffic Impact Study
                                         Requirements, lists the requirements for the traffic analysis.
                                         The Public Works Engineering Manual requires that all
                                         development proposals submit a traffic analysis with the
                                         Development Review application (Section 8-2, Traffic
                                         Studies). New development that will cause degradation
                                         below acceptable operating levels (generally, LOS D during
                                         the PM peak hour) is required to provide mitigating
                                         transportation system improvements that will restore the level
                                         of service to the acceptable standard. The Public Works
                                         Engineering Manual includes a list of information typically
                                         required for a TIS (p. 8-4).
                                         The 1998 TSP also includes recommendations for required
                                         elements of a TIS (Chapter 10), not all of which are codified in
                                         the CDO.
                                         Recommendation: While the existing TIS requirement
                                         should provide decision-makers with adequate information
                                         with which to determine the impacts of land use decisions



                                                7
                                                  City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                           TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                 11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
         TPR Requirement                               Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
      (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
                                            on the transportation system, the City should consider
                                            simplifying the TIS requirement by applying it to all
                                            development proposals that meet a given trip threshold. In
                                            addition, minor improvements to Section 14.051 could be
                                            made to distinguish between submittal requirements and
                                            approval criteria. Adding cross-references to the Public
                                            Works Engineering Manual can also clarify what is
                                            required for a TIS and the circumstances under which
                                            mitigation will be required. Also recommended is adding a
                                            statement in CDO Section 14.051 that confirms the City's
                                            ability to condition approval to require needed
                                            transportation improvements.

   (d) Coordinated review of future land    The CDO does not provide a process for coordinated review of
   use decisions affecting transportation   future land use decisions that affect transportation facilities.
   facilities, corridors or sites
                                            Recommendations: Section 10.815, Agency Involvement,
                                            should be amended to state that agencies will be notified of
                                            applications that may have an impact on their facilities.
                                            Amending CDO Section 10.610, Notice of Hearing, to
                                            include requirements to provide notice to ODOT and
                                            relevant transportation service providers or special interest
                                            transportation groups (such as those advocating bicycle or
                                            freight interests) could help ensure "coordinated review" of
                                            land use decisions affecting transportation facilities.

   (e) Process to apply conditions to       The CDO does not explicitly call out a process to apply
   development proposals in order to        development conditions in order to minimize impacts to
   minimize impacts and protect             transportation facilities. The CDO does, however, give the
   transportation facilities                City the following authority.
                                            The CDO contains provisions to condition approval of
                                            conditional uses (11.110 Decision - Conditions of Approval)
                                            through an Administrative Action (approval by the Planning
                                            Director). Types of conditions listed include requiring an
                                            increase in street width (3) and requiring dedication and
                                            improvement of additional right of way (4).
                                            The City also has the authority to condition approval of a
                                            planned unit development (Section 12.372 Criteria for
                                            Approval).
                                            Review Criteria for proposed tentative subdivision plans
                                            enable the Planning Commission to require street dedication as
                                            a condition of approval (11.815(6)).
                                            Recommendations: The CDO should explicitly give the
                                            City the ability to apply conditions of approval to new



                                                   8
                                                   City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                            TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                  11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
         TPR Requirement                                Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
      (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
                                             development and should specify that one of the objectives
                                             in imposing conditions will be to minimize impacts to
                                             transportation facilities. The subdivisions section (11.810
                                             Tentative Plan Content) should be amended to include a
                                             requirement that development proposals include data on
                                             the potential traffic impacts where a TIS is required
                                             pursuant to Section 14.050.10. For additional related
                                             recommendations, see the TPR requirements in section
                                             660-012-0060 below.

   (f) Regulations to provide notice to      Section 10.610, Notice of Hearing, of the CDO does not
   public agencies providing                 specify the types of decisions that require notice to public
   transportation facilities and services,   agencies, nor which public agencies should receive notice.
   MPOs, and ODOT of: land use
                                             Recommendations: The City should amend the CDO to
   applications that require public
                                             include a requirement that ODOT and other affected
   hearings, subdivision and partition
                                             public agencies (DEQ, Oregon Department of Aviation,
   applications, applications which affect
                                             Klamath County, Basin Transit etc.) receive notification of
   private access to roads, applications
                                             land use applications that meet the descriptions in this TPR
   within airport noise corridor and
                                             requirement.
   imaginary surfaces which affect
   airport operations.

   g) Regulations assuring amendments        Pursuant to CDO Section 10.105, text amendments to Chapters
   to land use designations, densities,      10, 11, 12, 13 or 14 may only be initiated by the City Council
   design standards are consistent with      or Planning Commission. Under Section 10.505, zone changes
   the function, capacities, and levels of   may be initiated by the property owner or by the City (Council
   service of facilities designated in the   or Commission). Chapter 10 does not include approval criteria
   TSP.                                      for zone changes or plan or ordinance amendments.
                                             Recommendations: At a minimum, the CDO should
                                             dictate that approval of plan or ordinance (text)
                                             amendments is contingent on finding that the proposed
                                             amendment complies with all applicable Statewide
                                             Planning Goals, which would include compliance with the
                                             TPR. The City should consider further amending the CDO
                                             to specifically state that approval of amendments to land
                                             use designations, densities, and design standards is
                                             contingent on findings of consistency with the planned
                                             transportation system, as adopted in the City's TSP.
                                             Criteria for zone change approval (Section 10.505) should
                                             include the provision that adequate public facilities,
                                             services, and transportation networks are in place or are
                                             planned to be provided concurrently with the development
                                             of the property.
                                             In addition, because Klamath Falls has a one-map system



                                                    9
                                                     City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                              TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                    11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
         TPR Requirement                                  Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
      (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
                                               and a zone change constitutes an amendment to the
                                               Comprehensive Plan land use designation,code language
                                               should be revised to include reference to TPR Section ­
                                               0060 (see Section 660-12-0060 below), or should include
                                               language from this TPR section that states under what
                                               circumstances a plan or land use regulation amendment
                                               "significantly affects a transportation facility" and the
                                               mitigation that is required. The options for ensuring that
                                               allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity,
                                               and level of service of the facility identified in the TSP
                                               should be included in the CDO or, at a minimum, code
                                               language should reference the relevant TPR section.

(3) Local governments shall adopt land
use or subdivision regulations for urban
areas and rural communities as set forth in
660-012-0040(3)(a-d):

    (a) Provide bicycle parking in             Section 14.046, Bicycle Parking Facilities, meets this TPR
    multifamily developments of 4 units        requirement.
    or more, new retail, office and
    institutional developments, transit
    transfer stations and park-and-ride lots

    (b) Provide "safe and convenient" (per     Subdivision design standards (Chapter 11, Section 11.805)
    subsection 660-012-0045.3(d))              include provisions for sidewalks, requiring that they are
    pedestrian and bicycle connections         installed on both sides of all streets, in any special pedestrian
    from new subdivisions/multifamily          ways within the land development, and "when the Commission
    development to neighborhood activity       determines such improvements are necessary." The City may
    centers; bikeways are required along       require a sidewalk or bikeway "to connect to a cul de sac or to
    arterials and major collectors;            pass through an unusually long or oddly shaped block or
    sidewalks are required along arterials,    otherwise provide appropriate circulation."
    collectors, and most local streets in
                                               CDO Chapter 14, which contains the City's site development
    urban areas except controlled access
                                               standards, does not expressly require that new subdivisions or
    roadways
                                               multifamily developments include non-motorized access ways
                                               to reach activity centers. However, where a TIS is required,
                                               development proposals must address bike and pedestrian use
                                               and the availability of transit to serve the development (Section
                                               14.051(6)). Each lot and parcel in a development is required
                                               to abut an improved street with sidewalks for the entire length
                                               of the lot frontage (Section 14.050(1)).
                                               Planned Unit Development (PUD) applications are required to
                                               show proposed access and circulation patterns for vehicle,
                                               bicycle, pedestrian and, where applicable, transit systems but
                                               there is no further code guidance on placement or intended



                                                     10
                                                      City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                               TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                     11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
          TPR Requirement                                  Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
                                                function of pedestrian and bicycle routes (Section 12.380
                                                Development Plan Submittal Requirements).
                                                The Public Works Engineering Standards provide that
                                                sidewalks on Major Arterials in commercially zoned areas can
                                                be as wide as 8 feet. Major Arterials, Major Collectors, and
                                                Minor Collectors with on-street bike lanes are required to have
                                                6-foot sidewalks. Local streets are required to have 5-foot
                                                sidewalks with four-foot planter strips on both sides of the
                                                street.
                                                Recommendations: Consistent with this TPR requirement,
                                                code and public works standards specify where bikeways
                                                are required (based on street classification) and their
                                                construction design (width, material). The CDO also
                                                enables the City to require bicycle and pedestrian
                                                pathways to provide "appropriate circulation." The City
                                                should consider adding clarifying language in the CDO
                                                that providing bikeways and sidewalks along arterials and
                                                collectors is required.

    (c) Off-site road improvements              City code language does not specifically indicate that off-site
    required as a condition of                  road improvements can be required as a condition of
    development approval must                   development approval.
    accommodate bicycle and pedestrian
                                                Recommendations: As part of the TIS requirements, add a
    travel, including facilities on arterials
                                                statement in CDO Section 14.051 that confirms the City's
    and major collectors
                                                ability to condition approval to require needed
                                                transportation improvements. Add similar language to
                                                11.805, Design Standards, so that it also applies to
                                                subdivision approval where a TIS is not required.

    (e) Provide internal pedestrian             The CDO does not include requirements that new office and
    circulation within new office parks         commercial developments provide pedestrian circulation
    and commercial developments                 internal to the site.
                                                Recommendation: Design Review standards (Section
                                                11.068 Criteria for Approval) and Design Standards for
                                                subdivisions (Section 11.805) should be amended to meet
                                                this TPR requirement. Proposed language should require
                                                that the planned pedestrian system internal to the
                                                development connect building entrances, adjacent streets,
                                                and nearby transit stops. (Note: Appendix G of the TSP
                                                includes some methods for meeting this TPR requirement.)

(4) To support transit in urban areas
containing a population greater than




                                                      11
                                                        City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                 TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                       11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
             TPR Requirement                                 Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
        (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
25,000, where the area is already served
by a public transit system or where a
determination has been made that a public
transit system is feasible, local
governments shall adopt land use and
subdivision regulations as provided in (a)-
(g) below:

(a) Transit routes and transit facilities shall   The updated Klamath Falls Urban Area TSP will identify
be designed to support transit use through        transit routes and determine appropriate standards for these
provision of bus stops, pullouts and              transportation facilities, consistent with this section of the
shelters, optimum road geometrics, on-            TPR.
road parking restrictions and similar
facilities, as appropriate;

(b) New retail, office and institutional          Transit Stops are not currently identified in the existing TSP.
buildings at or near major transit stops          Information from Basin Transit will be reviewed and
shall provide for convenient pedestrian           incorporated into the updated TSP.
access to transit through the measures
                                                  The CDO does not currently identify specific development
listed in (A) and (B) below.
                                                  standards for development near major transit stops.
(A) Walkways shall be provided                    Recommendation: Design Review standards (Section
connecting building entrances and streets         11.068 Criteria for Approval) and Design Standards for
adjoining the site;                               subdivisions (Section 11.805) should be amended to meet
                                                  this TPR requirement. Specifically, these CDO sections
(B) Pedestrian connections to adjoining
                                                  should identify development standards consistent with TPR
properties shall be provided except where
                                                  -0045(4) for development proposals that are within a
such a connection is impracticable.
                                                  certain distance from a major transit stop.
Pedestrian connections shall connect the
on site circulation system to existing or
proposed streets, walkways, and
driveways that abut the property. Where
adjacent properties are undeveloped or
have potential for redevelopment, streets,
accessways and walkways on site shall be
laid out or stubbed to allow for extension
to the adjoining property;

(C) In addition to (A) and (B) above, on
sites at major transit stops provide the
following:

(i) Either locate buildings within 20 feet of
the transit stop, a transit street or an
intersecting street or provide a pedestrian
plaza at the transit stop or a street



                                                        12
                                                   City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                            TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                  11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
            TPR Requirement                              Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
intersection;

(ii) A reasonably direct pedestrian
connection between the transit stop and
building entrances on the site;

(iii) A transit passenger landing pad
accessible to disabled persons;

(iv) An easement or dedication for a
passenger shelter if requested by the
transit provider; and

(v) Lighting at the transit stop.

(c) Local governments may implement          Instead of requiring that all new retail, office and institutional
(4)(b)(A) and (B) above through the          development meet development requirements that satisfy -
designation of pedestrian districts and      0045(A) and (B), the City has the option of requiring these
adoption of appropriate implementing         standards within designated pedestrian districts. Note:
measures regulating development within       Considering the size of the community, City staff have
pedestrian districts. Pedestrian districts   determined that designating a pedestrian district is not
must comply with the requirement of          necessary at this time.
(4)(b)(C) above;

(d) Designated employee parking areas in     The Off Street Parking and Loading sections of Chapter 14 do
new developments shall provide               not include a section that requires preferential parking for
preferential parking for carpools and        carpools or vanpools.
vanpools;
                                             Recommendation: The City should consider requiring that
                                             new developments with planned designated employee
                                             parking areas provide preferential parking for employee
                                             carpools and vanpools. (Note: While Klamath Falls is not a
                                             large city, it is a major employment area and draws
                                             commuters from the larger urban area and the County.
                                             Requiring planned employment uses to dedicate carpool
                                             spaces can incentivize ride sharing. This idea is not new to
                                             transportation planning in the area, as Appendix G of the
                                             existing TSP includes a recommended requirement for
                                             employers with 50 employees or more to dedicate 10% of
                                             the required parking spaces for car/vanpools.)

(e) Existing development shall be allowed    The CDO does not address redevelopment of sites for transit-
to redevelop a portion of existing parking   oriented uses.
areas for transit-oriented uses, including
                                             Recommendation: Chapter 14 should be revised to allow
bus stops and pullouts, bus shelters, park
                                             redevelopment of existing parking spaces for transit
and ride stations, transit-oriented
                                             oriented uses. The City could also consider amending the



                                                    13
                                                     City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                              TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                    11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
           TPR Requirement                                Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
      (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
developments, and similar facilities, where    CDO to allow for a reduction in the number of minimum
appropriate;                                   required parking spaces if the development proposes
                                               transit-related amenities such as transit stops, pull-outs,
                                               shelters, and park and ride lots, or when the development
                                               is abutting a street with transit service. (Note: Appendix G
                                               of the existing TSP recommends allowing a 10% reduction
                                               in required parking spaces for sites that are within 400 feet
                                               of a transit route and are proposing a transit stop or
                                               amenity as part of the development.)

(f) Road systems for new development           The TSP update will identify existing and planned transit
shall be provided that can be adequately       routes; the location and design of planned new roadways will
served by transit, including provision of      be consistent with existing and planned transit service.
pedestrian access to existing and identified
                                               Recommendation: Section 11.805, Design Standards for
future transit routes. This shall include,
                                               subdivisions, should be amended to require that new
where appropriate, separate accessways to
                                               development provide pedestrian access to existing and
minimize travel distances;
                                               planned future transit routes. (Note: The 1995 Basin
                                               Transit Service Transit Development Plan, reviewed in
                                               Section III of this memorandum, includes
                                               recommendations pertaining to access to transit.)

(g) Along existing or planned transit          Transit routes are not currently identified in the existing TSP.
routes, designation of types and densities     Information from Basin Transit will be reviewed and
of land uses adequate to support transit.      incorporated into the updated TSP.
                                               Recommendation: When updating the transit element of
                                               the TSP, review existing land uses and consider land use
                                               changes that would support the viability of transit on
                                               existing or planned routes. (Note: The recommendation in
                                               Appendix G of the TSP is to develop specific corridor plans
                                               for transit route in the community that would address
                                               urban design issue, including access and transit-supportive
                                               land uses. The 1995 Basin Transit Service Transit
                                               Development Plan also includes recommendations
                                               pertaining to transit supporting land uses.)

(6) As part of the pedestrian and bicycle      Recommendation: This requirement should be addressed
circulation plans, local governments shall     by the TSP update planning process. The requirement can
identify improvements to facilitate bicycle    be met by adopting improvements in developed areas that
and pedestrian trips to meet local travel      meet the needs identified in the TSP's pedestrian and
needs in developed areas.                      bicycle circulation elements.


(7) Local governments shall establish          The design standards in the CDO (Section 11.805) call for a
standards for local streets and accessways     minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet for local roads, 36 feet
                                               of that curb-to-curb paving. The CDO does not provide for a


                                                     14
                                               City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                        TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                              11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
            TPR Requirement                         Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
that minimize pavement width and total   narrower street width when on-street parking is restricted to
ROW consistent with the operational      one side or is prohibited.
needs of the facility.
                                         The existing TSP (Figure 7-3) requires a 50 to 60-foot right-of-
                                         way and 36 feet of paved road (for parking on both sides).

                                         The Public Works Engineering Standards has another set of
                                         requirements, specifying that local streets with parking on both
                                         sides have to be constructed with 65-66 feet of right-of-way
                                         and 42 feet of curb-to-curb pavement (Drawing No. 8-200).
                                         The state's Transportation and Growth Management program
                                         has developed a guidebook (Neighborhood Street Design
                                         Guideline) that suggests the following local street standards:

                                                           Pavement        Right of-Way
                                         No On-Street Parking 20'          42-48'
                                         Parking on One Side   24'         47-52'
                                         Parking on Two Sides 28'          52-56'

                                         The City's TSP, the CDO and the Public Works standards
                                         require both a wider right-of-way and a wider paved local
                                         street than the options illustrated in the Neighborhood Street
                                         Design Guidelines. The street cross-section for a local street
                                         with no on-street parking, as shown in the existing TSP, is
                                         closest in design to the state guidelines, providing a right-of-
                                         way that is less wide and a paved width only slightly wider
                                         than the guidelines. See Table 2 in this section of the
                                         memorandum for a comparison of the City's standard.
                                         Recommendations: The Street Standards table in Section
                                         11.805 should be amended to be consistent with the
                                         updated TSP. The City should evaluate whether narrower
                                         local streets, consistent with the model language discussed
                                         above, will be permitted and under what circumstances. In
                                         Section 11.805 the City may also want to distinguish the
                                         different designs for local streets (parking allowed on one
                                         or both sides, or prohibited) to identify where the narrower
                                         standards are appropriate. If the City prefers to further
                                         define under what circumstances a narrower street right-
                                         of-way design may be approved (slopes under a certain
                                         grade, roadways carrying under a certain volume of traffic,
                                         etc.), the standards must be clear and objective.
                                         (Note: Local street width was one of the topics addressed in
                                         a 2004 Comprehensive Plan and Code Audit funded
                                         through the Transportation and Growth Management



                                               15
                                                       City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                      11/30/10

Table 1. TPR Requirements and City of Klamath Falls Compliance
          TPR Requirement                                   Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
                                                 (TGM) Program. The Citizen's Advisory Committee
                                                 guiding the project had concerns over emergency vehicle
                                                 access and snow removal and ultimately agreed not to
                                                 forward a recommendation to reduce pavement width of
                                                 local streets to the City Council. In the Final Audit Report
                                                 the Project Management Team recommended the city
                                                 revisit reducing pavement widths on local streets and
                                                 discuss further areas or situations where narrower local
                                                 streets might be appropriate in Klamath Falls in order to
                                                 comply with the TPR.)

TPR Requirement (OAR Section 660-                Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
12-0060)
Amendments to functional plans,                  Recommendations: Revise the CDO to include language
acknowledged comprehensive plans, and            that is consistent with the language of this section of the
land use regulations that significantly affect   TPR.
an existing or planned transportation facility
shall assure that allowed land uses are          Section -0060 was amended in March 2005 and includes
consistent with the identified function,         new provisions for local jurisdictions on how to make a
capacity, and performance standards of the       determination whether or not an amendment to the City's
facility.                                        adopted plans or land use regulations has a significant
                                                 affect on a transportation facility.
                                                 The TPR includes a category of facilities, improvements,
                                                 and services that can be assumed to be "in-place" or
                                                 committed and available to provide transportation capacity
                                                 (-0060)(4)). For the City of Klamath Falls, these include
                                                 projects in the STIP or locally adopted TIP or CIP and
                                                 projects that are authorized in the local TSP for which a
                                                 funding plan or mechanism is in place.
                                                 The TPR also allows applicants and decision-makers to
                                                 rely on transportation improvements that are "reasonably
                                                 likely to be provided by the end of the planning period" (-
                                                 0060 (4)(b)(D) when considering amendments to local plans
                                                 and land use regulations. Through this TSP update
                                                 process, the City of Klamath Falls has an opportunity to
                                                 identify what, if any, planned improvements in the adopted
                                                 TSP may be considered "reasonably likely" to be funded
                                                 and built within the 20-year planning horizon.
                                                 Pending the 20-year transportation improvement needs
                                                 and the development of a corresponding funding element,
                                                 revisit -0060 determination of "reasonably likely"
                                                 transportation projects.




                                                       16
                                                       City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                      11/30/10




Table 2. TPR Requirements and Klamath County Compliance
          TPR Requirement                                   Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
(1) Each local government shall amend its
land use regulations to implement the
TSP.

    (b) To the extent, if any, that a            The zone districts in Chapter 50, Land Use Zones, do not
    transportation facility, service, or         specifically list transportation-related improvements as a
    improvement concerns the application         permitted use.
    of a comprehensive plan provision or
                                                 Recommendations: The Land Development Code (LDC)
    land use regulation, it may be allowed
                                                 should be amended to allow transportation improvements
    without further land use review if it is
                                                 in all zones, provided that the proposed improvements
    permitted outright or if it is subject to
                                                 implement the transportation system plan and/or can be
    standards that do not require
                                                 shown to be consistent with adopted policy. The County
    interpretation or the exercise of
                                                 should consider including transportation facilities in the
    factual, policy or legal judgment.
                                                 definition of Extensive Impact Services and Utilities
                                                 (Article 11, Definitions), a conditional use in County zoning
                                                 districts.

    (c) Where a transportation facility,         Section 32.030, Types of Notice, includes the provision that
    service or improvement is determined         notice of quasi-judicial land use hearings for actions wholly or
    to have a significant impact on land         partially within an Urban Growth Boundary must be mailed to
    use or requires interpretation or the        all owners of real property within 100 feet.
    exercise of factual, policy or legal
                                                 Recommendations: Section 32.030 could be expanded to
    judgment regarding the application of
                                                 require notification to state agencies when applications
    a comprehensive plan or land use
                                                 have the potential to impact their facilities, regardless of
    regulation, the local government shall
                                                 distance from the subject property.
    provide a review and approval process
    that is consistent with 660-012-0050         The LDC does not contain specific requirements for notice
    (Transportation Project Development).        to ODOT for applicable land use applications. Section
    Local governments shall amend                32.030 could include provisions to notice ODOT when a
    regulations to provide for consolidated      proposal may impact state facilities. See further discussion
    review of land use decisions required        in Table 1 under this TPR requirement.
    to permit a transportation project.

(2) Local governments shall adopt land
use or subdivision ordinance regulations,
consistent with applicable federal and
state requirements, to protect
transportation facilities for their identified
functions.

    (a) Access control measures.                 LDC Section 71.160, Access Permits, requires a County access



                                                       17
                                                  City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                           TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                 11/30/10

Table 2. TPR Requirements and Klamath County Compliance
        TPR Requirement                                Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
     (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
                                            permit prior to the construction of any driveway or road which
                                            connects with a public or county road or a permit from the
                                            State Highway Division if access is on a state highway.
                                            Recommendations: Article 71, Vehicular Access and
                                            Circulation, does not include access spacing requirements.
                                            The LDC standards should be updated for the Klamath
                                            Falls Urban Area consistent with the recommendations of
                                            the updated TSP. See further discussion in Table 1 under
                                            this TPR requirement.

   (b) Standards to protect the future      The LDC does not require that development proposals or
   operations of roadways and transit       proposals for legislative land use changes include a traffic
   corridors                                analysis to assess the impacts of the proposal on the
                                            transportation system.
                                            Recommendation: The County should codify a
                                            requirement for a traffic impact analysis or study for
                                            development proposals that are expected to generate a
                                            significant amount of traffic. Code amendments should
                                            include the circumstances under which an analysis is
                                            required and what must be included in the study. To
                                            satisfy TPR -0060 requirements (see discussion in this
                                            table), the County should also require a traffic assessment
                                            in association with changes to the land use designations
                                            that significantly affect a transportation facility. Note: The
                                            City of Klamath Falls CDO Section 14.050, Access and
                                            Driveways, includes this requirement. The comparable
                                            LDC section is Article 71, Vehicular Access and
                                            Circulation.

   (d) Coordinated review of future land    LDC Chapter 30, Public Hearings, Notice, and Appeal, does
   use decisions affecting transportation   not provide a process for coordinated review of future land use
   facilities, corridors or sites           decisions that affect transportation facilities.
                                            Recommendations: Article 32, Public Notice, should be
                                            amended to state that agencies will be notified of
                                            applications that may have an impact on their facilities.
                                            Amending Section 32.030, Types of Notice, to include a
                                            general requirement to provide notice other government
                                            agencies, including ODOT and relevant transportation
                                            service providers or special interest transportation groups,
                                            could help ensure "coordinated review" of land use
                                            decisions affecting transportation facilities.

   (e) Process to apply conditions to       The LDC does not explicitly call out a process to apply
   development proposals in order to        development conditions in order to minimize impacts to


                                                  18
                                                   City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                            TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                  11/30/10

Table 2. TPR Requirements and Klamath County Compliance
          TPR Requirement                               Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
      (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
   minimize impacts and protect              transportation facilities. The LCD does, however, give the
   transportation facilities                 County the following authority.
                                             Article 44, Conditional Use Permit, requires a Conditional Use
                                             Permit for all uses within the UGB (except Extensive Impact
                                             Services and Utilities), as well as subdivision and planned unit
                                             development applications as part of a Type II Administrative
                                             Review Procedure (Article 22) or Planning Commission
                                             Review Procedure (Article 26). The review body may
                                             condition approval, based on findings of fact that it deems
                                             necessary "to ensure compliance with the Klamath County
                                             Comprehensive Plan, Land Development code, and sound land
                                             use planning principles (Section 44.030.D)"
                                             Conditional Use Permit applications for all uses within the
                                             Urban Growth Boundary except for Extensive Impact Services
                                             and Utilities involving land located within an Urban Growth
                                             Boundary and those in conjunction with a subdivision or
                                             planned unit development.
                                             Recommendations: Article 44 could be amended to
                                             explicitly state that conditions of approval may include
                                             requirements related to minimizing traffic impacts and
                                             protecting the transportation system. Article 45, Land
                                             Partition, should be amended to include a requirement that
                                             development proposals include data on the potential traffic
                                             impacts where a transportation impact analysis is required.
                                             For additional related recommendations, see the TPR
                                             requirements in section 660-012-0060 below.

   (f) Regulations to provide notice to      Article 32, Public Notice, does not specify the types of
   public agencies providing                 decisions that require notice to public agencies, nor which
   transportation facilities and services,   public agencies should receive notice.
   MPOs, and ODOT of: land use
                                             Recommendations: The County should amend the LDC to
   applications that require public
                                             include a requirement that ODOT and other affected
   hearings, subdivision and partition
                                             public agencies (DEQ, Oregon Department of Aviation,
   applications, applications which affect
                                             City of Klamath Falls, Basin Transit etc.) receive
   private access to roads, applications
                                             notification of land use applications that meet the
   within airport noise corridor and
                                             descriptions in this TPR requirement.
   imaginary surfaces which affect
   airport operations.

   g) Regulations assuring amendments        Legislative amendments to the Klamath County
   to land use designations, densities,      Comprehensive Plan, Land Development Code, or zoning map
   design standards are consistent with      require findings of consistency with Oregon Statewide
   the function, capacities, and levels of   Planning Goals and state statutes (Section 49.020).
   service of facilities designated in the



                                                   19
                                                     City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                              TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                    11/30/10

Table 2. TPR Requirements and Klamath County Compliance
         TPR Requirement                                  Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
      (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
    TSP.                                       Recommendations: The County's approval criteria for
                                               legislative amendments, found in Article 49, satisfy this TPR
                                               requirement.

(3) Local governments shall adopt land
use or subdivision regulations for urban
areas and rural communities as set forth in
660-012-0040(3)(a-d):

    (a) Provide bicycle parking in             Article 68, Off-Street Parking and Loading, does not include
    multifamily developments of 4 units        requirements for bicycle parking.
    or more, new retail, office and
                                               Recommendations: Amend LDC Article 68 to include
    institutional developments, transit
                                               requirements for bicycle parking, consistent with this TPR
    transfer stations and park-and-ride lots
                                               requirement.

    (b) Provide "safe and convenient" (per     Chapter 60, Planning Department Development Standards,
    subsection 660-012-0045.3(d))              includes standards for developing sites within the Klamath
    pedestrian and bicycle connections         Falls Urban Growth Area. There are no requirements for
    from new subdivisions/multifamily          pedestrian and bicycle connectivity in Chapter 60. The County
    development to neighborhood activity       does, however, requires sidewalks for all subdivisions within
    centers; bikeways are required along       the Klamath Falls Urban Growth Area where the average lot
    arterials and major collectors;            size of the development is not greater than 20,000 square feet
    sidewalks are required along arterials,    (Public Works Department Development Standards, Section
    collectors, and most local streets in      71.050.A). The County may also require dedicated "pedestrian
    urban areas except controlled access       ways to permit access to cul-de-sacs, to pass through oddly
    roadways                                   shaped or unusually long blocks, or to provide access to
                                               schools, parks or other public or private areas (Section
                                               71.050.E)."
                                               Recommendations: Consistent with this TPR requirement,
                                               the LDC should specify where bikeways, as well as
                                               sidewalks, are required. The residential density standard
                                               on which the current sidewalk requirements are based
                                               (Section 71.050.A) should be reexamined in light of
                                               updated TSP recommendations. (Note: The current Urban
                                               Area TSP includes roadway design standards based on
                                               street classification. Table 7-1 of the County's TSP
                                               includes requirements for sidewalks and bicycle lanes,
                                               based on roadway classifications; however these standards
                                               are not for the Klamath Falls Urban Area.) The County
                                               should also consider amending development standards in
                                               Chapter 60 to include language that addresses this "safe
                                               and convenient" TPR requirement for non-motorized
                                               modes of transportation.




                                                     20
                                                        City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                 TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                       11/30/10

Table 2. TPR Requirements and Klamath County Compliance
          TPR Requirement                                    Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
    (c) Off-site road improvements                County code language does not specifically indicate that off-
    required as a condition of                    site road improvements can be required as a condition of
    development approval must                     development approval.
    accommodate bicycle and pedestrian
                                                  Recommendations: As part of the recommended
    travel, including facilities on arterials
                                                  requirement for a transportation impact analysis, add a
    and major collectors
                                                  statement that confirms the County's ability to condition
                                                  approval to require needed transportation improvements.
                                                  Similar language is recommended for Article 44,
                                                  Conditional Use Permit, so that conditions of approval may
                                                  include requirements related to protecting the planned
                                                  transportation system.

    (e) Provide internal pedestrian               The LDC does not include requirements that new office and
    circulation within new office parks           commercial developments provide pedestrian circulation
    and commercial developments                   internal to the site.
                                                  Recommendation: Chapter 60, Planning Department
                                                  Development Standards, should be amended to meet this
                                                  TPR requirement. Proposed language should require that
                                                  the planned pedestrian system internal to the development
                                                  connect building entrances, adjacent streets, and nearby
                                                  transit stops.

(4) To support transit in urban areas
containing a population greater than
25,000, where the area is already served
by a public transit system or where a
determination has been made that a public
transit system is feasible, local
governments shall adopt land use and
subdivision regulations as provided in (a)-
(g) below:

(a) Transit routes and transit facilities shall   The updated Klamath Falls Urban Area TSP will identify
be designed to support transit use through        transit routes within the Urban Area and will determine
provision of bus stops, pullouts and              appropriate standards for these transportation facilities,
shelters, optimum road geometrics, on-            consistent with this section of the TPR.
road parking restrictions and similar
facilities, as appropriate;

(b) New retail, office and institutional          Transit Stops are not currently identified in the Rural TSP.
buildings at or near major transit stops          Information from Basin Transit will be reviewed and
shall provide for convenient pedestrian           incorporated into the updated (Urban Area) TSP.
access to transit through the measures
                                                  The LDO does not currently identify specific development
listed in (A) and (B) below.
                                                  standards for development near major transit stops.



                                                        21
                                                      City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                               TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                     11/30/10

Table 2. TPR Requirements and Klamath County Compliance
          TPR Requirement                                  Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
(A) Walkways shall be provided                  Recommendation: Chapter 60, Planning Department
connecting building entrances and streets       Development Standards, should be amended to meet this
adjoining the site;                             TPR requirement. Specifically, this chapter should
                                                identify development standards consistent with TPR -
(B) Pedestrian connections to adjoining         0045(4) for development proposals that are within a certain
properties shall be provided except where       distance from a major transit stop.
such a connection is impracticable.
Pedestrian connections shall connect the
on site circulation system to existing or
proposed streets, walkways, and
driveways that abut the property. Where
adjacent properties are undeveloped or
have potential for redevelopment, streets,
accessways and walkways on site shall be
laid out or stubbed to allow for extension
to the adjoining property;

(C) In addition to (A) and (B) above, on
sites at major transit stops provide the
following:

(i) Either locate buildings within 20 feet of
the transit stop, a transit street or an
intersecting street or provide a pedestrian
plaza at the transit stop or a street
intersection;

(ii) A reasonably direct pedestrian
connection between the transit stop and
building entrances on the site;

(iii) A transit passenger landing pad
accessible to disabled persons;

(iv) An easement or dedication for a
passenger shelter if requested by the
transit provider; and

(v) Lighting at the transit stop.

(c) Local governments may implement             Instead of requiring that all new retail, office and institutional
(4)(b)(A) and (B) above through the             development meet development requirements that satisfy -
designation of pedestrian districts and         0045(A) and (B), the County has the option of requiring these
adoption of appropriate implementing            standards within designated pedestrian districts.
measures regulating development within
                                                Recommendation: The County, in consultation with the
pedestrian districts. Pedestrian districts
                                                City of Klamath Falls, should determine if there are any



                                                      22
                                                     City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                              TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                    11/30/10

Table 2. TPR Requirements and Klamath County Compliance
            TPR Requirement                               Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
must comply with the requirement of            areas within the Urban Area where it is necessary or
(4)(b)(C) above;                               desirable to implement -0045(4)(b)(A) and (B) though the
                                               designation of pedestrian districts.

(d) Designated employee parking areas in       Article 68, Off-Street Parking and Loading, does not include a
new developments shall provide                 section that requires preferential parking for carpools or
preferential parking for carpools and          vanpools.
vanpools;
                                               Recommendation: Amend the development standards in
                                               Chapter 60 to require that all new developments with
                                               designated employee parking areas provide preferential
                                               parking for employee carpools and vanpools. (Note:
                                               Appendix G of the existing Urban Area TSP includes a
                                               recommended requirement for employers with 50
                                               employees or more to dedicate 10% of the required
                                               parking spaces for car/vanpools.)

(e) Existing development shall be allowed      The LDC does not address redevelopment of sites for transit-
to redevelop a portion of existing parking     oriented uses.
areas for transit-oriented uses, including
                                               Recommendation: Chapter 60 should be revised to allow
bus stops and pullouts, bus shelters, park
                                               redevelopment of existing parking spaces for transit
and ride stations, transit-oriented
                                               oriented uses. See additional discussion in Table 1 under
developments, and similar facilities, where
                                               this TPR requirement.
appropriate;

(f) Road systems for new development           The TSP update will identify existing and planned transit
shall be provided that can be adequately       routes; the location and design of planned new roadways will
served by transit, including provision of      be consistent with existing and planned transit service.
pedestrian access to existing and identified
                                               Recommendation: Chapter 60 should be amended to
future transit routes. This shall include,
                                               require that new development provide pedestrian access to
where appropriate, separate accessways to
                                               existing and planned future transit routes. (Note: The 1995
minimize travel distances;
                                               Basin Transit Service Transit Development Plan, reviewed
                                               in Section III of this memorandum, includes
                                               recommendations pertaining to access to transit.)

(g) Along existing or planned transit          Transit routes are not currently identified in the existing Rural
routes, designation of types and densities     TSP. Information from Basin Transit will be reviewed and
of land uses adequate to support transit.      incorporated into the updated TSP.
                                               Recommendation: See discussion in Table 1 under this
                                               TPR requirement.

(6) As part of the pedestrian and bicycle      Recommendation: This requirement should be addressed
circulation plans, local governments shall     by the TSP update planning process. The requirement can
identify improvements to facilitate bicycle    be met by adopting improvements in developed areas that
and pedestrian trips to meet local travel      meet the needs identified in the TSP's pedestrian and



                                                     23
                                                       City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                      11/30/10

Table 2. TPR Requirements and Klamath County Compliance
           TPR Requirement                                  Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
       (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
needs in developed areas.                        bicycle circulation elements.


(7) Local governments shall establish            Section 71.050, Improvements in the Klamath Falls Urban
standards for local streets and accessways       Area, includes the standards for roadway improvements for
that minimize pavement width and total           subdivisions within the Klamath Falls Urban Growth Area.
ROW consistent with the operational              The LDC does not specify right-of-way widths, but for
needs of the facility.                           developments where average lot sizes are one acre or less, a
                                                 minimum of 36 feet of paved roadway is required. For
                                                 developments where average lot size is 20,000 square feet or
                                                 less, street improvements must include sidewalks. For
                                                 developments where average lot sizes are over one acre, the
                                                 requirement is 24 feet of paved roadway with 4-foot gravel
                                                 shoulders.

                                                 Table 7-1 of the County's TSP includes roadway
                                                 classifications and associated standards. The requirement for
                                                 paved lanes on a local street is 10-11 feet. These standards,
                                                 however, do not apply to the Klamath Falls Urban Area.

                                                 The state's Transportation and Growth Management program
                                                 has developed a guidebook (Neighborhood Street Design
                                                 Guideline) that suggests the following local street standards:

                                                                   Pavement      Right of-Way
                                                 No On-Street Parking 20'        42-48'
                                                 Parking on One Side   24'       47-52'
                                                 Parking on Two Sides 28'        52-56'

                                                 The LDC requires a wider paved local street in the Urban Area
                                                 than the options illustrated in the Neighborhood Street Design
                                                 Guidelines.
                                                 Recommendations: The Street Standards table in Section
                                                 71.050 should be amended to be consistent with the
                                                 recommendations of the updated (Urban Area) TSP.

TPR Requirement (OAR Section 660-                Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
12-0060)
Amendments to functional plans,                  Recommendations: Revise the LDC to include language
acknowledged comprehensive plans, and            that is consistent with the language of this section of the
land use regulations that significantly affect   TPR. See the recommendation in Table 1 under this TPR
an existing or planned transportation facility   requirement.
shall assure that allowed land uses are
consistent with the identified function,



                                                       24
                                             City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                      TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                            11/30/10

Table 2. TPR Requirements and Klamath County Compliance
            TPR Requirement                       Ordinance Compliance/Recommendations
        (OAR Section 660-12-0045)
capacity, and performance standards of the
facility.




                                             25
                                                                                                            City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                                                                     TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                                                                           11/30/10



       



      Table 3. Comparison of Klamath Falls Urban Area Local Street Width Standards
                   Street Widths, City of      Public Works                 Klamath Falls         Klamath County Land             Recommended 
                    Klamath Falls Urban  Engineering Standards,              Community             Development Code             Neighborhood Street 
                    Area Transportation    City of Klamath Falls            Development                                          Design Guidelines* 
                       Systems Plan                                           Ordinance 

                   Pavement     Rightof      Pavement      Rightof     Pavement        Rightof    Pavement        Rightof      Pavement      Rightof
                     Width        Way          Width         Way         Width           Way       Width1           Way          Width         Way 

      No On
      Street          22'         3545'         28'         5152'          36'           60'         36'                          20'         4248' 
                                                                                                                       
      Parking                                                                                                                       

      Parking 
      on One          30'         4555'         35'         5859'          36'           60'         36'                          24'         4752' 
      Side                                                                                 

      Parking 
      on Two          36'         5060'         42'         6566'          36'           60'         36'                          28'         5256' 
      Sides                                                                                


1
    Standards shown are for development where the average lot size is greater than 1 acre; LDC Section 71.050.
*Neighborhood Street Design Guidelines (2000) http://www.oregon.gov/LCD/docs/publications/neighstreet.pdf




                                                                                  26
                                                 City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                          TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                11/30/10

III.   PLAN & POLICY REVIEW


STATE OF OREGON

Transportation System Planning Guidelines (2008)

ODOT's Transportation System Plan Guidelines ("Guidelines") document is comprised of four
chapters: an overview of transportation system planning (Chapter 1); guidance for the preparation of
a jurisdiction's first TSP and of TSP updates (Chapters 2 and 3); and policy guidance on
transportation and land use issues in a series of technical appendices (Chapter 4). The 2008
Guidelines differ from the 2001 Guidelines in that the updated guidelines focus more on TSP
updates, make stronger connections between local transportation needs and the availability of
transportation funding, and provide more guidance related to mobility standards, the OTP, and
project financing in the technical appendices. The Guidelines also provide electronic links throughout
the document for easy access to additional resources.

The chapter on TSP updates is divided into three steps: determining if an update is needed and
scoping the update project; preparing an assessment; and addressing recent regulatory and policy
changes. The last two steps are relevant to the Klamath Falls Urban Area TSP update, at this point
in the planning process.

The TSP Guidelines direct TSP updates to address recent policy and regulatory changes, and call
out recent changes to the Oregon Transportation Plan, Oregon Highway Plan, and Transportation
Planning Rule. A review of these documents and how they relate to the TSP update is provided in
other sub-sections of this memorandum.

Several important changes have been made to state policy since the adoption of the Klamath Falls
Urban Area TSP in 1998. The 2006 Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) emphasizes maintaining
facilities, optimizing existing system performance through technology and better system integration,
creating sustainable funding, and investing in strategic capacity enhancements. Amendments to the
Oregon Highway Plan (OHP) that have potential relevance to transportation planning in Klamath
Falls include changes to Policy 1B (Land Use and Transportation), which requires a management
plan for Special Transportation Areas on state highways that are also designated as State Freight
Routes, and revisions to Policy 1F (Mobility Standards) that allows for the adoption of alternative
mobility standards where "practical difficulties make conformance with the highway mobility
standards infeasible." OHP Appendix C (Access Management Spacing Standards) was revised in
2004 to be consistent with amendments to the Access Management Rule, OAR 734-051 (as
reviewed later in this memorandum).

The Guidelines detail amendments to the TPR (last updated in 2005), which also have bearing on
the TSP update, as well as any other potential Comprehensive Plan amendments in the city.
Section -0050 (Project Development) revisions protect determinations of need, mode, function
and general location for projects identified in TSPs. Revisions to Section -0060, relating to plan
amendments, include the following:

       ·   Require local jurisdictions to balance the need for development with the need for
           transportation improvements;



                                                 27
                                                       City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                      11/30/10

        ·    Address "significant effect" by establishing the end of the planning period as the
             measure for determining whether proposed amendments would cause an
             imbalance between development and the transportation network serving that
             development;
        ·    Identify the transportation improvements that a local government can consider in
             determining whether a proposed amendment will significantly affect
             transportation facilities; and
        ·    Identify methods for local jurisdictions to determine whether or not a needed
             transportation facility is reasonably likely to be provided within the planning
             horizon.

Oregon Transportation Plan (2006)

Originally adopted in 1992, the Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) is a policy document developed by
ODOT in response to federal and state mandates for systematic planning for the future of Oregon's
transportation system. The OTP is intended to meet statutory requirements (ORS 184.618(1)) to
develop a state transportation policy and comprehensive long-range plan for a multi-modal
transportation system that addresses economic efficiency, orderly economic development, safety,
and environmental quality. The 2006 OTP expands on the policy objectives of the 1992 plan, with an
emphasis on maintaining assets in place,2 optimizing existing system performance through
technology and better system integration, creating sustainable funding, and investing in strategic
capacity enhancements.

The OTP's goals, policies and strategies guide the development of state multimodal, modal/topic3
and facility plans and regional and local transportation system plans. The OTP provides the
framework for prioritizing transportation improvements and funding, but it does not identify specific
projects for development.4 As required by Oregon and federal statutes, the OTP guides
development and investment in the transportation system through:

·     Transportation goals and policies,
·     Transportation investment scenarios and an implementation framework, and
·     Key initiatives to implement the vision and policies.

Goals in the OTP include: Mobility and Accessibility; Management of the System; Economic Vitality;
Sustainability; Safety and Security; Funding the Transportation System; and Coordination,
Communication and Cooperation. Policies and strategies under many of these goals emphasize
increasing coordination and cooperation among federal and state agencies, regional and local
governments and private entities to achieve these goals.


2
  The OTP defines "asset management" as a "systematic process of maintaining, upgrading and operating
physical assets cost-effectively. It combines engineering principles with sound business practices and economic
theory, and it provides tools to facilitate a more organized, logical approach to decision-making. Asset
management provides a framework for handling both short- and long-range planning."
3
 Modal or topic plans, as developed by ODOT and other state agencies, include plans for aviation, bicycle and
pedestrian facilities, highways, marine ports and waterways, public transportation and rail.
4
  Projects are identified through facility plans and regional and local transportation system plans, and sometimes
through modal plans.




                                                       28
                                                      City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                               TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                     11/30/10

The Implementation Framework section of the OTP describes the implementation process and how
state multimodal, modal/topic plans, regional and local transportation system plans and master plans
will further refine the OTP's broad policies and investment levels. Local transportation system plans
can further OTP implementation by defining standards, instituting performance measures, and
requiring that operational strategies be developed.5

The Implementation section also describes three investment levels, examples of the investment
priorities for each level of investment, and their impacts on the transportation system. These levels
are described as "flat funding" (Level 1), "maintaining and improving existing infrastructure" (Level 2),
and "expanding facilities and services and services" (Level 3). The recommendation in the OTP is for
the State to invest at levels closer to Level 3 "in order to be competitive economically and to have the
transportation infrastructure and services that allow communities to function well."

Finally, a list of "key initiatives" describes the OTP's implementation priorities. The key initiatives are
intended to help frame plan implementation and reflect the directions of the OTP including system
optimization, integration of transportation modes, integration of transportation, land use, the
environment and the economy, and the need to make strategic investments using a sustainable
funding structure. The key initiatives envision creating the sustainable funding plan using both
traditional and new revenue sources.


Oregon Highway Plan (1999, last amended 2006)

The Oregon Highway Plan (OHP), an element and modal plan of the state's comprehensive
transportation plan (OTP), guides the planning, operations, and financing of ODOT's Highway
Division. Policies in the OHP emphasize the efficient management of the highway system to
increase safety and to extend highway capacity, partnerships with other agencies and local
governments, and the use of new techniques to improve road safety and capacity. These policies
also link land use and transportation, set standards for highway performance and access
management, and emphasize the relationship between state highways and local road, bicycle,
pedestrian, transit, rail, and air systems.

The Oregon Transportation Commission adopted the Highway Plan on March 18, 1999. In July
2006, ODOT published an update that includes amendments made from November 1999 through
January 2006. The updated TSP will need to be consistent with the OHP and the planning process
will review and reference the recent changes to the OHP, where applicable.

The policies found within the OHP that apply to the Klamath Falls Urban Area TSP include:

Policy 1A: State Highway Classification System;

Policy 1B: Land Use and Transportation;

Policy 1C: State Highway Freight System



5
  As stated in the Implementation section of the OTP, requirements for regional and local transportation system
plans (TSPs) are found in the Transportation Planning Rule (OAR 660-012). Regional and local TSPs must be
consistent with the state TSP (the OTP), state multimodal, modal/topic and transportation facility plans.




                                                      29
                                                   City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                            TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                  11/30/10

Policy 1D: Scenic Byways

Policy 1F: Highway Mobility Standards;

Policy 1G: Major Improvements

Policy 1H: Bypasses

Policy 2B: Off-System Improvements;

Policy 2E: Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS);

Policy 2F: Traffic Safety;

Policy 2G: Rail and Highway Compatibility

Policy 3A: Classification and Spacing Standards;

Policy 3B: Medians;

Policy 3C: Interchange Access Management Areas

Policy 3D: Deviations;

Policy 4A: Efficiency of Freight Movement;

Policy 4B: Alternative Passenger Modes;

Policy 4D: Transportation Demand Management

Policy 4E: Park-and-Ride Facilities; and

Policy 5A: Environmental Resources

Policy 1A: State Highway Classification System.
The 1991 Highway Plan's Level of Importance Policy classifies the state highway system into four
levels of importance (Interstate, Statewide, Regional and District) to provide direction for managing
the system and a basis for developing funding strategies for improvements. Remaining unclassified
state highways are considered Local Interest Roads. ODOT uses the state highway classification
system to guide management and investment decisions regarding state highway facilities. The
system guides the development of corridor plans, transportation system plans, major investment
studies, review of local plan and zoning amendments, periodic review of local comprehensive plans,
highway project selection, design and development, and facility management decisions including
road approach permits.

The federal government, as part of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991,
required the establishment of a National Highway System (NHS) to provide an interconnected
system of principal arterial routes that will serve "interstate and inter-regional travel." ODOT has an
obligation to ensure that NHS roadways in Oregon adequately perform this function of serving a
larger geographic area. Nearly all roadways designated by ODOT as Interstate and Statewide




                                                   30
                                                 City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                          TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                11/30/10

highways are part of the NHS, as are a smaller number of Regional highways. Highways in and
around Klamath Falls that are part of the NHS are listed on the following page.

Within Klamath Falls and the surrounding area, there are state highways with Statewide, Regional,
and District Levels of Importance, as described on the following page. The purpose and
management objectives of each of these classifications are summarized below.

   ·   Statewide Highways typically provide inter-urban and inter-regional mobility and provide
       connections to larger urban areas, ports, and major recreation areas that are not directly
       served by Interstate Highways. A secondary function is to provide connections for intra-urban
       and intra-regional trips. The management objective is to provide safe and efficient, high-
       speed, continuous-flow operation. In constrained and urban areas, interruptions to flow
       should be minimal.

   ·   Regional Highways typically provide connections and links to regional centers, Statewide or
       interstate Highways, or economic or activity centers of regional significance. The
       management objective for these facilities is to provide safe and efficient, high-speed,
       continuous-flow operation in rural areas and moderate to high-speed operations in urban and
       urbanizing areas. A secondary function is to serve land uses in the vicinity of these highways.

   ·   District Highways are facilities of county-wide significance and function largely as county and
       city arterials or collectors. They provide connections and links between small urbanized
       areas, rural centers and urban hubs, and also serve local access and traffic. The
       management objective is to provide for safe and efficient, moderate to high-speed
       continuous-flow operation in rural areas reflecting the surrounding environment and moderate
       to low-speed operation in urban and urbanizing areas for traffic flow and for pedestrian and
       bicycle movements.

ODOT also classifies certain state highways as "Expressways." Expressways are complete routes or
segments of existing two-lane and multi-lane highways and planned multi-lane highways that provide
for safe and efficient high speed and high volume traffic movements. Their primary function is to
provide for interurban travel and connections to ports and major recreation areas with minimal
interruptions. A secondary function is to provide for long distance intra-urban travel in metropolitan
areas. In urban areas, speeds are moderate to high. In rural areas, speeds are high. Usually there
are no pedestrian facilities, and bikeways may be separated from the roadway.

The classification of the state highways that pass through and around Klamath Falls is described
below.

   ·   The Dalles-California Highway (US 97) runs north-south through Klamath Falls, connecting
       the city with Bend in the north and connecting to I-5 south of the California border. Through
       Klamath Falls, US 97 is part of the NHS and is designated with a Statewide Level of
       Importance.

   ·   Oregon State Route 140 (OR 140) runs roughly northwest and southeast, skirting the
       southern edge of the city. Called Lake of the Woods northeast of the city, South Klamath
       Falls as it passes south of the city, and Klamath Falls-Lakeview to the southeast, OR 140 is
       also part of the NHS with a Statewide Level of Importance designation. Between its junction
       with OR 66 and its junction with OR 39, OR 140 is also classified as an Expressway.




                                                 31
                                                  City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                           TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                 11/30/10

   ·   Oregon State Route 39 (OR 39), which is called the Klamath Falls-Malin Highway for most of
       its length in Klamath Falls, is also part of the NHS, but it is designated with a Regional, rather
       than a Statewide, Level of Importance.

   ·   Oregon State Route 66 (OR 66), called the Green Springs Highway, runs southwest to
       northeast, and terminates at the junction with US 97 in the southwest corner of Klamath Falls.
       OR66 is classified with District Level of Importance and is not part of the NHS, except where
       it briefly overlaps with OR 140, where it shares OR 140's Statewide Level of Importance and
       NHS designation.

Policy 1B: Land Use and Transportation. Policy 1B applies to all state highways. It is designed to
clarify how ODOT will work with local governments and others to link land use and transportation in
transportation plans, facility and corridor plans, plan amendments, access permitting and project
development. Policy 1B recognizes that state highways serve as the main streets of many
communities and strives to maintain a balance between serving local communities (accessibility) and
the through traveler (mobility). This policy recognizes the role of both the State and local
governments related to the state highway system and calls for a coordinated approach to land use
and transportation planning. The policy also provides for three types of highway segment
designations ­ Special Transportation Areas (STAs), Urban Business Areas (UBAs) and Commercial
Centers ­ that provide tools to implement more compact community development patterns.

Policy 1C: State Highway Freight System. The primary purpose of the State Highway Freight System
is to facilitate efficient and reliable interstate, intrastate, and regional truck movement through a
designated freight system. This freight system, made up of the Interstate Highways and certain
Statewide, Regional and District Highways, the majority of which are on the National Highway
System, includes routes that carry significant tonnage of freight by truck and serve as the primary
interstate and intrastate highway freight connection to ports, intermodal terminals, and urban areas.
Highways included in this designation have higher highway mobility standards than other Statewide
Highways.

As shown on the following map, US 97 and OR 140 in Klamath Falls are classified as Freight Routes,
as is OR 39 south of the junction with OR 140.




                                                  32
                                               City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                        TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                              11/30/10




Policy 1D: Scenic Byways. The Oregon Transportation Commission has designated Scenic Byways
throughout the state on federal, state, and local roads which have exceptional scenic value. As
shown on the following map, the Lake of the Woods highway (OR 140), the small segment of OR 66
that connects OR 140 to US 97, and US 97 south from that junction into California are part of the
"Volcanic Legacy" Scenic Byway, which is designated by the federal government as an "All American
Road." For designated Scenic Byways, ODOT will consider aesthetic and design elements along
with safety and performance considerations in managing and maintaining the roadway and will
develop guidelines for aesthetic and design elements within the public right-of-way.




                                               33
                                                 City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                          TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                11/30/10




Policy 1F: Highway Mobility Standards Access Management Policy. This policy addresses state
highway performance expectations for planning and plan implementation or amendment, as well as
providing guidance for managing access and traffic control systems. For Klamath Falls, this policy
pertains to all state highways (see Policy 1A). Action 1F.1 states that highway mobility standards
apply to all state highway sections; for areas outside of the Portland Metro area, the maximum
volume to capacity ratios for peak hour operating conditions in Table 6 apply. 1F.5 states that within
transportation system plans, where the volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratio is worse than the identified
standards in the OHP and transportation improvements are not planned, the performance standard
for the highway shall be to improve performance as much as feasible and to avoid further
degradation of performance.




                                                 34
                                                  City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                           TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                 11/30/10

The Methodology Memorandum and Existing Conditions Memorandum to be provided in Task 3 of
the TSP update will present the study intersections and corresponding current mobility standards.

Policy 1G: Major Improvements. This policy requires maintaining performance and improving safety
by improving efficiency and management before adding capacity.

Policy 1H: Bypasses. Bypasses are highways designed to maintain or increase mobility for through
traffic, often by providing an alternate route around a downtown, an urban or metropolitan area or an
existing highway. In Klamath Falls, there are two highway segments designated as Bypasses: US 97
from its junction with OR 39 to Klamath Falls city limits, and OR 140 from the junction with OR66 to
the junction with OR 39.

In order for a bypass to work effectively over the long term, local planning and zoning and the local
street network must support the function of the bypass. Local transportation plans and ordinances
should assure that land development patterns in the vicinity of the bypass will not use cul-de-sac or
other interrupted street network patterns which cause reliance on the new facility for a large number
of local trips. In most cases local streets should not directly access the new bypass facility. ODOT
and the local governments must agree on the location of connections to the local street network and
agree that local streets will be disconnected if they negatively affect the through function of the
highway. Local governments and ODOT must agree on the amendment to the TSP or local
transportation plan which incorporates the bypass.

Policy 2B: Off-System Improvements. This policy recognizes that the state may provide financial
assistance to local jurisdictions to make improvements to local transportation systems if the
improvements would provide a cost-effective means of improving the operations of the state highway
system.

Policy 2E: Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). This policy seeks to improve the safety and
efficiency of transportation facilities, and to generally maximize operations in a cost-effective way.
The policy requires coordination with the Oregon Intelligent Transportation Systems Strategic Plan.

Policy 2F: Traffic Safety. This policy emphasizes the state's efforts to improve safety of all users of
the highway system. Action 2F.4 addresses the development and implementation of the Safety
Management System to target resources to sites with the most significant safety issues.

Policy 2G: Rail and Highway Compatibility. This policy seeks to increase safety and transportation
efficiency through the reduction and prevention of conflicts between railroad and highway users.
Actions to address this policy include eliminating at-grade crossings wherever possible, designing
highway projects to avoid at-grade crossings, coordinating highway projects affecting rail crossings
with the ODOT Rail Division and the railroads, and addressing pedestrian and bicycle access when
designing grade-separated crossings.       (See the Oregon Rail Plan review section in this
memorandum for an overview of the existing rail system in Klamath Falls.)

Policy 3A: Classification and Spacing Standards. This policy addresses the location, spacing, and
type of road and street intersections and approach roads on state highways. It includes standards for
each highway classification. The adopted standards can be found in Appendix C of the Oregon
Highway Plan; generally, the minimum access spacing distance increases as either the highway's
importance or posted speed increases. The access management spacing standards established in




                                                  35
                                                               City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                        TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                              11/30/10

the OHP are implemented by OAR 734, Division 51.6 Table 1 illustrates the unsignalized intersection
access spacing standards as they apply to Urban highways of various levels of importance. (Spacing
for at-grade urban expressway intersections is 2,640 feet.)


                      Table 1 Access Spacing Standards for Private and Public Approaches1

    Posted Speed (miles                                      Minimum Space Required (feet)
         per hour)
                                      Statewide                          Regional                              District

             25                          520                                350                                  350

          30 and 35                      720                                425                                  350

          40 and 45                      990                                750                                  500

             50                         1,100                               830                                  550

             55                         1,320                               990                                  700
                      1
                       These access management spacing standards do not apply to approaches in
                      existence prior to April 1, 2000 except as provided in OAR 734-051-0115(1)(c) and 734-
                      051-0125(1)(c).

                      * Measurement of the approach road spacing is from center to center on the same side
                      of the roadway.
Traffic signal spacing standards supersede access management spacing standards for approaches.
For signalized intersections on statewide and regional highways such as US 97, OR 140, and OR 39,
OAR 734-020-470 identifies a desired minimum spacing of ½ mile (2,640 feet) be maintained
between signalized intersections.

Policy 3B: Medians. This policy establishes the state's criteria for the placement of medians. It
includes Action 3B.3 which requires the consideration of non-traversable medians for modernization
of all urban, multi-lane Statewide (NHS) Highways as well as all urban, multi-lane Regional Highways
where posted speeds are 45 mph or greater. The criteria for consideration include:

      ·    Forecasted average daily traffic greater than 28,000 vehicles per day during the 20-year
           planning period;

      ·    A higher-than-average accident rate;

      ·    Pedestrian crossing safety issues; and

      ·    Topographic and alignment issues resulting in inadequate left-turn sight distances.

Policy 3C: Interchange Access Management Areas. This policy addresses management of grade-
separated interchange areas to ensure safe and efficient operation between connecting roadways.
Action items include developing interchange area management plans to protect the function of the
interchange to provide safe and efficient operations between connecting roadways and to minimize
the need for major improvements of existing interchanges. The local jurisdiction's role in access


6
 Oregon Revised Statute (OAR) 734, Division 51, was amended in September 2005 to be consistent with
August 2005 OHP revisions to Policy 1B. Specifically, the spacing standards in OAR 734-051 were amended to
be consistent with the OHP tables in Appendix C, Access Management Standards.




                                                               36
                                                    City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                             TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                   11/30/10

management is stated in Policy 3C as follows: "necessary supporting improvements, such as road
networks, channelization, medians and access control in the interchange management area must be
identified in the local comprehensive plan and committed with an identified funding source, or must
be in place (Action 3C.2)." Access management standards are detailed in Policy 3C and include the
distance required between an interchange and approaches and intersections.

Policy 3D: Deviations. This policy provides the foundation for requests for state highway approach
permits that require deviation(s) from access management standards. Procedures for requesting
deviations are included in OAR 734-051. Action 3D.5 identifies conditions to consider in evaluating
requests for deviations: queuing that increases delays and unsafe operations, pedestrian and bicycle
circulation, traffic controls, local road system requirements, improving connectivity to adjacent
properties or local road system, potential use of channelization, or potential use of nontraversible
medians.

Policy 4A: Efficiency of Freight Movement. This policy emphasizes the need to maintain and improve
the efficiency of freight movement on the state highway system. US 97, OR 140, and a portion of OR
39 are designated State Highway Freight Routes. Action 4A.8 under this policy recognizes that local
truck routes are important linkages in the movement of freight throughout the state and that truck
routes can serve to detour trucks off the state highway system. This action obligates ODOT to
coordinate with local jurisdictions when designating, managing and constructing a project on a local
freight route. The local truck routes are shown in the following graphic.7




7
  This graphic was developed by the Community Development Department in consultation from Public Works and
the City Attorney, but has not been formally adopted.



                                                    37
                                                   City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                            TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                  11/30/10

Policy 4B: Alternative Passenger Modes. This policy encourages the development of alternative
passenger services and systems as part of broader corridor strategies and promotes the
development of alternative passenger transportation services located off the highway system to help
preserve the performance and function of the state highway system.

Policy 4D: Transportation Demand Management. This policy establishes the state's interest in
supporting demand management strategies that reduce peak period single occupant vehicle travel,
thereby improving the flow of traffic on the state highway system.

Policy 4E: Park and Ride Facilities. This policy seeks to maximize the existing transportation system
and passenger capacity by supporting and developing park-and-ride facilities. Basin Transit Service
operates two transit centers in Klamath Falls that function as transfer points for the various bus
routes, but neither of these provides dedicated parking for transit riders.

Policy 5A: Environmental Resources. This policy intends to protect the natural and built environment
­ including air quality, fish and wildlife habitat, migration routes, vegetation, and water resources from
impacts from state highways and ODOT facilities. Impacts to identified natural resources must be
avoided or mitigated by any proposed construction or reconstruction projects on state facilities in
Klamath Falls.


Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan (1995)

The Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan is a modal element of the Oregon Transportation Plan and
provides guidance for planning, design and operation of facilities for bicycle and pedestrian travel.
The plan contains the standards and designs used on state highway projects for these facilities.

The plan includes two parts: the Policy and Action Plan and the Planning, Design, Maintenance, and
Safety part. The policy section provides background information, including relevant state and federal
laws, and contains the goals, actions, and implementation strategies proposed by ODOT to improve
bicycle and pedestrian transportation.

Policies in the first part of the plan state that bikeway and walkway systems will be established on
rural highways by widening shoulders as part of modernization projects, as well as on many
preservation overlays, where warranted. For urban highways, implementation may take place:

·       As part of modernization projects (bike lanes and sidewalks will be included);

·       As part of preservation projects, where minor upgrades can be made;

·       By restriping roads with bike lanes;

·       With minor betterment projects, such as completing short missing segments of sidewalks;

·       As bikeway or walkway modernization projects;

·       By developers as part of permit conditions, where warranted.

Part Two of the plan addresses maintenance and construction issues, and establishes facility design
standards for the following bicycle and pedestrian facilities: on-road bikeways (pp. 66-70), restriping
existing roads with bike lanes (p. 86), walkways (pp. 91-92), multi-use paths (p. 117), signing and



                                                   38
                                                    City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                             TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                   11/30/10

marking (starting p. 143), and street crossings and intersections (crosswalks, raised crosswalks and
raised intersections, p. 111-112; intersections pp. 134-135). The plan section on street crossings
(Section II.5) includes standards and guidance for crosswalks, intersections, medians, and islands
and refuges.

Standard widths for bike lanes and walkways are six feet. Minimum widths are five feet for bike lanes
and walkways, when bike lanes are adjacent to curbs or parking lanes, and four feet for bike lanes
when they are on uncurbed shoulders or in other severely constrained areas. For shoulder
bikeways, recommended for rural highways, the plan refers to Highway Design Manual standards.
Widths should be six feet for roadways with ADT of 400-2000 and eight feet for roadways with ADT
greater than 2000.

The Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan is in the process of being updated. While many new pedestrian and
bicycle treatments have been developed and incorporated into the update, ODOT program staff
report that few design standards for bike and pedestrian facilities will change. However, staff indicate
that standards for rumble strips may change, potentially making the strips "friendlier" to bikes.8 Once
adopted, the updated Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan Design Standards and Guidelines will be
referenced where bicycle or pedestrian facilities are planned as part of improvements to any of the
state-owned facilities in Klamath Falls.


Oregon Rail Plan (2001)

The Oregon Rail Plan is a modal element of the OTP. It is intended to implement the OTP's long-
range vision of a viable freight and passenger rail system in Oregon.

Chapter 1, Rail Policies and Planning, includes federal requirements for rail freight. This chapter
includes a section addressing compliance with Statewide Planning Goals. ODOT's certified State
Agency Coordination (SAC) Program and Oregon Administrative Rules Chapter 31, Division 15
describe the procedures that ODOT will follow when developing and adopting plans to assure that
they comply with the statewide planning goals and are compatible with acknowledged
comprehensive plans. Relevant to a TSP update for the Klamath Falls Urban Area, the stated focus
of ODOT's efforts to establish compatibility with acknowledged comprehensive plans will be at the
facility planning and project planning stages of the planning program. Policy 1 under Freight Rail is
"increase economic opportunities for the State by having a viable and competitive rail system."
Regarding passenger rail policy, the OTP supports intercity rail passenger service as part of a
balanced transportation system. Convenient connections with other modes should integrate
passenger train service into a network linking all areas of the state, nation, and the world.

Chapter 2 is the Freight Element of the Oregon Rail Plan. The element has four major purposes: (1)
describe Oregon's freight rail system in terms of the carriers and the individual properties that make


8
  Note: This information was obtained from ODOT as part of a 2009 document review for the South US 97
Corridor Plan. Staff indicated that new standards were expected to reflect updated standards in
AASHTO's Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, and that these national standards were slated
for update in 2009. (The 1999 edition of the Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities is available at
AASHTO's online bookstore.) ODOT's 2009 Traffic Manual states that: "The Department of
Transportation has adopted the AASHTO publication, Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, to
establish bikeway design and construction standards, to establish traffic control devices guidelines for
bikeways, and recommend illumination standards (6.3 Bicycle Facilities)."



                                                    39
                                                   City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                            TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                  11/30/10

up the state railroad system, (2) describe the commodities transported by rail in Oregon, (3) identify
funding needs and potential funding sources for railroads in Oregon, (4) assess what shippers
require of rail service in Oregon. Burlington Northern and Union Pacific have rail lines running
through Klamath Falls. The two companies share the tracks that run north from Klamath Falls, and
have separate tracks running southeast and southwest on the south side of Klamath Falls.

The Passenger Element is in Chapter 3. Amtrak operates passenger rail through Klamath Falls on
the Coast Starlight route, which connects Seattle, Portland, Eugene, Sacramento, the San Francisco
Bay Area, San Jose, and Los Angeles. The train provides the only direct intercity service to Oregon
communities between Portland and Klamath Falls, and overnight service south to California. The
Coast Starlight is an important element in Oregon's tourism and recreational industries. Sparse
population between Eugene and Klamath Falls is unlikely to support a state-sponsored corridor train
extension, but increasing popularity of the Coast Starlight may eventually require Amtrak to consider
additional through service on the route. Station building improvements and improved passenger
platforms at the Klamath Falls station are needed to meet current and projected passenger usage (p.
108).

There is also daily inter-city bus service from Klamath Falls to Medford, Ashland, Lakeview, Chemult,
and Bend.


Oregon Public Transportation Plan (1997)

The Oregon Public Transportation Plan forms the transit modal plan of the Oregon Transportation
Plan. The vision guiding the Public Transportation Plan is as follows:

    The public transportation plan builds on and begins implementing the OTP's long-range
    vision for public transportation in the State of Oregon. That vision includes:
    ·   A comprehensive, interconnected and dependable public transportation system,
        with stable funding, that provides access and mobility in and between communities
        of Oregon in a convenient, reliable, and safe manner that encourages people to ride
    ·   A public transportation system that provides appropriate service in each area of the
        state, including service in urban areas that is an attractive alternative to the single-
        occupant vehicle, and high-quality, dependable service in suburban, rural, and
        frontier (remote) areas
    ·   A system that enables those who do not drive to meet their daily needs
    ·   A public transportation system that plays a critical role in improving the livability and
        economic prosperity for Oregonians.
The plan contains goals, policies, and strategies relating to the whole of the state's public
transportation system. The plan is intended to provide guidance for ODOT and public transportation
agencies regarding the development of public transportation systems.

Basin Transit Service (BTS) provides bus and trolley service within Klamath Falls. The Basin Transit
Service Transit Development Plan (TDP) is reviewed in a later subsection of this memorandum.
Proposed policies and projects that result from this TSP update process will be reviewed in
consultation with Basin Transit Service for consistency with the TDP and recent BTS planning efforts.




                                                    40
                                                 City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                          TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                11/30/10

Access Management Rule (OAR 734-051)

Oregon Administrative Rule 734-051 defines the State's role in managing access to highway facilities
in order to maintain functional use and safety and to preserve public investment. The provisions in
the OAR apply to all roadways under state jurisdiction within Klamath Falls. The access
management rules include spacing standards for varying types of state roadways.9 It also lists
criteria for granting right of access and approach locations onto state highway facilities.

The access management rule also provides criteria for granting right of access and approach
locations onto state highway facilities (-0080) and for potential deviations from spacing standards (-
0135). Section -0155 identifies when, how and why ODOT will develop access management plans
and interchange area management plans for particular sections of a highway.


Freight Moves the Oregon Economy (1999)

This report summarizes a variety of information about issues and needs surrounding the transport of
freight by roads, rail lines, waterways, aircraft, and pipelines. The document's stated purpose is to
demonstrate the importance of freight to the Oregon economy and identify concerns and needs
regarding the maintenance and enhancement of current and future mobility within the state of
Oregon.

The report describes the US 97 corridor as "the most important north-south corridor for freight
movements east of the Cascade Mountains" and notes that it provides an important alternative for
freight moving between the Willamette Valley and northern California.10 The highways identified in
the OHP as part of the NHS, including US 97 and OR 140, are significant for freight movement. The
importance of freight movement will be a consideration during the Klamath Falls Urban Area TSP
update as it pertains to access to US 97 and OR 140 and how the local roadway system intersects
with Union Pacific and Burlington Northern rail operations.

In addition, Pacific Gas Transmission has natural gas transmission lines that run from the California
border to the Washington border and pass through Klamath Falls, with another line from Klamath
Falls to Medford.

Klamath Falls also has one of seven large (over 500,000 bushels of capacity) grain elevators in the
state where grain is brought in by truck and shipped out by rail, providing an important link between
modes of freight movement.


Oregon Aviation Plan (2007)

The 2007 Oregon Aviation Plan (OAP) defines policies and investment strategies for Oregon's public
use aviation system for the next 20 years. It further refines the goals and policies of the Oregon
Transportation Plan and is part of the OTP. The plan assesses the condition of the existing aviation
infrastructure, the economic benefit of the aviation industry, and the national importance and state


9
  "Spacing Standards" mean Access Management Spacing Standards as set forth in OAR 734-051-0115
and specified in Tables 2, 3, and 4, adopted and made a part of Division 51 rules.
10
   Part II, page 28.



                                                 41
                                                    City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                             TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                   11/30/10

significance of each airport. It also provides an overview of the airports in the system and the
jurisdictional responsibilities at all levels of government for the management, maintenance, operation,
and funding of Oregon's airports. The plan contains policies and recommended actions to be
implemented by Oregon Department of Aviation in coordination with other state and local agencies
and the Federal Aviation Administration.

The OAP categorizes airports based on functional role and service criteria. The Klamath Falls Airport
is classified as a Category I commercial service airport. The significant function of this class of
airport, according to the OAP, is to accommodate scheduled major/national or regional/commuter
commercial air carrier service. Category I airports support some level of scheduled commercial
airline service in addition to a full range of general aviation aircraft. This includes both domestic and
international destinations. A summary of recommended improvements to the airport can be found in
Table 5.19 of the OAP and include constructing new hangars, a full parallel taxiway to Runway 14/32,
and a designated cargo apron with an associated small handling facility. Information specific to the
Klamath Falls Airport can be found in the Individual Airport Report that was developed for the facility
and that is part of the OAP. The Klamath Falls Airport Individual Report describes the location of the
airport as four miles southeast of the city of Klamath Falls with access provided by State Route 97.
The report also describes the history of the airport as a military air base, including the eighteen F-15
aircraft presently based at Klamath Falls for training fighter pilots. Kingsley Field also has 475 fulltime
and 300 part-time personnel assigned to the base, which now trains flight surgeons, optometrists,
and air traffic controllers (p. 19). According to surveys conducted as part of developing the airport
report, users of the airport include those engaged in local business, out-of-town business, recreation,
tourism, and agriculture. Surrounding communities rely on the airport for medical rescue flights, fire
protection, delivery of mail/cargo, and Air National Guard (p. 28). For additional information regarding
services and land uses at the airport, see the Klamath County Rural Transportation System Plan
review (under "Regional Plans") and the Klamath Falls Airport Master Plan review (under "Local
Plans") of this memorandum.


State Transportation Improvement Program (2000-present)

The State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) is the programming and funding document
for transportation projects and programs statewide. The projects and programs undergo a selection
process managed by ODOT Regions or ODOT central offices. The document covers a period of four
years and is updated every two years. Listed below are projects in Klamath County from the current,
adopted STIP from 2008 through 2011, that are funded for FFY 2010 and 2011. A draft STIP for
2010 through 2013 is under development and has not been adopted at this time.

                                  Highway                                                       Year
Section               Route                      Total Cost    Description
                                  Name                                                          (FFY)

                                  KLAMATH                      REALIGN HIGHWAY TO
OR140: BEATTY
                      OR-140      FALLS-         $3,955,000    CORRECT CURVE, IMPROVE 2010
CURVES
                                  LAKEVIEW                     SAFETY & FREIGHT MOBILITY
OR140: BNSF                       KLAMATH
(DAIRY) BRIDGE        OR-140      FALLS-         $2,622,000    REPLACE BRIDGE #02147            2011
REPLACEMENT                       LAKEVIEW




                                                    42
                                            City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                     TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                           11/30/10


                             Highway                                                    Year
Section             Route                Total Cost   Description
                             Name                                                       (FFY)

OR39: ALAMEDA
AVE PARTIAL                  KLAMATH
                    OR-39                $1,658,000   REPLACE BRIDGE #06741             2010
VIADUCT BRIDGE               FALLS-MALIN
#06741 *
OR422:
WILLIAMSON                                            DECK REPLACEMENT. NEW
                    OR-422   CHILOQUIN   $1,113,000                                     2010
RIVER BRIDGE                                          RAILS.
#01959
OR66:GREEN
SPRINGS
INTERCHANGE                  GREEN
                    OR-66                $425,000     PLANNING PROJECT                  2010
AREA                         SPRINGS
MANAGMENT
PLAN*
                                                      DECK OVERLAY; REPAIR
OR39: LINK RIVER             KLAMATH                  CRACKED
BRIDGE #01579       OR-39    FALLS-      $231,000     SUPERSTRUCTURE &                  2010
(KLAMATH FALLS)*             LAKEVIEW                 SUBSTRUCTURE BRIDGE
                                                      01579
OR39: MATNEY -                                        PAVEMENT PRESERVATION,
                             KLAMATH
MERRIL N CITY       OR-39                $629,000     T-UP INTERSECTION, ADD            2010
                             FALLS-MALIN
LIMITS                                                RIGHT TURN DECEL LANE
                                                      INSTALL COMMUNICATION
KLAMATH FALLS
                             KLAMATH                  INFRASTRUCTURE &
ADAPTIVE SIGNAL     OR-39                $75,000                                        2010
                             FALLS-MALIN              SOFTWARE FOR SIGNAL
TIMING*
                                                      TIMING SYSTEM
OR140 @                      SOUTH                    INTERSECTION
WASHBURN WAY        OR-140   KLAMATH     $50,000      MODERNIZATION                     2010
(KLAMATH FALLS)*             FALLS                    IMPROVEMENT
OR39 @ GETTLE                KLAMATH                  INTERSECTION
                    OR-39                $44,000                                        2010
(KLAMATH FALLS)*             FALLS-MALIN              IMPROVEMENT
                                                      PAVEMENT PRESERVATION;
US97: MISSISSIPPI
                             THE DALLES-              REPLACE GUARDRAIL &
DR - CRESCENT       US-97                $865,000                               2010
                             CALIFORNIA               SIGNS; INSTALL OR REPLACE
RANGER STATION
                                                      CURBS & SIDEWALKS
                                                      DEVELOP PROJECT TO
US97: HAGELSTEIN
                             THE DALLES-              WIDEN SHOULDERS, ADD
PARK - N SHADY   US-97                   $1,606,000                                     2010
                             CALIFORNIA               ROCKFALL PROTECTION &
PINE
                                                      DECEL LANE
REGION 4 CHIP
                                                      CHIP SEAL PRESERVATION
SEAL PROJECTS                VARIOUS
                                         $2,800,000   PROJECTS ON OR58 MP70-86 2010
ON OR58 & US97               HIGHWAYS
                                                      & US97 MP195-240
HWYS
OR39: 6TH ST                 KLAMATH
                    OR-39                $250,000     PAVEMENT PRESERVATION             2010
(AUSTIN AVE) -               FALLS-MALIN



                                            43
                                                 City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                          TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                11/30/10


                                Highway                                                      Year
Section             Route                     Total Cost   Description
                                Name                                                         (FFY)

MERRILL/LAKEVIE
W JCT*
OR140: CURVE                    KLAMATH
CORRECTIONS         OR-140      FALLS-        $800,000     CURVE CORRECTIONS                 2010
(MP43-45)                       LAKEVIEW
                                                           BIKE & PEDESTRIAN
BONANZA SAFE                    DAIRY-
                    OR-70                     $391,000     IMPROVEMENTS AND                  2010
WALK PROJECT                    BONANZA
                                                           TRAFFIC CALMING
Source: http://highway.odot.state.or.us/cf/STIPSrch/index.cfm

* Projects within the Klamath Falls UGB.




                                                 44
                                               City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                        TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                              11/30/10


REGIONAL AND COUNTY PLANS

Klamath County Comprehensive Plan (2010)

The Klamath County Comprehensive Plan was originally adopted in 1984 and last updated in
January 2010. The Comprehensive Plan includes general transportation policies in the Goal 12
chapter, but more detailed transportation policies are included in the Klamath County Rural
Transportation System Plan, reviewed separately in this memorandum. Relevant policies from the
Comprehensive Plan are listed below by Goal.

       Goal 2 ­ Land Use:

       13. POLICY: The County shall encourage commercial/industrial development and
       identify potential industrial and commercial sites for uses that are compatible and
       related to airports in Klamath County.

       Implementation: Lands proposed for rezoning that lay within the
       Airport/Transportation Development Zone will be restricted to commercial and
       industrial development. If land proposed for application of this development zone is
       designated for agricultural/forestry use, an exception to the applicable Statewide
       Planning Goals, through the plan amendment process, will be required.




                                               45
                                          City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                   TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                         11/30/10

Goal 10 ­ Housing:

11. POLICY: The County will encourage the use of planned unit development (PUDs)
and other forms of clustered housing that introduce innovative and cost-effective
approaches to siting, block layout, design and landscaping.

Goal 11 ­ Public Facilities:

1. POLICY: In order to achieve the requirements of State-wide Planning Goal 11, the
County shall, in cooperation with the City of Klamath Falls, prepare and adopt a public
facilities plan describing the water, sewer, transportation, and other urban facilities
and services which are to support land uses within the Klamath Falls UGB.

2. POLICY: The County may encourage the development of a public facility or service
in an urbanizable area only when there is provision for the coordinated development
of all other urban facilities and services appropriate to the area.

Goal 12 ­ Transportation:

4. POLICY: The County shall encourage the extension of rail lines to serve major
industrial developments, provided that such rail lines do not disrupt auto traffic or
transport hazardous cargoes through residential areas.

5. POLICY: The width and spacing of driveways along arterials shall be restricted.
Where necessary, turning lanes cut out of abutting property or the construction of
parallel frontage roads shall be required, if adequately proven to be necessary by the
governing body or agency.

Implementation: The Land Development Code establishes development standards
regulating ingress and egress of land uses abutting major arterials.

6. POLICY: Higher density residential development should when feasible, be located
within walking distance (1,000 feet to one quarter mile) of major arterials.

Implementation: The land use plan should locate, when feasible, higher density
residential development near major arterials, and the Land Development Code shall
require pedestrian walkway along future streets.

7. POLICY: The County shall encourage local governments to improve the
convenience and safety of pedestrian and bicycle transportation.

8. POLICY: The Country shall encourage existing airports to be maintained and
improved, and encourage the development of additional airports as needed.

10. POLICY: Height and use of structures within the approach and departure zones
designated for the Klamath Falls Municipal Airport in the l976 Airport Master Plan
shall be limited (Arnold Thompson Associates, Inc., Master Plan, Klamath Falls
Municipal Airport, April, l976); specifically:

A. The height of all structures within the airport approach and departure zones shall
be limited.



                                          46
                                                   City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                            TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                  11/30/10

        B. All residential and heavy-use (i.e., uses where large numbers of people
        congregate) land uses within the airport approach safety zones shall be restricted or
        prohibited.

        C. Uses which would create interference with or hazards to aviation shall be
        prohibited.

        11. POLICY: A safe, convenient and economic transportation system, adequate to
        serve anticipated growth, shall be developed that will minimize adverse social,
        economic and environmental impacts and costs of the transportation systems.

        Goal 14 ­ Urbanization:

        3. POLICY: During partitioning or subdividing of urban land, the County shall
        encourage parcels of adequate dimension so as to maximize the utility of land
        resources and enable the logical and efficient extension of services to such parcels.

        Implementation: The land use plan designates residential densities that follow a
        hierarchy of high to low densities from central to outer areas.

Updated TSP goals and policies will need to be found consistent with County transportation
goals and policies that pertain to the Klamath Falls Urban Area.


Klamath County Rural Transportation System Plan (2010)

The Klamath County Rural Transportation System Plan ("County TSP") provides for transportation
development in the rural areas of the County. The planning area for the Klamath County TSP is
generally outside the Klamath Falls Urban Growth Boundary.11 The plan includes transportation
issues related to the incorporated cities of Chiloquin, Bonanza, Merrill and Malin; the TSP also
addresses proposed capital investments in rural communities. Overall, the TSP includes
transportation issues related to state and county facilities, and not urban facilities.

Chapter 3 identifies major county roadways and briefly describes their current use and condition;
appendices A, B, and C provide detailed information about county roads and their current condition,
including paving and presence of certain features such as sidewalks. Chapter 3 notes that all of the
most heavily used county roads identified have one lane in each direction, that none have curbs,
sidewalks or parking, and that traffic controls are stop signs.

Chapter 3 also identifies dedicated bike facilities in the county, including the State Park Trail, a paved
"Rails to Trails" corridor extending east from Klamath Falls to the rural community of Olene, utilizing
the old railroad right-of-way.

The County TSP includes a description of the Klamath Falls Airport (Kingsley Field). The Airport
offers commercial air service (7 percent of operations), general aviation services (56 percent), air taxi



11
   The County TSP includes county roadways that traverse the Klamath Falls Urban Area, as well as the
city limits. The updated City TSP will need to be consistent with the County's policies, roadway
classifications, and planned improvements for these facilities.



                                                   47
                                                  City of Klamath Falls Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                           TM #1 Plans and Policy Review
                                                                                                 11/30/10

services (7 percent), and also is home to the Oregon Air National Guard 173rd Fighter Wing (30
percent). Land uses adjacent to the airport include:

   ·   An industrial park developed by Klamath Economic Development group

   ·   A new Business Park adjacent to the airfield, developed by the airport on airport property

   ·   Agricultural lands

   ·   Minor residential development

The County TSP also notes that both Bel-Tec and Qwest have fiber optic lines in Klamath County,
and that Bel-Tec has two lines that are entirely within the City of Klamath Falls. One hub is located at
403 Pine Street, and the other hub is located at the Sheriff's Office on Vandenberg Road.

Chapter 7 includes sections addressing roads, transit, bicycle and pedestrian facilities. The Roadway
Element includes a map of roadway functional classification around Klamath Falls, reproduced
below, and a description of each classification.




The purpose and management objectives of each of these classifications are summarized below.



                                                  48
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Washburn Way -- S 6th St                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10541101
 CITY/STATE: Klamath Falls, OR                                                                                         DATE: 9/30/2010
                    600 0.97 585                          Peak-Hour: 4:20 PM -- 5:20 PM                                 3.7       2.6

                     24 475 101
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 4.4 1.0

       672    85                     95    723
                                                                                                           3.3   3.5                      2.1      2.6
       0.78   594       0.95        373   0.92
                                                                                                                 2.2                      3.5
       1053   374                   255    963
                                                                                                           2.7   3.2                      1.6      2.0

                    273 407 268
                                                                                                                        3.3 2.5 1.9

                    1104 0.87 948
                                                                                                                        3.4       2.5



                          4                                                                                             1     1   0


                                                                                                                 0                         0

              5                       4                                                                          0                         0

                                                                                                                 0                         0


                          1                                                                                             0     0   0




 5-Min Count       Washburn Way                      Washburn Way                 S 6th St                     S 6th St
     Period         (Northbound)                      (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At Left Thru Right                                                                                                            Total
                                    U            Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
     4:00 PM    35    51      23    0             10    30     2     0     8     34      18     0    30       40       7      0         288
     4:05 PM    21    29      31    0             14    30     2     0    10     36      42     0    13       30       6      0         264
     4:10 PM    25    28      20    0              8    46     2     0     4     48      30     0    32       39       8      0         290
     4:15 PM    36    36      24    0             10    34     0     0     6     28      17     0    16       33       2      0         242
     4:20 PM    24    29      26    0              7    37     3     0    11     45      32     0    14       40       2      0         270
     4:25 PM    29    52      27    0              7    55     3     0     4     41      32     0    28       32       5      0         315
     4:30 PM    21    22      17    0              8    37     0     0     8     34      32     0    30       35       8      0         252
     4:35 PM    12    34      28    0              5    43     1     0     5     56      26     1    14       37      14      0         276
     4:40 PM    32    26      15    0              5    27     7     0     6     35      28     0    11       21       1      0         214
     4:45 PM    15    34      21    0              7    55     3     0     8     45      18     1    28       32       5      0         272
     4:50 PM    20    41      19    0              8    37     0     0     6     62      42     0    30       35       8      0         308
     4:55 PM    28    27      24    0              5    43     1     0     9     47      22     0    14       37      14      0         271             3262
     5:00 PM    27    29      32    0             12    51     1     0     3     33      23     0    25       29       8      0         273             3247
     5:05 PM    21    42      16    0             13    32     1     0     9     64      40     0    28       22      11      0         299             3282
     5:10 PM    17    26      24    0             10    20     2     0     6     84      44     0    12       32      14      0         291             3283
     5:15 PM    27    45      19    0             14    38     2     0     8     48      35     0    21       21       5      0         283             3324
     5:20 PM    12    37      15    0             11    33     1     0     8     36      19     0    29       30       6      0         237             3291
     5:25 PM    31    25      14    0             11    24     4     0     5     44      23     0    22       33      11      0         247             3223
     5:30 PM    15    38      12    0              6    42     4     0     3     31      19     0    20       33       9      0         232             3203
     5:35 PM    27    25      19    0             14    27     1     0     5     43      13     0    13       33       8      0         228             3155
     5:40 PM    17    30      12    0              9    34     5     0    14     28      19     0    24       36       6      0         234             3175
     5:45 PM    19    28       9    0              7    33     0     0     3     28      23     1    21       28       4      0         204             3107
     5:50 PM    16    32      15    0             10    33     6     0     9     19      17     0    26       13       5      0         201             3000
     5:55 PM    19    32      10    0              5    28     3     0     1     29      23     0    14       31      12      0         207             2936
 Peak 15-Min             Northbound                       Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles 260   452    236     0            148   360    20     0    92    784    476      0   244      300    120       0                 3492
 Heavy Trucks    4     8      12                   0    16     0           8     12      16           0        8       0                         84
  Pedestrians          0                                 8                       12                            4                                 24
   Bicycles      0     0       0                   0     0     0           0      0       0           0        0       0                          0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/13/2010 8:04 AM                                               SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Altamont Dr -- S 6th St                                                                                         QC JOB #: 10541115
 CITY/STATE: Klamath Falls, OR                                                                                             DATE: 9/30/2010
                    30 0.65 24                                Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                 16.7       8.3

                      4    15    11
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                            50.0 6.7 18.2

       812    12                        2    826
                                                                                                              2.5   16.7                       0.0      3.0
       0.83   873         0.89        667   0.87
                                                                                                                    1.5                        2.1
       1100   215                     157   1076
                                                                                                              1.7   1.9                        7.0      2.2

                    141 10 192
                                                                                                                            2.8 0.0 4.7

                    387 0.86 343
                                                                                                                            4.1        3.8



                           18                                                                                                0     0   0


                                                                                                                    0                           0

              0                         0                                                                           0                           0

                                                                                                                    0                           0


                           0                                                                                                 0     0   0




 5-Min Count               Altamont Dr                     Altamont Dr               S 6th St                     S 6th St
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At Left                                                                                                                            Total
                           Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right     U   Left Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                     Totals
     4:00 PM    14           1      11    0          2       1      0     0     0   63      15     0    18       51       0        0         176
     4:05 PM    10           1      10    0          0       0      0     0     1   66      13     0    16       71       0        0         188
     4:10 PM    13           0      16    0          0       2      2     0     0   67      15     0    15       74       0        0         204
     4:15 PM    11           0      12    0          2       1      0     0     1   50      16     0    10       71       0        0         174
     4:20 PM    16           2       9    0          3       2      3     0     1   62      12     0    13       63       0        0         186
     4:25 PM    16           1       7    0          1       0      0     0     1   63      20     0    16       46       0        0         171
     4:30 PM    13           0       7    0          1       0      0     0     0   57      23     0    17       55       0        0         173
     4:35 PM    12           0      16    0          0       0      1     0     2   74      19     0    16       57       1        0         198
     4:40 PM     6           0      18    0          0       3      0     0     0   74      12     0    11       48       0        0         172
     4:45 PM    13           0      12    0          2       0      2     0     1   58       9     0    19       66       0        0         182
     4:50 PM    14           1      18    0          1       1      0     0     2   80      13     0     8       67       0        0         205
     4:55 PM    11           3      18    0          1       0      0     0     2   59      23     0    10       43       1        0         171             2200
     5:00 PM    10           2      14    0          2       3      0     0     0   66      22     0    16       67       0        0         202             2226
     5:05 PM    11           1      22    0          2       3      1     0     0   87      18     0    13       57       0        0         215             2253
     5:10 PM    14           0      20    0          0       1      0     0     2  104      20     0    19       48       0        0         228             2277
     5:15 PM    12           1      20    0          0       0      0     0     2   83      17     0    11       49       0        0         195             2298
     5:20 PM    11           0      11    0          2       4      0     0     1   58      20     0     8       56       0        0         171             2283
     5:25 PM    14           2      16    0          0       0      0     0     0   73      19     0     9       54       0        0         187             2299
     5:30 PM     8           2      16    0          1       0      0     0     0   50      16     0    12       54       0        0         159             2285
     5:35 PM     4           1       8    0          0       1      0     0     0   70      15     0    11       54       0        0         164             2251
     5:40 PM     7           0       4    0          1       1      0     0     1   56      13     0    11       54       0        0         148             2227
     5:45 PM    10           0      16    0          1       0      1     0     0   60      20     0    15       53       0        0         176             2221
     5:50 PM    10           0       5    0          2       1      0     0     1   56      23     0    13       38       0        0         149             2165
     5:55 PM     7           0      11    0          0       0      0     0     0   61      11     0     7       40       0        0         137             2131
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound              Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates    Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right     U   Left Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles 140          12    224     0         16      28      4     0     8 1028    240      0   192      688       0        0                 2580
 Heavy Trucks    0           0      12               0       0      0           4   16       4           0        8       0                           44
  Pedestrians                0                              24                       0                            0                                   24
   Bicycles      0           0       0               0       0      0           0    0       0           0        0       0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/13/2010 2:06 PM                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S 6th St -- OR 39                                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10541107
 CITY/STATE: Klamath Falls, OR                                                                                                DATE: 9/30/2010
                      706 0.88 413                                 Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                               2.5       4.1

                      234      0     472
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                               3.0 0.0 2.3

       1007    166                         247   1020
                                                                                                                  2.3   0.6                      6.5      3.1
        0.83   1079           0.90         773   0.92
                                                                                                                        2.3                      2.1
       1245    0                             0   1551
                                                                                                                  2.1   0.0                      0.0      2.3

                          0    0      0
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                          0   0.00    0
                                                                                                                               0.0       0.0



                               5                                                                                               0     0   0


                                                                                                                        0                         0

               0                             0                                                                          0                         0

                                                                                                                        0                         0


                               0                                                                                               0     0   0




 5-Min Count                     S 6th St                         S 6th St                OR 39                       OR 39
     Period                   (Northbound)                     (Southbound)            (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                   Left        Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
     4:00 PM         0           0       0    0          35       0      17   0    13   78      0      0     0       53     18       0         214
     4:05 PM         0           0       0    0          19       0      18   0    10   83      0      0     0       75     19       0         224
     4:10 PM         0           0       0    0          36       0      14   0    15   66      0      0     0       77     17       0         225
     4:15 PM         0           0       0    0          17       0      17   0    16   73      0      0     0       72     15       0         210
     4:20 PM         0           0       0    0          39       0      21   0    10   70      0      0     0       57     18       0         215
     4:25 PM         0           0       0    0          25       0      23   0    18   75      0      0     0       51     23       0         215
     4:30 PM         0           0       0    0          21       0      17   0    13   64      0      0     0       55     17       0         187
     4:35 PM         0           0       0    0          43       0      22   0    13   78      0      0     0       63     21       0         240
     4:40 PM         0           0       0    0          50       0      15   0    13   86      0      0     0       62     24       0         250
     4:45 PM         0           0       0    0          33       0      19   0    10   97      0      0     0       71     17       0         247
     4:50 PM         0           0       0    0          37       0      22   0    16   83      0      0     0       60     20       0         238
     4:55 PM         0           0       0    0          34       0      14   0     9   73      0      0     0       61     23       0         214             2679
     5:00 PM         0           0       0    0          44       0      15   0    13   85      0      0     0       68     23       0         248             2713
     5:05 PM         0           0       0    0          34       0      27   0    15  106      0      0     0       79     23       0         284             2773
     5:10 PM         0           0       0    0          38       0      24   0    20  106      0      0     0       58     19       0         265             2813
     5:15 PM         0           0       0    0          45       0      32   0    13  113      0      0     0       54     15       0         272             2875
     5:20 PM         0           0       0    0          48       0      14   0    16  101      0      0     0       60     17       0         256             2916
     5:25 PM         0           0       0    0          32       0      17   0     9   74      0      0     0       66     24       0         222             2923
     5:30 PM         0           0       0    0          34       0      13   0    19   77      0      0     0       71     21       0         235             2971
     5:35 PM         0           0       0    0          29       0      17   0    13   69      0      0     0       70     30       0         228             2959
     5:40 PM         0           0       0    0          35       0      17   0    13   66      0      0     0       62     18       0         211             2920
     5:45 PM         0           0       0    0          28       0      24   0    15   80      0      0     0       64      7       0         218             2891
     5:50 PM         0           0       0    0          25       0      10   0    12   75      0      0     0       48     15       0         185             2838
     5:55 PM         0           0       0    0          29       0      14   0     6   68      0      0     0       48     18       0         183             2807
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                      Southbound              Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates        Left        Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       0           0       0    0         468       0    332    0   192 1300      0      0     0      764   228        0                 3284
 Heavy Trucks        0           0       0                8       0      12         4   28      0            0       12     12                          76
  Pedestrians                    0                                4                      0                            0                                  4
   Bicycles           0          0       0                0       0       0         0    0      0            0        0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/13/2010 8:04 AM                                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Homedale St -- S 6th St (OR 39)                                                                                      QC JOB #: 10274309
 CITY/STATE: Klamath Falls, OR                                                                                                  DATE: 8/7/2007
                      194 0.80 194                             Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                     2.6       2.6

                      48    86    60
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                                 2.1 4.7 0.0

       777    57                        35    689
                                                                                                                   4.8    0.0                      2.9      4.9
       0.94   1053         0.94        583   0.94
                                                                                                                          2.9                      5.3
       1319   209                       71   1174
                                                                                                                   2.7    1.9                      2.8      2.8

                      146 102 61
                                                                                                                                 3.4 3.9 3.3

                      366 0.86 309
                                                                                                                                 2.7       3.6



                            2




              0                          0




                            3




15-Min Count               Homedale St                      Homedale St              S 6th St (OR 39)              S 6th St (OR 39)
   Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                   Left     Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left     Thru Right       U   Left     Thru Right        U                     Totals
   4:00 PM          45       25    23         0      24      14    12     0    14      227      49      0    23      170       8       0         634
   4:15 PM          45       27    28         0      14      21     6     0    23      235      37      0    18      162      11       0         627
   4:30 PM          36       26    11         0      14      13    14     0    10      250      53      0    14      153      12       0         606
   4:45 PM          41       18    20         0       9      22     8     0    20      259      41      0    18      155       8       0         619             2486
   5:00 PM          26       22    11         0      23      27    15     0    19      258      60      0    11      143       5       0         620             2472
   5:15 PM          43       36    19         0      14      24    11     0     8      286      55      0    28      132      10       0         666             2511
   5:30 PM          39       22    20         0      17      15     9     0     9      252      47      0    22      132      11       0         595             2500
   5:45 PM          42       18    22         0      18      24    12     0    20      195      37      0    20      139       4       0         551             2432




 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                        Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates    Left        Thru Right     U         Left   Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U          Left    Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles 172         144      76    0          56     96    44     0     32 1144    220    0          112     528     40    0                      2664
 Heavy Trucks    0          12       4                0      4     4            0   20      8                 0      12      4                            68
  Pedestrians                8                               0                       0                                0                                    8
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/28/2010 8:43 AM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
