                               Dundee
Transportation System Plan


                                          Update Volume 2

     Prepared for




      Prepared by


In association with   Angelo Planning Group
                      December 2014
Volume	2	Contents	
Volume 2 of the TSP includes all background memos and technical data that was the basis for the
Dundee TSP Update.

Memo 1: Public Involvement Plan

Memo 2: Background Document Review

Memo 3: Goals, Objectives, & Evaluation Criteria

Memo 4: Existing Conditions

Memo 5: Future Forecasting

Memo 6: Future Needs Analysis

Memo 7: Stakeholder Interviews #1

Memo 8: Alternatives Evaluation

Memo 9: Stakeholder Interviews #2

Memo 10: Implementing Ordinances

Memo 11: Finance Program

Memo 12: Transportation Standards
                          DRAFT	  MEMORANDUM	  #1	  

DATE:               December 28, 2011

TO:                 Dundee TSP Update Project Management Team

FROM:               Carl Springer, P.E., DKS Associates
                    Ray Delahanty, DKS Associates

SUBJECT:            Dundee Transportation System Plan Update
                    Public Involvement Plan


Project	  Purpose	  and	  Overview	  
The City of Dundee is undertaking an update to its Transportation System Plan (TSP). The
TSP provides guidance for the City, as well as partner agencies and other local stakeholders,
about current and future transportation needs, conditions, and proposed improvements. The
City’s current TSP dates from 2003, and this update will address updated land use
assumptions, new transportation assumptions from the Newberg-Dundee Bypass project,
and other new and/or amended federal, state, and local plans, policies, and regulations.

Key	  Issues	  
Key transportation planning objectives and issues identified to date include:

     •    Build upon and incorporate the ideas from previous small-area transportation plans,
          such as the Main Street Refinement Plan (2006) and the Riverfront District Master
          Plan (2010).
     •    Establish a new 2010 TSP baseline and a new 2035 planning horizon.
     •    Apply the regional traffic model developed by the Oregon Department of
          Transportation (ODOT)’s Transportation Planning and Analysis Unit (TPAU).
     •    Address compliance with new and amended federal, state, and local plans, policies,
          and regulations including the Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP), the state
          Transportation Planning Rule (TPR), the Oregon Highway Plan (OHP), and the
          Oregon Greenhouse Gas Reduction Initiative.
     •    Identify potential new funding sources for the transportation system.
     •    Study potential changes to existing Dundee street classifications and cross-sections.




                                              Public Involvement Plan            Page 1
                             Dundee Transportation System Plan Update      December 28, 2011

The	  Role	  of	  Public	  Involvement	  
Engaging Dundee’s citizens and businesses on these and other key issues will be vitally
important to the success of the TSP update process. The purpose of this Public Involvement
Plan (PIP) is to ensure that the TSP update has broad community support by doing the
following:

    •    Inform and educate stakeholders and the public so they can understand the TSP
         process and regulatory framework, and can provide constructive input throughout
         the process.
    •    Form a Project Advisory Committee (PAC) to directly engage a broad range of
         community and governmental stakeholders, including key technical, resident, and
         business interest and perspectives.
    •    Develop a key stakeholder roster representing key interest groups such as downtown
         businesses, neighborhood groups, and the development community. Conduct a
         series of stakeholder interviews to identify specific transportation issues, needs, and
         possible solutions and to evaluate alternatives once they have been developed.
    •    Engage the broader community by holding up to three community events to provide
         information and gather input during the alternatives analysis and to review and
         comment on the draft TSP update.
    •    Develop a project website with monthly updates to provide meeting and project
         information to the general public and local media.


Project	  Advisory	  Committee	  (PAC)	  
This group will assist the Project Management Team (PMT) and local decision makers in
identifying and addressing community issues throughout the planning effort. At major
milestones they will be asked to review the technical work and seek consensus-based
recommendations that balance the various community interests and accomplish the
objectives of the update process. PAC members will also act as liaisons to the community to
help inform constituents about the process and encourage their participation in community
outreach events and meetings. Agency technical staff representatives will provide oversight
and assistance with interagency coordination, assuring consistency between overlapping
plans.

The PAC is expected to represent a range of interest groups, potentially including but not
limited to:

    •    The City of Dundee
    •    The Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT)
    •    Dundee Fire Department
    •    Newberg School District

                                                 Public Involvement Plan         Page 2
                          Dundee Transportation System Plan Update       December 28, 2011

    •   Chehalem Valley Transit
    •   Yamhill County Road Division

It is expected that the group will meet six times over the course of the project. The City of
Dundee will coordinate the formation of the PAC.


Community	  Meetings	  
The following public involvement tasks are intended to bring a larger and more inclusive set
of participants into the TSP update planning process.

Stakeholder	  Interviews	  
The consultant will hold interviews with up to ten (10) stakeholders or stakeholder groups as
identified by the City. The interviews will be conducted in two phases, both during Task 5,
to identify transportation planning issues and to review and discuss alternative solutions to
these issues. Stakeholders will include concerned citizens, business owners, and developers
among others. Stakeholders or groups should also include any organized groups that
represent low-income, minority, or other potentially disadvantaged populations, consistent
with Oregon Title VI Outreach requirements. Other stakeholders could include historic
preservation advocates or bicycle and pedestrian advocates. The list may be modified to
include other potential stakeholders based on early input from City staff and consultant
team.

Community	  Events	  
Up to three community events will be conducted for this project. An open house format will
be used for each, and City and Consultant staff will cooperatively plan and facilitate the
events. Objectives for the three events are as follows:

Community	  Event	  #1	  
Present an overview of the project purpose and the findings from Technical Memoranda #1
through #6, including existing and future conditions, and preliminary land use and
transportation alternatives. Provide written handouts, display boards, and/or other media.
Seek input on the goals and objectives of the plan, as well as suggestions for transportation
system alternatives to be considered in subsequent technical memoranda and the TSP.

Community	  Event	  #2	  
Present an overview of the alternatives evaluation and potential recommendations for
system improvements using a combination of written materials, display boards, and/or other
media. Seek input on alternatives evaluation and recommendations.

Community	  Event	  #3	  
Present an overview of the Draft TSP using a combination of written materials, display
boards, and/or other media, and seek feedback for the recommended TSP.

                                            Public Involvement Plan             Page 3
                                Dundee Transportation System Plan Update          December 28, 2011

Additional	  Community	  Outreach	  
City staff may facilitate additional outreach meetings at local gathering places and with local
community groups throughout the process.


Public	  Information	  

Website	  
The consultant team will develop and maintain a project Website dedicated to the TSP
update. It will include key project information, including a brief overview of the project,
meeting dates and summaries, other public involvement opportunities, and project materials.
The Website will also provide an opportunity for public comments and questions. The
Website will be updated regularly to include new project materials as well as responses to
frequently asked questions.

News	  Releases	  and	  Articles	  
News releases will be drafted by the consultant team and issued at key points in the process,
particularly in advance of community meetings. City staff will provide these releases to the
local media, and City staff and consultants will respond to questions and requests from local
media representatives for comments or information as needed.

Mailings	  and	  Flyers	  
Meeting information mailers will be developed prior to each public event. City staff will
develop and distribute the mailers with input from the consultant. In addition, City staff will
develop flyers to be distributed at several locations within the City and the planning area.


Tasks	  and	  Responsibilities	  
            Task                                     Description                               PI Lead
Public Involvement Plan             Prepare a detailed plan outlining stakeholder
                                    outreach methods, advertisement of meetings,
                                                                                        DKS
                                    distribution of work products, workshop format,
                                    and roles and responsibilities.
                                    Comment on and suggest refinements to Plan.         City
Project Website                     Prepare Website content, graphics, layout and
                                    information. Initial content should include a
                                    planning process description, schedule,
                                    opportunities for involvement, and contact
                                                                                        DKS
                                    information. Regular updates will include answers
                                    to frequently-asked questions and current
                                    technical and process information, including
                                    meeting notices, summaries, maps, and memos.
                                    Provide link from project Website to City

                                                   Public Involvement Plan                Page 4
                         Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                December 28, 2011

         Task                                  Description                                 PI Lead
                             Website.
                             Review content before posting to Website.
                                                                                    City and ODOT
PAC Meetings                 Develop PAC roster. Form PAC. Provide
                             meeting logistics and notification. Distribute         City
                             meeting materials.
                             Review PAC roster. Facilitate meetings. Lead
                             presentations. Prepare information and display         DKS
                             materials, agendas, summaries, and graphics.
Stakeholder Interviews       Identify up to 10 stakeholders or stakeholder
                             groups to be interviewed during two sets of            City
                             stakeholder interviews during the project (Task
                             5).
                             Coordinate interviews with stakeholders and/or
                             stakeholder groups. Work with consultant to            City
                             schedule meetings and provide any needed
                             materials to interviewees in advance.
                             Review stakeholder interview roster. Conduct
                             interviews. Prepare written summaries of
                                                                                    DKS
                             individual interviews as well as an overall
                             summary.
Community Events             Coordinate meeting logistics and set-up. Provide
                             staff. Distribute/mail meeting notification
                                                                                    City
                             information and leave-behinds. Co-facilitate
                             meeting discussions.
                             Prepare meeting notification materials for
                             distribution. Develop meeting format strategy.
                             Prepare handouts, PowerPoint presentation (as
                             needed), and content for display materials.            DKS
                             Prepare sign-in sheets and comment cards.
                             Provide staff. Co-facilitate meeting discussions.
Additional Community         Coordinate and facilitate individual meetings at
Outreach                     local gathering places and/or with community
                                                                                    City
                             groups as needed to supplement scheduled
                             community events. Distribute project materials.
                             Respond to questions during meetings. Prepare
                             brief summary of results.
Media Updates                Draft and issue media releases approximately           DKS
                             monthly.
                             Distribute media updates and act as project            City
                             contact to the media.




                                             Public Involvement Plan                  Page 5
                        Dundee Transportation System Plan Update        December 28, 2011

Compliance	  with	  Title	  VI	  Outreach	  Requirements	  
Implementation of this Public Involvement Plan will meet requirements and guidance found
in ODOT’s Title VI (1964 Civil Rights Act) Plan. Specifically, Title VI identifies measures to
reach and solicit comments from disadvantaged populations within a community. Although
Dundee has relatively limited concentrations of minorities and low-income residents, these
populations are present throughout the city.

Based on 2000 census data, the racial makeup of the city was about 92% Caucasian with
about 8% of the population classified as Hispanic. This is a higher percentage of Caucasian
and lower percentages of nearly all other ethnic groups compared to Oregon as a whole.

Approximately 6.6% of individuals in the city were below the poverty line in 2000, compared
to 7.6% for the state as a whole. Though over a decade old, the 2000 figures are still
considered relatively accurate, although poverty across the state can be assumed to have
increased as a result of the recent recession.

Outreach to low-income and minority populations will be addressed through the following
means:

    •   Make an effort to identify and include low-income and/or minority community
        members to include on the Project Advisory Committee (PAC) and/or as
        stakeholders to be interviewed.
    •   Use a variety of methods of communication as described in the sections above, most
        of which are accessible to minority and low-income residents.
    •   Notify agencies that work with low-income and minority populations about
        opportunities for public involvement.
    •   Notify representatives from Native American tribes in the region such as the
        Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde, Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians,
        Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs, Clatsop-Nehalem Confederated Tribes, and
        the Chinook Indian Nation.
    •   Hold meetings in places that are accessible by transit, walking, or bicycling.
    •   The City will offer ADA assistance (e.g. accessibility, hearing assistance) and
        translation services as needed at meetings, given prior notice.




                                             Public Involvement Plan           Page 6
                                                    	  
                                 MEMORANDUM	  #2	  

DATE:              January 27, 2012

TO:                Dundee TSP Update Project Management Team

FROM:              Darci Rudzinski, AICP, Angelo Planning Group
                   Shayna Rehberg, AICP, Angelo Planning Group

SUBJECT:           Dundee Transportation System Plan Update
                   Background Document Review


Overview	  
This memorandum summarizes the planning documents, policies, and regulations that are
applicable to the City of Dundee Transportation System Plan (TSP) update. The City’s
current TSP will serve as the foundation for the update process, upon which new
information obtained from system analysis and stakeholder input will be applied to address
changing transportation needs through the year 2035, resulting in a new and updated TSP.
Proposed new strategies for addressing transportation needs will need to be compliant and
coordinated with the plans, policies, and regulations described herein.


Transportation	  System	  Planning	  in	  Oregon	  
Transportation System Planning in Oregon is required by state law as one of the 19
statewide planning goals1 (Goal 12 – Transportation). The Transportation Planning Rule
(TPR), OAR 660-0122, defines how to implement State Planning Goal 12. Specifically, the
TPR directs the State to prepare a TSP, referred to as the Oregon Transportation Plan
(OTP); Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs) to prepare a Regional Transportation
Plan (RTP) that is consistent with the OTP; and Counties and Cities to prepare local TSPs
that are consistent with the OTP and RTP.

The TPR requires TSPs to integrate comprehensive land use planning with transportation
planning and to promote systems that serve statewide, regional and local transportation

1
    Statewide Planning Goals: http://www.oregon.gov/LCD/goals.shtml

2
    Transportation Planning Rule: http://arcweb.sos.state.or.us/rules/OARS_600/OAR_660/660_012.html


                                            Background Document Review                 Page 1
                                Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                 January 27, 2012

needs. State transportation requirements aim to improve community livability by
encouraging land use patterns and transportation systems that make it more convenient and
efficient for people to walk, bicycle, use transit and drive less to meet their daily needs.

The OTP3, as the guiding document for regional and local TSPs, establishes goals, policies,
strategies and initiatives that address the core challenges and opportunities facing
transportation in Oregon. The OTP prioritizes:

      •   Maintaining and maximizing assets already in place;
      •   Optimizing the performance of the existing system through technology;
      •   Integrating transportation, land use, economic development and the environment;
      •   Integrating the transportation system across jurisdictions, ownerships and modes;
      •   Creating sustainable funding; and
      •   Investing in strategic capacity enhancements.

OTP guidance is further implemented by adopted standards in the Oregon Highway Plan
(OHP).4


Why	  does	  Dundee	  need	  an	  Updated	  TSP?	  
The City's current TSP was adopted in 2003. Since then amendments have been made to the
OTP, OHP, and other state regulations, plans for the Newberg-Dundee Bypass have
progressed, and other local vision and master plans have been have been developed. The
last 10 years of regulatory, land use, and transportation system changes will guide and be
incorporated in this TSP update.

ODOT’s Transportation System Plan Guidelines5 document directs TSP updates to
address recent policy and regulatory changes, and calls out some of the recent changes to the
OTP, OHP, TPR. Since adoption of the 2003 Dundee TSP, the OTP was updated (2006) to
emphasize maintaining assets in place, optimizing existing system performance through
technology and better system integration, creating sustainable funding, and investing in
strategic capacity enhancements. Policy 1F (Mobility Standards) of the OHP was amended
in 2011 to clarify that the adoption of alternative mobility standards is permitted where it is
“infeasible or impractical to meet the mobility targets.”6 Appendix C (Access Management

3
    Oregon Transportation Plan: http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/ortransplanupdate.shtml

4
    Oregon Highway Plan: http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/orhwyplan.shtml

5
    ODOT Transportation System Plan Guidelines: http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/TSP.shtml

6Note that the mobility targets included in the Highway Mobility Policy must be used for the initial deficiency
analysis of state highways. However, state policy allows that, where it can be shown that it is infeasible or
impractical to meet the targets, local governments may work with ODOT and stakeholders to consider and

                                              Background Document Review                       Page 2
                                 Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                  January 27, 2012

Spacing Standards) has also been updated to be consistent with amendments to the Access
Management Rule, OAR 734-051.7


How	  is	  the	  Transportation	  System	  Defined?	  
The following sections summarize the state highway classifications and applicable state
policies for state facilities through Dundee. This information guides planning for these
facilities and ultimately determines the adopted standards and regulations that apply to state
highways in Dundee.

ODOT	  Classifications	  for	  State	  Highways	  in	  Dundee	  
Highway	  Classifications: OHP Policy 1A categorizes state highways for planning and
management decisions. Updates to the TSP will support the existing highway classifications
and will enhance the ability of the highways in Dundee to serve transportation needs
consistent with their defined functions. The following classifications apply to state facilities
in Dundee:

    •    OR 99W (Pacific Highway West, No. 91/1W) is classified as a Statewide Highway,
         part of the National Highway System (NHS), a Truck Route, and a Freight Route.
         Statewide highways primarily serve inter-urban and inter-regional travel and strive to
         provide safe and efficient, high-speed operation with minimal access and
         interruption. Operation may be affected by special land use designations described
         below.
    •    Newberg-Dundee Bypass (to be constructed) is expected to be classified as a Bypass
         and Expressway. Expressways are characterized by limited access. The primary
         purpose of expressways is to serve interurban travel and provide for high-speed and
         high-volume traffic with minimal access and interruption.

Special	  Designations: OHP Policy 1B permits special highway segment designations where
specific types of land use patterns foster compact development and in areas where the need
for appropriate local access outweighs the considerations of highway mobility. Currently,
there are no Special Transportation Area (STA) designations on OR 99W in Dundee. Such
designations may be considered during the TSP update or subsequent planning processes to
acknowledge that the highway serves as Dundee’s main street and that mobility and through
traffic needs must be balanced with local access needs. Within an STA designation, which
must be adopted as part of the OHP, access spacing standards can be modified and speeds
reduced. While an STA designation may be appropriately considered for OR 99W through

evaluate alternatives to the mobility targets in Tables 6. Any variance from the targets in Tables 6 requires
Oregon Transportation Commission adoption.

7Amendments to OAR 734-051 were made by SB 264 (2011) and went into effect on January 1, 2012.
http://www.leg.state.or.us/11reg/measpdf/sb0200.dir/sb0264.en.pdf


                                                Background Document Review                       Page 3
                                 Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                  January 27, 2012

Dundee, the OHP specifies that the future Newberg-Dundee Bypass, as an Expressway, may
not be designated as an STA.

State	  Highway	  Freight	  System: OHP Policy 1C addresses the need to balance the
movement of goods and services with other uses. It states that the timeliness of freight
movements should be considered when developing and implementing plans and projects on
freight routes. Within Dundee, OR 99W is classified as a Federal Truck Route and an
Oregon Freight Route. This classification could change with the completion of the
Newberg-Dundee Bypass.


How	  is	  the	  Transportation	  System	  Managed?	  
State	  Highway	  Mobility	  Standards: OHP Policy 1F sets mobility targets for ensuring a
reliable and acceptable level of mobility on the highway system8. The OHP assesses mobility
in terms of volume to capacity ratio (v/c). The following mobility targets are applicable to
long-range planning for state highways in Dundee during peak hour operation9, pursuant to
Policy 1F, Table 6:

       •   0.85 v/c for Statewide Highways that are Freight Routes inside a UGB, outside of a
           MPO and STA, where the posted speed is 35 mph or less (OR 99W).10
       •   0.80 v/c for Statewide Expressways and Statewide Highways that are Freight Routes
           inside a UGB, outside of a MPO and STA, where the posted speed is greater than 35
           mph (OR 99W and future Newberg-Dundee Bypass).

It is anticipated that the findings of the transportation analysis for the TSP update will
support a change to mobility targets for 99W within the city; the TSP update process is an
opportunity to develop and apply alternative mobility targets. The Oregon Transportation
Commission (OTC) must approve proposed alternative mobility targets on state highways.

City	  and	  County	  Mobility	  Standards: The City of Dundee TSP11 identifies Level of Service
(LOS) “D” as the minimum performance standard for all streets owned and operated by the
8
  In particular, the mobility targets in Table 6 of OHP Policy 1F are applicable to state facilities in Dundee and
are considered standards for purposes of determining compliance with Transportation Planning Rule (OAR
660-012).

9
 OHP Policy 1F uses the 30th highest annual hour as the peak hour. Alternatives to the 30th highest annual
hour may be established as part of adopting an alternative mobility target.

10The Dundee City Council recently approved a recommendation by the ODOT speed zone investigator to
change the speed from 35 mph to 30 mph on 99W through Dundee. ODOT is waiting for confirmation from
the City of Newberg, which is currently considering recommendations pertaining to 99W in Newberg. A speed
zone order from ODOT will be issued at the end of the review process.
11
     Dundee TSP (2003), p.98, Policy A.11 under General Transportation Network Policies.

                                               Background Document Review                        Page 4
                               Dundee Transportation System Plan Update              January 27, 2012

City during the 20-year planning period. As current TSP policy states: “When the LOS drops
to ‘E’, actions will be initiated to return the street to LOS ‘D’.” Similarly, the Yamhill
County TSP12 requires LOS “D” as the minimum acceptable performance standard for
County-owned collectors and arterials. Local LOS standards will be reviewed as part of the
TSP update.

Access	  Management	  on	  State	  Highways: The Oregon Access Management Rule13 (OAR
734-051) strives to balance the safety and mobility needs of travelers along state highways
with the access needs of property and business owners. ODOT’s rule sets guidelines for
managing access to the state’s highway facilities in order to maintain highway function,
operations, safety, and the preservation of public investment consistent with the policies of
the 1999 OHP. Access management rules allow ODOT to control the issuing of permits for
access to state highways, state highway rights of way and other properties under the State’s
jurisdiction.

In addition, the ability to close existing approaches, set spacing standards and establish a
formal appeals process in relation to access issues is identified. These rules enable the State
to set policy and direct the location and spacing of intersections and approaches on state
highways, ensuring the relevance of the functional classification system and preserving the
efficient operation of state routes.

OAR 734-051 is in the process of being amended to allow more consideration for economic
development when developing and implementing access management rules. The new laws
will result in substantial changes in rules about how ODOT manages highway approach road
permitting. Changes include modifying how ODOT deals with approach road spacing,
highway improvement requirements with development, and traffic impact analyses
requirements for approach road permits. The law’s provisions went into effect on January 1,
2012.

OHP Policy 3A and OAR 734-051 set access spacing standards for driveways and
approaches to the state highway system.14 The standards are based on state highway
classification and differ based on posted speed. The administrative rule is in the process of
being amended; the following spacing standards are in effect for unsignalized approaches to




12
  Yamhill County TSP, Goals and Policies 1, Chapter 5 – Transportation System Plan, Section 5.2 –
Collector/Arterial Street Plan, Subsection 5.2.4 – Level of Service

13   Access Management Rule: http://arcweb.sos.state.or.us/rules/OARS_700/OAR_734/734_051.html
14
  ODOT Access Management Standards (Appendix C):
http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/orhwyplan.shtml


                                            Background Document Review                     Page 5
                                           Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                            January 27, 2012

statewide highways in urban areas where average daily traffic is more than 5,000 motor
vehicles.15

Table	  1:	  Spacing	  Standards	  for	  Urban	  Non-­‐Designated	  Statewide	  Highways	  (OR	  99W)	  
    Posted Speed (mph)                                      Spacing (feet)

            55 and higher                                         1,320

                   50                                             1,100

                 40-45                                             800

                 30-35                                             500

            25 and lower                                           350



Access	  Management	  on	  Local	  Roadways: The existing Dundee TSP, Dundee
Development Code, and Yamhill County TSP provide access spacing standards and
guidelines for public roadways under City and County jurisdiction. Access spacing
guidelines from the Dundee TSP are as follows:

       •    Local streets shall be spaced at a maximum 600 feet apart, unless accessing OR 99W,
            where state access spacing requirements apply.
       •    Collectors shall be located wherever necessary to carry traffic volumes higher than
            local street standards, or where the street provides primary access to OR 99W. In
            general, collectors should be spaced at a maximum ¼ mile apart. 16

The Dundee Development Code includes specific standards for City streets.17

Table	  2:	  Minimum	  Spacing	  Standards	  for	  City	  Streets	  	  
     Street Classification                                Spacing (feet)

                Arterial                                    150 (+/- 20%)

               Collector                                            75

                 Local                                              15




15   Table 2 in SB 264, http://www.leg.state.or.us/11reg/measpdf/sb0200.dir/sb0264.en.pdf

16   2003 Dundee TSP, Transportation System Plan (Chapter 6), pp. 108-109.

17   Development Code, Section 2.202.08, Access Management


                                                              Background Document Review                              Page 6
                                 Dundee Transportation System Plan Update           January 27, 2012

Yamhill County owns the following five roads in Dundee: Fox Farm Road, Dayton Avenue,
9th Street-Worden Hill Road, Niederberger Road, and Fulquartz Landing Road.18

The policy statements below from the Yamhill County TSP guide access management on
County-owned arterials in urban areas.

       •   Public road access spaced at a minimum of ½ mile apart.
       •   Driveways spaced at a minimum of 500 feet apart.
       •   Traffic signals spaced at a minimum of ½ mile apart, and no median control.19

County policy states that environmental conditions and safety conditions are amongst the
factors considered in taking an exception to these policies.

Major	  Improvements: OHP Policy 1G requires maintaining performance and improving
safety by improving efficiency and management before adding capacity. The intent of policy
1G and Action 1G.2 is to ensure that major improvement projects to state highway facilities
have been through a planning process that involves coordination between state, regional,
and local stakeholders and the public, and that there is substantial support for the proposed
improvement.

Off-­‐System	  Improvements: OHP Policy 2B establishes ODOT’s interest in improvements
on local roads that maintain or improve safety and mobility performance on state roadways,
and supports local jurisdictions in adopting land use and access management policies. The
TSP will include sections describing existing and future land use patterns, access
management, and implementation measures.

Traffic	  Safety: OHP Policy 2F identifies the need for projects in the state to improve safety
for all users of the state highway system through engineering, education, enforcement, and
emergency services. One component of the TSP update is to identify existing crash patterns
and rates and to develop strategies to address safety issues. Proposed improvements will aim
to reduce the vehicle crash potential and/or improve bicycle and pedestrian safety by
providing upgraded facilities that meet current standards.

Alternative	  Passenger	  Modes: OHP Policy 4B, Action 4B.4 requires that highway projects
encourage the use of alternative passenger modes to reduce local trips. The TSP will develop
ways to support and increase the use of alternative passenger modes to reduce trips on
highways and other facilities. This will include improvements to bicycle and pedestrian
facilities and consideration of existing and future transit movement along roadways.



18   2003 Dundee TSP. Existing Conditions (Chapter 3), p. 31

19   Yamhill County TSP, Access Management and Functional Classification Policy 8


                                               Background Document Review               Page 7
                                       Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                           January 27, 2012


Improvements	  on	  State	  Highways: The Highway Design Manual20 (HDM) provides
uniform standards and procedures for ODOT and is in general agreement with the 2001
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. Some key areas where guidance is provided are the
location and design of new construction, major reconstruction, and resurfacing, restoration
or rehabilitation (3R) projects. The HDM should be used for all projects on state highways
in Dundee to determine design requirements, including the maximum allowable volume to
capacity ratios for use in the design of highway projects.


Other	  Background	  Information	  for	  the	  TSP	  Update	  
The following sections summarize additional background information or guidance
documents that will be referenced in updating the Dundee TSP.

Projects	  to	  Be	  Considered	  in	  Future	  Transportation	  Analysis	  
Several of the documents reviewed identified transportation improvement projects that will
be considered in future transportation analysis in Dundee. Relevant projects are found in the
following documents.
                                                                                                    21
Approved	  2010-­‐2013	  Statewide	  Transportation	  Improvement	  Program	  (STIP) 	  	  	  
      •    OR-18/Newberg – Dundee Bypass (Key Number: 12819): Funding for acquisition
           of right-of-way to preserve alignments in the bypass corridor adopted through the
           Location Environmental Impact Statement (LEIS). Sufficient funding has already
           been programmed for the design/construction level EIS for the bypass.

Newberg-­‐Dundee	  Bypass	  Tier	  2	  Draft	  Environmental	  Impact	  Statement	  (2010)	  
The Newberg-Dundee Bypass is planned as a four-lane, 11-mile, controlled access
expressway proposed by ODOT and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). The
alignment and design options are based on many years of planning and coordination with
Yamhill County and the cities of Newberg and Dundee. The facility is proposed to bypass
the central portions of Newberg and Dundee to relieve traffic congestion and allow for
downtown revitalization and enhancement in these communities. A Tier 2 Draft
Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) has been completed for the proposed bypass.

Four interchanges are proposed including a Dayton Interchange at the junction of OR 99W
and OR 18, an East Dundee Interchange within the Dundee UGB, an OR 219 Interchange
at the edge of the Newberg UGB, and an East Newberg Interchange.


20
  ODOT Highway Design Manual:
http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/HWY/ENGSERVICES/hwy_manuals.shtml
21
     ODOT STIP: http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/HWY/STIP/


                                                        Background Document Review                            Page 8
                                     Dundee Transportation System Plan Update              January 27, 2012

The Build Alternative developed through the Tier 2 DEIS process divides the bypass into
nine segments. Segments 2, 3, and 4 span from the Dayton Interchange to the Dundee
UGB, and from the Dundee UGB to the East Dundee Interchange just north of the UGB.
The following summarizes the improvements that are proposed for Segments 2, 3, and 4.

Segment 2 – At-grade roadway with local circulation improvements that reconnect
Riverwood Road, Fulquartz Landing Road west/east, and Crawford Lane to OR 99W,
which will be disconnected by construction of the bypass and are located on the eastern edge
of the Dundee UGB.

Segment 3 – Design options involve below-grade or at-grade roadway, with and without six
to eight-foot berms. Local circulation improvements for all design options involve bypass
overcrossing options at either 6th, 8th, or 10th Street, all located within Dundee.

Segment 4 – Design options for East Dundee Interchange are either a diamond interchange
or partial cloverleaf interchange in the Riverside Master Plan study area (also indicated
through land identified as Columbia Empire Farms22). Local circulation improvements for
both options involve an East Dundee connector road that re-aligns Fox Farm Road and
Dayton Avenue to connect with OR 99W.

ODOT has made recommendations on design options. For Segment 3, ODOT
recommends the bypass be at-grade with six to eight-foot berms and the 8th Street
overcrossing (Design Option 3.B2). For Segment 4, ODOT recommends a diamond
interchange (Design Option 4.1). ODOT and the City have been working on crossing
locations.

Newberg-­‐Dundee	  Bypass	  Phase	  1	  Technical	  Report	  Addendum	  
ODOT is evaluating options for the first phase of construction of the Newberg-Dundee
Bypass.23 Phase 1 will entail construction of a two-lane roadway (one lane in each direction)
extending from OR 219 in Newberg to OR 99W south of Dundee. The western connection
will occur at either a directional interchange near Fulquartz Landing Road/OR 99W, well
south of the Dundee UGB, or at an at-grade signalized intersection with OR 99W just to the
south of the Dundee UGB. No intermediate interchanges along the bypass will be
constructed as part of Phase 1 and, other than the Phase 1 western connection of the bypass
to OR 99W, none of the proposed opening year (2016) mitigation measures are located in
Dundee.



22   This property is outside the Riverside Master Plan study area, and outside the UGB/city limits.

23Phase 1 Technical Report Addendum, Kittelson & Associates, September 2011. The final version of the
Riverside Master Plan District (Ord no. 503-2011) is found in the City’s ordinance table in the Dundee
Municipal Code: http://codepublishing.com/OR/Dundee/


                                                      Background Document Review                 Page 9
                                           Dundee Transportation System Plan Update     January 27, 2012

Dundee	  Capital	  Improvement	  Plan	  	  
The City does not have a current Capital Improvement Plan (CIP). Transportation projects
developed as part of the TSP update can serve as a transportation CIP for the city.

Dundee	  Riverside	  Master	  Plan	  (2010)	  	  
The Dundee Riverside Master Plan consists of a land use and transportation plan and
implementing development regulations for roughly 400 acres in Southeast Dundee. Land
uses envisioned in the master plan include a large amount of land for parks, open space, and
a trail network as well as residential development and non-residential development including
smaller-scale neighborhood commercial uses and larger-scale “destination” uses such as
wineries, event facilities, a hotel, golf course, restaurants, and related uses.

The master plan includes transportation policies and phasing requirements24 as well as
roadway cross sections for local streets, parkway collectors, and collector streets25.
Conceptual projects are shown in the plan26 and include:
       •    5th Street extension, including bypass overpass
       •    North South Parkway
       •    Chehalem Heritage Trails
       •    Greenway Trail

The Riverside Master Plan planning process deliberately excluded developing a local street
system for the area. The expectation is that the local street system will be developed as part
of development plans and will be consistent with adopted city standards.

Dundee	  Main	  Street	  Refinement	  Plan	  (2006)	  
The Dundee Main Street Refinement Plan was prepared in anticipation of enhancements
that could be made to downtown once the Newberg-Dundee Bypass was constructed. The
plan is not an adopted City document but represents important past visioning and policy
work on the part of the community and community partners.

The plan consists primarily of a land use concept plan and a set of street design guidelines (a
“main street plan”). Elements of the land use concept plan and design guidelines include the
following ideas:



24Transportation policies and phasing requirements are found on pp. 18-19 and pp. 21-22 of the final version
of the Riverside Master Plan, http://www.dundeeriverfront.net/. [Note: Version 5, but not the final version, is
provided on the project website.]

 Figure 4 (Standard Cross Sections for Local Streets) and Figure 5 (Standard Cross Sections for Parkway
25

Collector and Collector Streets)

26   Figure 3 (Riverside District Transportation Framework Plan)


                                                          Background Document Review        Page 10
                                      Dundee Transportation System Plan Update      January 27, 2012


     •    The downtown core is between 5th Street and 10th Street, with gateways envisioned at
          these boundaries.
     •    The road through downtown should be three lanes, with wider sidewalks, bicycle
          facilities, on-street parking, and landscaping.
     •    Uses should be mostly retail, with minimal to no setbacks and no driveways in
          between buildings. Passive open spaces (courtyards/plazas) should be located
          throughout the retail areas.
     •    Off-street parking should be accessed from side streets.
     •    There should be a network of pedestrian and bicycle “green” corridors down to the
          Willamette River and circling town.
     •    A town square should be developed at either the historic railroad depot or on the
          corner of 5th and OR 99W, to be the site of a farmers market and other community
          activities.

The plan recommends different applications and treatments pertaining to speed limits, on-
street parking, raised medians, planters, curb extensions, sidewalks, and bicycle lanes
depending on the roadway segment designations of Downtown Core, Transition, Suburban,
and Rural. It proposes local connectivity improvements as well as “interim” improvements
and strategies to help mitigate conditions on OR 99W until the bypass is built.
                                                                   	  27
Dundee	  Oregon	  99W	  Interim	  Measures	  Report	  (2006) 	  
The Interim Measures Report presents ODOT recommendations to mitigate some of the
congestion along OR 99W in Dundee until the bypass is constructed. Of several project
ideas evaluated, ODOT recommended the following three sets of ideas.

     •    Traffic signals at 9th-10th – Signals intended to facilitate local off-highway traffic
          circulation.
     •    Commuter Bus Service – The Yamhill County Transit Committee approved a transit
          plan recommending park-and-ride lots.28 The Bypass Project Management Team was
          charged with working on funding options.
     •    Dundee Intra-city Connectivity Improvements at Red Hills Road, Fairview Road,
          and Fulquartz Landing Road – These improvements are feasible for local traffic, but
          need funding.




27Note: This document was not in the project scope of work but summarized information from this report is
included here due to its possible relevance to the TSP update.

28The Yamhill County Transit Area adopted the Yamhill County Public Transportation Action Plan in June
2004. [Note: This plan is not available online.] It was followed by the Yamhill County Coordinated Human
Services Public Transportation Plan (2007), http://www.yctransitarea.org/pdf/COORDINATEDPLAN.PDF.


                                                      Background Document Review         Page 11
                                            Dundee Transportation System Plan Update           January 27, 2012


Actions	  or	  Strategies	  to	  Be	  Considered	  in	  Updating	  the	  TSP	  
Several of the documents reviewed identify transportation actions, strategies, or standards
and guidelines that will be considered in updated the Dundee TSP. Relevant actions or
strategies include those found in the following documents.

Oregon	  Freight	  Plan	  (2011)	  
The Oregon Freight Plan (OFP) is a modal plan of the OTP that implements the State’s
goals and policies related to freight. Its purpose statement is: “to improve freight
connections to local, Native American, state, regional, national and global markets in order
to increase trade-related jobs and income for workers and businesses.”

The objectives of the plan include creating a framework for prioritizing and facilitating
investments in freight facilities (including rail, marine, air, and pipeline infrastructure) and
adopting strategies to maintain and improve the freight transportation system.

The plan identifies and defines four multimodal corridors whose connectivity is vital to the
state economy. OR 99W is a state facility that provides connectivity in one of those
corridors, the Western Corridor.

The plan includes a set of 11 strategies and corresponding actions that address defining and
preserving a strategic freight system, reviewing investment criteria, establishing procedures to
ensure system safety and efficiency, partnering with other organizations, coordinating freight
planning with land use planning and other regulatory programs, and dealing with long-term
funding needs.

Newly adopted, the plan still needs to develop and take action on implementation measures
including an overall implementation plan, performance measures, funding options, and
outreach regarding bottlenecks and choke points on the strategic freight system.

While freight needs on OR 99W will largely be alleviated once the bypass is constructed, this
TSP update will be coordinated with any Freight Plan implementation measures that may be
developed and enacted during the TSP update process. Because OR 99W is currently a
designated Freight Route, the requirements of ORS 366.215 also apply. This State Statute
states, with specific exceptions, that the Oregon Transportation Commission may not
permanently reduce the vehicle-carrying capacity of an identified freight route.29

Oregon	  Bicycle	  and	  Pedestrian	  Plan	  (1995;	  2007	  draft	  update)	  	  
The goal of the Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan is to provide safe and accessible
bicycling and walking facilities in order to encourage increased levels of bicycling and
walking. The plan provides measures that will assist local jurisdictions in understanding the

29This statue implements a no Reduction of Vehicle-carrying Capacity (RVC) policy and pertains to all
planning, project development, development review and maintenance projects. See ODOT’s Guidelines for
Implementation of ORS 366.215 http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/ORS366.215.shtml .


                                                               Background Document Review          Page 12
                                        Dundee Transportation System Plan Update        January 27, 2012

principles and policies that ODOT follows in providing bike and walkways along state
highways. In order to the meet the plan’s objectives, strategies for system design include
providing bikeway and walkway systems that are integrated with other transportation
systems; providing a safe and accessible biking and walking environment; and developing
education programs that improve bicycle and pedestrian safety.
The plan states that bikeway and walkway systems will be established on urban highways, as
follows:
     •     As part of modernization projects (bike lanes and sidewalks will be included);
     •     As part of preservation projects, where minor upgrades can be made;
     •     By restriping roads with bike lanes;
     •     With minor improvement projects, such as completing short missing segments of
           sidewalks;
     •     As bikeway or walkway modernization projects;
     •     By developers as part of permit conditions, where warranted.

The 1995 document includes two sections, including the Policy & Action Plan and Bikeway &
Walkway Planning Design, Maintenance & Safety. The first section contains background
information, legal mandates and current conditions, goals, actions, and implementation
strategies ODOT proposes to improve bicycle and pedestrian transportation. The second
section assists ODOT, cities, and counties in designing, constructing and maintaining
pedestrian and bicycle facilities. The document recommends design standards and provides
safety information.

The second section has been updated as a new Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Design Guide
addressing on-road bikeways, restriping, bicycle parking, walkways, street crossings,
intersections, and shared-use paths. 30 Once adopted, the updated Oregon Bicycle and
Pedestrian Plan Design Guide will be referenced where bicycle or pedestrian facilities are
planned as part of state funded projects or facilities.

Oregon	  Public	  Transportation	  Plan	  (1997)	  
The Oregon Public Transportation Plan serves as the transit modal plan of the OTP. The
plan builds on and implements the OTP’s long-range vision for public transportation in the
State of Oregon. The vision includes a comprehensive, interconnected, and dependable
public transportation system, with stable funding, that provides appropriate service in each
area of the state, offers an attractive option to driving to meet daily needs, and supports
livability and economic development in the state.


30A July 2007 public review draft is available on ODOT’s website: at:
http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/HWY/BIKEPED/bp_plan_update.shtml#Backgound_Information




                                                           Background Document Review       Page 13
                                     Dundee Transportation System Plan Update         January 27, 2012

The plan contains goals, policies, and strategies relating to the whole of the state’s public
transportation system. The plan is intended to provide guidance for ODOT and public
transportation agencies regarding the development of public transportation systems.

The Yamhill County Transit Committee addresses transit issues in Dundee and Yamhill
County. Since adoption of the 2003 Dundee TSP, the Yamhill County Transit Area (YCTA)
was formed to provide countywide service by contracting with Yamhill County Community
Action Partnership (YCAP) and CVSCC (Chehalem Valley Senior Citizens Council). The
organizations provide daily service between Tigard and McMinnville in Yamhill County.
YCTA plans include the Yamhill County Public Transportation Action Plan (2004) and
Yamhill County Coordinated Human Services Public Transportation Plan (2007). 31 This
transportation planning process will be coordinated with the County’s transit plan and the
updated TSP will include a transit element.

Dundee	  Comprehensive	  Plan	  (1977)	  
The Dundee Comprehensive Plan addresses Statewide Planning Goals and guides the city’s
future long-term growth and development. The plan is generally organized according to the
statewide goals, presenting existing and forecasted conditions, objectives, and policies for
each goal.

Urbanization, economic development, and transportation goals are particularly relevant to
transportation planning in Dundee. Urbanization goals are reflected in the Comprehensive
Plan Map, which in turn guides zoning and establishes the city limits and UGB for Dundee.
Economic development policies call for diversifying the local economy by providing more
land for light industrial development; improving the business environment along OR 99W
by supporting highway projects that reduce congestion, requiring off-street parking, and
establishing high design standards; and controlling strip commercial development.
Transportation goals and policies in the Comprehensive Plan, including those addressing the
general transportation network, the bypass, pedestrian and bicycle facilities, public
transportation, and rail and pipelines, were updated in 2003, 2004, and 2010. A subsequent
2010 update consisted only of amendments to bypass policies, including identification of
preferred bypass alternatives, determination of planned improvements for TPR compliance,
specification of IAMP requirements, planning crossings of the bypass, and protection of
bypass function and surrounding rural land. Adopted transportation policies will be
reevaluated as part of the TSP update; new recommended policies will need to be made
consistent with other, related policies in the Comprehensive Plan.




31[Note: The Yamhill County Public Transportation Action Plan (2004) is not available online.] Yamhill
County Coordinated Human Services Public Transportation Plan (2007)
http://www.yctransitarea.org/pdf/COORDINATEDPLAN.PDF


                                                Background Document Review                 Page 14
                                       Dundee Transportation System Plan Update     January 27, 2012

Dundee	  Development	  Code	  
The Development Code implements the Comprehensive Plan by providing descriptions of
zone designations, allowable uses within those zones, and development regulations. Zone
designations in the city include agricultural, residential, commercial, destination resort, light
industrial, and public base zones. The Development Code also establishes overlay zones,
including the Flood Plain, Greenway Management, and Commercial Victorian Overlay
Zones. The Zoning Map shows the location of zone designations and consequently helps
direct the type, location, and density of land uses in the city.

The following is an overview of code sections that may need to be updated in order to be
consistent with the findings and recommendations of the updated TSP.

     •     Site Development Review (Section 3.105) is required for all new development or
           expansion and remodel projects that increase total floor area by 25% or more, except
           for single-family homes and duplexes. Site plan standards include requirements for
           transportation circulation patterns, access, and parking.
     •     Street standards (Section 2.202) addresses future street extensions, fees in lieu of
           street improvements, new streets, general right-of-way and improvement widths, cul-
           de-sacs, private streets, and access management. Specific street design standards and
           cross-section diagrams are found in the TSP (Figure 6-2), as well as the Riverside
           Master Plan.
     •     Off-street parking and loading provisions (Section 2.203) address requirements for
           location, joint use, dimensions, and number of spaces for motor vehicle parking.
           This section also establishes requirements for the number of spaces and design of
           bicycle parking.
     •     The code sections on development standards cover several transportation elements.
           Block standards (Section 2.208.04) include requirements for block length, other
           connectivity elements, and bicycle and pedestrian accessways. Improvement
           requirements (Section 2.208.05) address frontage improvements, streets, sidewalks,
           and curb cuts.
     •     Review criteria for subdivisions and Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) (Section
           3.107.03) and for zone changes (Section 3.102) include requirements for adequate
           public facilities. Traffic impact studies are not explicitly required as part of meeting
           these requirements.
     •     Public notice requirements (Section 3.202) specify that agencies with jurisdiction of
           roadways within 100 feet of application sites shall receive notices of Type I, II, and
           III hearings and decisions.

Dundee	  Public	  Works	  Design	  Standards	  
The City of Dundee has public works design standards that address general requirements for
the construction of public facilities, including streets and procedures for design


                                                       Background Document Review       Page 15
                                            Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                                        January 27, 2012

modifications32, and a specific section on streets33. The streets section addresses minimum
right-of-way and pavement widths according to functional classification as well as
requirements for cul-de-sacs, sidewalks, bikeways, and parking lots. It is expected that any
recommended changes made to street and transportation standards through the TSP update
process will need to be reflected in these public works standards documents.

A	  Vision	  for	  Highway	  99W	  in	  Dundee,	  Final	  Report	  from	  a	  Public	  Workshop	  (2011)	  
The Vision Plan focuses on land use and urban design in the OR 99W corridor, and in
Dundee in particular. The vision for this part of the corridor is to create:

       […] an attractive and safe “community corridor” that incorporates new buildings along with
       pedestrian and bicycle amenities into the existing business district to create a character unique to
       Dundee. The vision includes a town center off of Highway 99W to complement the corridor and
       provide a Main-street feel and community gathering space [...]

The plan envisions a community corridor that is identified by gateways; concentrates retail
uses into centers at key intersections; creates a distinct urban form through setbacks,
courtyards, and back entrances; locates parking to the sides and rear of buildings; and
provides an attractive streetscape and buffer to the highway.

According to the plan, the town center should include a mix of land uses (including local
shops, neighborhood services, small-scale offices, and second-story apartments), gathering
spaces, storefronts built right up to the sidewalk, an inviting pedestrian environment, and
parking to the sides or rear of buildings.

Next steps identified in the plan direct the City to develop an overall implementation
strategy, prepare integrated land use and transportation plans for the corridor and town
center, amend the Development Code for site and building design standards in the corridor,
secure funding for streetscape improvements, and revise the Vision Plan annually. One of
the objectives of this TSP update is to develop a transportation system that is consistent with
the land use objectives of creating a town center. Proposed amendments to the
Development Ordinance will be developed during the TSP update process in order to
comply with transportation and TPR requirements. While these amendments may not
entirely fulfill the land use planning “next steps” recommended by the Vision Plan, any
proposed ordinance amendments will be consistent with the Vision Plan.

Dundee	  Historic	  Resources	  and	  Local	  Wetland	  Inventory	  and	  Riparian	  Assessment	  (Goal	  5)	  
The City has provided GIS data that includes historic, local wetland, and riparian resources
to inform the transportation system analysis and recommendations.


32   City of Dundee Public Works Design Standards, Division 1

33   City of Dundee Public Works Design Standards, Division 2


                                                               Background Document Review                                       Page 16
                                       Dundee Transportation System Plan Update      January 27, 2012

Recently	  Constructed	  Transportation	  Projects	  	  
The following transportation improvements have been made in the city since adoption of
the 2003 TSP.

1. The Arrowhead, Tomahawk and View Crest streets (including sidewalks both sides) were
   completed as part of subdivision development. There are no sidewalk gaps.

2.    Highway frontage improvements, Neiderberger, Alder (including curbs and sidewalks)
     next to West End buildings project. The City paid the developer to complete curb and
     sidewalk improvements (quarter street improvements) to the west side of Alder Street
     across from the project.

3. Widening of 11th Street, a City project funded by a SCA grant. Curbs and sidewalks
   completed on south side of 11th Street between James Court and OR 99W. Curbs
   completed on north side of 11th Street between Alder Street and OR 99W, and
   sidewalks completed except about 200 feet eastward from Alder Street where the right-
   of-way is 50 feet wide.

4. Complete sidewalk on south side of 5th Street between Locust and Edwards (part
   of SCA grant) and complete curb and sidewalk on west side of Edwards between 5th
   and 8th (ARRA grant).

5. 5th Street/OR 99W intersection traffic signal project (ODOT), includes new turning
   lane on 5th Street eastbound approaching 99W, new sidewalk on the east side of 99W
   from a point about 300 feet south of 5th Street (Argyle Winery property) to the 4th
   Street intersection.

6. New streets, Graystone Drive and Graystone Place, pedestrian path connection between
   Graystone Place and 5th Street, new curb and sidewalk on the north side 7th Street, and
   new curb on the south side of 5th Street and the east side of Upland Drive, and curb and
   sidewalk on the west side of Upland Drive as part of a subdivision. Infill sidewalks are
   being installed as homes are built.

7. 1st Street and Brier street improvements in the Vineyard Estates subdivision, curb on
   east side of Alder Street (next to Vineyard Estates subdivision), curb on east side of
   Dogwood from 5th to 1st, curb on west side of Dogwood from 5th to a point about 100
   feet north of the 1st Street intersection, sidewalk on the east side of Dogwood from 5th
   to a point about 400 feet north of 5th Street. Infill sidewalks are being installed as homes
   are built.

8. Curb and sidewalk installed on the north side of 1st Street between Dogwood and
   Carmel Circle (SCA grant).

9. Oliver Court completed for new subdivision.


                                                        Background Document Review       Page 17
                                 Dundee Transportation System Plan Update             January 27, 2012

10. Namitz Court completed for new subdivision. Pedestrian walkway connection between
    Namitz and Oliver.

11. Sidewalk on both sides of 1st Street near OR 99W intersection. New curb and sidewalk
    along the east side of OR 99W adjacent to new gas station (2nd Street to north city
    limits).

12. New sidewalk and curb on the north side of 7th Street starting about 100 feet east of
    Carmen Heights intersection to about 200 feet east of Carmen Heights intersection.
    Alder Street widened to 25 feet with 5-foot-wide section of the road striped and marked
    for pedestrian use on the west side between 7th and Upland.

These projects will be considered in the transportation analysis as part of the existing
conditions and will be reflected as part of the existing local street system in the updated TSP.

Traffic	  Studies	  
Important traffic studies in Dundee consist of those prepared for the Riverside Master Plan.
Two technical memoranda prepared by Kittelson & Associates describe the existing and
future background transportation conditions for the Riverside Master Plan area and the
transportation impacts of the proposed development concept for the area.34

Analysis done for the first memorandum found that access to OR 99W from the master plan
area is currently restricted and long delays can occur. Completion of the Newberg-Dundee
Bypass will substantially reduce OR 99W traffic volumes and improve operations at study
intersections in the master plan area to acceptable levels. However, construction of the
currently funded Phase 1 is likely to have limited impacts on current traffic levels, and
improvements will be needed on OR 99W to maintain acceptable operations within the 20-
year horizon as the bypass is being constructed. The existing TSP recommends traffic
signals to be installed at identified intersections on OR 99W to serve both the hillside part of
Dundee as well as the master plan area.

Even though the analysis found that study intersections will operate at acceptable levels after
construction of the bypass, potential transportation demand reduction measures were
recommended for the master plan area in order to balance land use and transportation
needs. These measures could include land use strategies such as allowing for a mix and
concentration of uses, transit services, improved and complete bicycle and pedestrian
facilities, and a transportation demand management (TDM) program.

The second memorandum recommends a hierarchy of streets, with street standards modified
from the adopted TSP standards, to facilitate local and regional trips. The recommendations
include improvements needed on the adjacent street system to bring it up to standard, in
recognition of the additional traffic that the master plan area will generate. Table 3 shows
34   Respectively, these are memoranda dated August 13, 2010 and November 17, 2010.


                                              Background Document Review                  Page 18
                                   Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                       January 27, 2012

planning level cost estimates for the system improvements recommended to mitigate
impacts from implementation of the Riverside Master Plan.

Table	  3:	  Planning	  Level	  Cost	  Estimates	  for	  Recommended	  Transportation	  System	  Improvements	  
Alternative/Cost Element                                             Estimated              Cost Attributable To
                                                                   Cost(2010 $) 1
   North-south collector on riverside of                             $2,935,000                      Developer
   Bypass
   Edwards Road Improvements: 5th to                                 $ 380,000                    City/Developer
   Parks
   5th Street railroad gates, coordinated                             $400,000             Developer/City/ODOT
   with OR 99W traffic signal, including
   road improvements and westbound
   right turn lane at 99W/5th intersection4
   Parks Road Improvements: Edwards                                  $ 830,000        Developer/City/County/ODOT
   to OR 99W
   Parks Road traffic signal at OR 99W                                $340,000             Developer/City/ODOT
   Parks Road railroad gates, coordinated                             $400,000                    Developer/City
   with OR 99W traffic signal, including
   road improvements4
   Fulquartz Landing Improvements: So.                               $ 930,000           County/Developer/ODOT
   of Parks
   5th-to-8th Extension road                                         $2,595,000                      Developer
   improvements (excluding structure
   over bypass)
   5th-to-8th Extension road overcrossing                           $6,000,000 -                      ODOT
   structure (including approaches down                             $10,000,0003
   to grade)
   Green Seam Trails (18,870 linear feet                             $1,810,000                      Developer
   of 10’ asphalt trail)
   Multi-use Path (under Bypass from                                   $10,000                     ODOT/City
   12th to N-S Collector
   Nature Trails (9,552 linear feet of 8’                             $430,000           Developer/Chehalem Parks
   gravel/wood chip surface)
   TOTAL                                                          $17,060,000-
                                                                   $21,060,000
Notes: 1. Engineering and contingencies included at 20% of construction cost for surface streets and 40%
               for structures.
               2. Based on ODOT NDTIP Bypass EIS cost estimate. [Note: Reference in table is not included in original
               table.]
               3. Based on a shorter bridge (about 20% shorter) in this alternative, the ODOT-estimated cost in the
               NDTIP Bypass EIS for an 8th Street overcrossing was adjusted downward. Estimates assume 5%
               grade on bridge approaches – approximately $370,000 would be saved by increasing approach grade
               (reducing length of ramp) to 10%.
               4. A “Diagnostic Investigation,” conducted in coordination with ODOT Rail, ODOT Highway, City,
               and rail providers, should be conducted in which these entities will establish the threshold for
               construction of rail improvements.



                                                   Background Document Review                           Page 19
                                    Dundee Transportation System Plan Update     January 27, 2012

Existing	  Transportation	  Funding	  Mechanisms	  
The City has adopted a local, 2 cents per gallon gas tax for transportation improvements.
The major source of funding for new streets and street improvements related to growth will
be developer contributions. The TSP update will explore a variety of mechanisms for
funding recommended transportation system improvements and will indicate recommended
methods specific to the needed improvement.




                                                    Background Document Review       Page 20
                             MEMORANDUM	  #3	  

DATE:          February 10, 2012

TO:            Dundee TSP Update Project Management Team

FROM:          Carl Springer, P.E., DKS Associates
               Ray Delahanty, DKS Associates
               Darci Rudzinski, AICP, Angelo Planning Group
               Shayna Rehberg, AICP, Angelo Planning Group

SUBJECT:       Dundee Transportation System Plan Update
               Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria


The purpose of this memorandum is to present draft goals, objectives, and evaluation
criteria for the City of Dundee Transportation System Plan (TSP) update, providing a basis
for discussion as the community moves through the TSP update process. Goals and
objectives presented here are expected to evolve, and will not become fixed until adopted by
the city council.

The goals are broad, high-level statements describing the community’s intentions for the
future. Each goal is developed around a topic area, and while a goal may never be completely
attainable, it is used as a point toward which to strive. The objectives described under each
goal are statements providing a specific course of action that moves the community toward
that particular goal. Each new capital improvement project, land use application, or
implementation measure must be consistent with the objectives.

This memorandum is divided into two sections. The first section reviews goals and
objectives that guided the development of the 2003 TSP, highlights areas for review by
project participants, and suggests evaluation criteria. The second section presents adopted
planning goals, objectives, and policies from the City of Dundee Comprehensive Plan and
highlights areas that should be reviewed by project participants and possibly revised prior to
inclusion as the updated transportation goals and objectives.

The goals and objectives will guide the development of the transportation system plan, while
the evaluation criteria will be used to assess and prioritize future transportation programs
and improvements against the goals and objectives. Once adopted, the goals and objectives,
as well as the project list, will become part of the City of Dundee’s Comprehensive Plan.




                          Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria            Page 1
                               Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                 February 10, 2012

Existing	  TSP	  Goals	  and	  Policies	  
The existing goals and objectives from the Dundee TSP are provided below. Changes and
additions are suggested in italics. Objectives that are already addressed under other goals are
flagged as duplicates. Removal of these duplicate objectives can be considered, but is not
necessary.

Goal	  1:	  System	  Capacity	  and	  Mobility	  
Provide and maintain a transportation system that serves the travel needs of all Dundee
residents, businesses, and visitors, and minimizes the adverse impact of through travelers on
Dundee.

Goal	  1	  Objectives	  
   1. Improve system connectivity
   2. Conduct facility management
   3. Minimize congestion
   4. Provide and support travel choices (Duplicated under Goal 4)

Suggested	  Goal	  1	  Evaluation	  Criteria	  
   • Increases system connectivity
   • Improves roadway operations

Goal	  2:	  Livability	  
Provide and maintain a transportation system that fosters a pleasant, small city and preserves
and enhances existing neighborhoods and businesses.

Goal	  2	  Objectives	  
   1. Improve mobility (Duplicated under Goal 1)
   2. Minimize disruptions to neighborhoods and businesses
   3. Enhance economic vitality (Duplicated under Goal 9)
   4. Manage transportation facilities (Duplicated under Objective 1.2)
   5. Minimize energy, social, environmental, and economic impacts (Duplicated under Goal
             6)
   6. Improve pedestrian facilities (Duplicated under Goal 4)
   7. Improve bicycle facilities (Duplicated under Goal 4)
   8. Design streets to support a wide range of users and enhance quality of life and sense of place
   9. Incorporate sidewalk and vegetation improvements
   10. Incorporate street furnishings that reflect the city’s unique character

Suggested	  Goal	  2	  Evaluation	  Criteria	  
   • Improves street aesthetics
   • Reflects unique city character
   • Provides street classifications that are consistent with residents’ travel needs

                                  Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria                 Page 2
                              Dundee Transportation System Plan Update               February 10, 2012

Goal	  3:	  Coordination	  
Develop and maintain a transportation system that is consistent with and supports the goals,
objectives, and visions of the Dundee community, participating and affected agencies, the
county, and the state.

Goal	  3	  Objectives	  
   1. Support adopted local land use plans
   2. Provide for appropriate interjurisdictional communication
   3. Achieve consistency with State and County plans
   4. Practice public outreach

Suggested	  Goal	  3	  Evaluation	  Criteria	  
   • Compatible with regulatory documents
   • Demonstrated public and/or decision-maker support

Goal	  4:	  Travel	  Options	  
Develop and maintain a transportation system that encourages, supports, and incorporates a
variety of multi-modal travel options.

Goal	  4	  Objectives	  
   1. Improve bicycle facilities
   2. Improve pedestrian facilities
   3. Support transit and rail system development (This process should clarify whether this refers
             to passenger rail or freight; if freight then a separate objective under Goal 9 is appropriate)
   4. Improve truck access and circulation (May be more appropriate under Goal 9)
   5. Encourage walking and bicycling for trips within the city

Suggested	  Goal	  4	  Evaluation	  Criteria	  
   • Improves pedestrian/bicycle access to key destinations
   • Improves pedestrian comfort
   • Improves freight access/connectivity (May be more appropriate under Goal 9)
   • Increases alternatives to single-occupant vehicle travel
   • Increases attractiveness of walking and bicycling

Goal	  5:	  Accessibility	  
Provide and maintain a well-connected transportation system that serves the needs of all
members of the community and ensures adequate and efficient accessibility for all
acknowledged land uses, and available modes of travel.

Goal	  5	  Objectives	  
   1. Link recreation and other local destinations
   2. Comply with American Disabilities Act requirements

                                  Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria                Page 3
                            Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                     February 10, 2012

    3.   Support local land use plans
    4.   Manage transportation facilities (Duplicated under Objective 1.2)
    5.   Provide and support travel choices (Duplicated under Goal 4)
    6.   Provide adequate access to properties

Suggested	  Goal	  5	  Evaluation	  Criteria	  
   • Improves connections to recreation and other local destinations
   • Compatible with ADA requirements
   • Supportive of local land use plans
   • Maintains or improves access to properties

Goal	  6:	  Environment	  
Provide and maintain a transportation system that preserves, protects, and supports the
social, natural, and cultural environment of the Dundee community.

Goal	  6	  Objectives	  
   1. Minimize energy, social, environmental, and economic impacts
   2. Prioritize environmentally sustainable transportation improvements

Suggested	  Goal	  6	  Evaluation	  Criteria	  
   • Protects environmentally sensitive areas
   • Reduces vehicle miles traveled
   • Minimizes impacts to historic structures
   • Promotes opportunities for positive social interaction

Goal	  7:	  Timely	  Provision	  and	  Funding	  of	  Transportation	  Facilities	  and	  Services	  
Develop reasonable and effective funding and financing strategies and priorities to ensure
that the future transportation facilities and services called for in the TSP are provided to
support community development and acceptable transportation operations and safety.

Goal	  7	  Objectives	  
   1. Identify full range of potential funding sources
   2. Match fund sources to system improvement and maintenance needs
   3. Prioritize improvement needs
   4. Phase needed improvements
   5. Acquire and preserve right-of-way needed for system improvements
   6. Require mitigation of public and private development transportation impacts

Suggested	  Goal	  7	  Evaluation	  Criteria	  
   • Eligible for a variety of funding opportunities
   • Addresses a transportation need or deficiency identified in the TSP


                                Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria                      Page 4
                           Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                 February 10, 2012

Goal	  8:	  Safety	  
Develop and maintain a transportation system that protects the health and safety of
transportation system users.

Goal	  8	  Objectives	  
   1. Reduce vehicle crashes
   2. Reduce transportation-related injuries
   3. Improve pedestrian facilities (Duplicated under Goal 4)
   4. Improve bicycle facilities (Duplicated under Goal 4)
   5. Reduces pedestrian/motor vehicle conflicts (Replaces Objective 3)
   6. Reduces bicycle/motor vehicle conflicts (Replaces Objective 4)

Suggested	  Goal	  8	  Evaluation	  Criteria	  
   • Improves intersection/bicycle/pedestrian/railroad crossing safety



Goal	  9:	  Economic	  Development	  
Provide and maintain a transportation system that supports the economic vitality of the
Dundee community.

Goal	  9	  Objectives	  
   1. Accommodate freight movement to support local businesses
   2. Provide for convenient parking and access to local businesses and other key
             destinations
   3. Provide economic development opportunities
   4. Provide transportation choices that support employers and employees
   5. Minimize transportation conflicts between neighborhoods and businesses
   6. Improve bicycle and pedestrian circulation

Suggested	  Goal	  9	  Evaluation	  Criteria	  
   • Minimizes negative impacts to existing land uses
   • Increases attractiveness to investment and development
   • Minimize impacts on on-street parking
   • Provides access to commercial and “destination” (recreation, wineries, tourism, etc.) uses


Comprehensive	  Plan	  Goals,	  Objectives,	  and	  Policies	  
The City’s Comprehensive Plan (1977) features a more current set of goals, objectives, and
policies that direct development of the City’s transportation system (pp. 72-76, 1977
Comprehensive Plan). This includes amendments to transportation policies made in 2003
and 2004 (pp. 74-76, 1977 Comprehensive Plan). More recent policy amendments

                             Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria                   Page 5
                        Dundee Transportation System Plan Update           February 10, 2012

pertaining to the Newberg-Dundee Bypass (Policies 7 and 10-14, adopted in Ordinance 502-
2011) have not yet been incorporated into the Comprehensive Plan document.

The proposed goals, objectives, and policies included in this section are the City’s adopted
transportation system goals, objectives, and policies, as found in the Comprehensive Plan
and in Ordinance 502-2011. While all policy language will be reviewed and potentially
updated as part of this TSP update, selected policies have been identified that will likely need
to be updated or modified. Notes in italics provide direction and/or suggest specific
amendments. In most cases the direction is to review the policy in light of the findings of
the TSP update process or to update language to be consistent with recent planning efforts,
such as the Riverside District Master Plan.

In addition to the suggestions following select policies, the following global issues will need
to be discussed and resolved by the Project Advisory Committee (PAC):

•   The structure of the Goals, Objectives, and Policies section of the TSP and consistency
    with the Comprehensive Plan.

•   Review of Newberg-Dundee Bypass policies in light of recent project work on the
    Bypass.

•   Possible new policies that support concepts from the 2006 Main Street Refinement Plan,
    such as planning for a transportation system that would support planned land
    uses/mixed land uses, a pedestrian-oriented streetscape, “green corridors” for
    pedestrians and bicyclists, etc.

•   Integrating policies that support and are consistent with the adopted Riverside District.
    The PAC may decide to integrate Riverside District Master Plan goals and policies into
    the TSP directly, or handle it as an overlay district.

Feedback from the PAC will inform changes and additions to the City’s existing
transportation policy language, which will be included as recommendations in the Draft TSP.

GOAL	  
To provide and encourage a safe, convenient, aesthetic and economical transportation
system, addressing the needs of all citizens within the community.

OBJECTIVES	  
A. The development of a well-connected street network that is safe, accessible and efficient
for motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists and the transportation disadvantaged.

B. Preserve the aesthetic quality of the community.




                          Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria             Page 6
                           Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                  February 10, 2012

C. The construction of a safe, continuous and direct network of streets, accessways, and
other improvements, including bikeways, sidewalks, and safe street crossings to promote safe
and convenient bicycle and pedestrian circulation within Dundee. [Consider ODOT standards
and policies for 99W.]

D. Develop policies for the location and improvement of arterials, collectors, local streets
and sidewalks. [These policies to be developed in tandem with updated street standards, and should consider
ODOT standards for 99W as well.]

E. Improve the transportation links within the region as well as other regions of the state,
while encouraging alternative transportation mode for commuters.

POLICIES	  
A. General Transportation Network

1. The designated arterial and collector streets of the street network will be used to assist in
prioritizing street development and maintenance.

2. The City of Dundee shall protect the function of existing and planned roadways as
identified in the Transportation System Plan. This policy recognizes the proposed new street
locations are conceptual in nature and the actual dedication and installation of improvements
shall comply with applicable regulations, including environmental provisions. [This policy to be
reviewed during TSP update; language should support implementation of a transportation impact analysis
development requirement.]

3. All development proposals, plan amendments, or zone changes shall conform with the
adopted Transportation System Plan.

4. The City of Dundee shall include a consideration of their impact on existing or planned
transportation facilities in all land use decisions. [This policy to be reviewed during TSP update;
intent is not currently clear and language should support implementation of a transportation impact analysis
and mitigation requirements.]

5. Transportation facility siting and design shall be done in a manner that will minimize
adverse effects on the existing land uses and natural features.

6. The City of Dundee shall protect the function of existing or planned roadways or roadway
corridors through the application of appropriate land use regulations, exactions, voluntary
dedication, or setbacks. [This policy to be reviewed during TSP update; it is similar to #2 above and
may be reworded/combined.]

7. New direct access to Highway 99W shall be granted only after consideration is given to
Oregon Department of Transportation access management standards, land use and traffic
patterns in the area of development, and not just at the specific site. Common driveways and
other access management techniques shall be encouraged to coordinate traffic and land use
                              Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria                    Page 7
                          Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                February 10, 2012

patterns and these shall be implemented wherever feasible. [Recommend all references to “Oregon
Department of Transportation” be changed to “ODOT.” Recommend rewording to emphasize minimizing
access points on 99W.]

8. The City shall coordinate development and revisions of its transportation systems plan
with the Oregon Department of Transportation and Yamhill County. Improvements listed
in ODOT's Statewide Transportation Improvement Program that affect Dundee shall be
consistent with the City's Transportation System Plan and Comprehensive Plan.

9. Off-street parking shall be provided by all land uses to improve traffic flow, promote
safety, and lessen sight obstruction along the streets. [Refine this policy or create a new policy to
indicate that the preferred location for commercial parking is to the side or behind buildings.]

10. The City shall develop a Capital Improvement Program to identify and prioritize
transportation projects.

11. All City streets shall operate at a Level of Service standard "D" or better during the 20
year planning period. When the LOS drops to "E," actions will be initiated to return the
street to LOS “D”. [This policy to be reviewed during TSP update.]

12. The City of Dundee shall work with Oregon Department of Transportation on a
continual basis to have a traffic signal installed at the Parks Road/Highway 99W and 10th
Street/Highway 99W intersections as soon as possible. [This policy to be reviewed during TSP
update, and consider need for State Traffic Engineer approval.]

13. Through the refinement plan process, the City of Dundee will investigate the potential of
developing a unique streetscape plan for the community's downtown, including the potential
for establishing a Special Transportation Area consistent with ODOT regulations. [This
policy to be revised in light of the Downtown Refinement Plan process and the outcome of the TSP process.]

B. Newberg-Dundee Bypass

1. The City shall coordinate with the Oregon Department of Transportation, Yamhill
County and other affected agencies regarding the location and construction of the Newberg-
Dundee Bypass.

2. The City shall encourage the selection of a bypass alternative that ensures sufficient traffic
is diverted from Highway 99W through Dundee to allow the remaining traffic to be served
by two travel lanes within the Transportation Plan's planning horizon. [This policy to be reviewed
during TSP update.]

3. The City shall encourage the new by-pass design to provide adequate public access -
including pedestrian, bicycle, vehicle and recreational - to the Willamette River. [All references
to the Bypass will be made consistent.]


                             Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria                  Page 8
                           Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                  February 10, 2012

4. The City shall encourage the new bypass design to incorporate adequate buffering and
physical separation between the new highway, and, public access to the Willamette River and
existing residential neighborhoods.

5. Improvements for street connectivity within the City, including alternative linkages to
adjacent communities, shall not occur until such time the bypass is in operation. [Update
policy to be consistent with Bypass policies and interim measures proposed through the TSP update process.]

6. The land use decisions regarding the location of the proposed Newberg-Dundee Bypass
shall be made through a subsequent amendment to the Dundee TSP. As part of this process,
the City recognizes Newberg and Yamhill County will need to amend their TSPs to
authorize a bypass corridor, and, Yamhill County must take an exception to Statewide
Planning Goal 12 to authorize a new transportation facility in rural lands. [Revise as a City
policy statement and update to recognize that a potential UGB amendment or Goal 3 exception may be
required for a Bypass overcrossing in the Riverside District.]

7. The City actively supports the development of the Newberg-­‐Dundee Bypass in the
southern location corridor described as Alternative 3J (Modified) in the Tier 1 Location
Environmental Impact Statement. The City prefers a below-grade roadway, however the City
recognizes that ODOT has selected an at-grade roadway with 6-8 foot berms as the
preferred alternative in the Tier 2 Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) process.
[Update to be consistent with Tier 2 DEIS and 2011 Bypass policies.]

8. The City affirms its support for a Bypass location and design that recognizes existing
Comprehensive Plan policies, including Recreation and Willamette River Greenway policies,
and which includes providing public access to the Willamette River and the City’s waterfront
for park and recreational development.

9. The City recognizes the designation of the Bypass as a statewide expressway and freight
route as defined in the Oregon Highway Plan. The City expects the Bypass and interchanges
will be fully access controlled and no direct access will be allowed from private properties on
the Bypass or within the Interchange Management Areas as defined by the OHP.

10. For purposes of City compliance with the Transportation Planning Rule (OAR 660-­‐012-­‐
0060), the City will not consider or rely on the Bypass (including the proposed East Dundee
Interchange) improvement that is reasonably likely to be constructed during the 20-year
planning horizon until the OTP includes all or a specific phase of the Bypass in the
construction section of the Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) or until
ODOT agrees, in writing that all or a portion of the bypass may be considered a planned
improvement. During the period before the Bypass can be considered a planned
improvement, the City of Dundee will work with ODOT to pursue mutually agreed upon
alternative mobility standards for Oregon 99W to comply with OAR 660-012-0060. [Update
to reflect current status of JTA Newberg-Dundee Bypass project.]

                             Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria                    Page 9
                        Dundee Transportation System Plan Update           February 10, 2012

11. An Interchange Area Management Plan (IAMP) will be developed to protect the
function and capacity of the East Dundee Interchange for at least a 20 to 25-year period.
The IAMP must be adopted by the Oregon Transportation Commission (OTC) before
construction of the interchange, consistent with the requirements of the 1999 Oregon
Highway Plan and OAR 734-051-0155(7). [Revise as a City policy statement and identify how the
City intends to participate in this planning.]

12. Figure 6-1 of the Dundee TSP identifies three potential collector road crossings of the
Bypass for illustrative purposes only. The City recognizes that one of the crossings will be
constructed as part of the Bypass project to maintain connectivity between downtown
Dundee and the Riverfront. The Tier 2 DEIS, Preferred Alternative, identifies an
overcrossing in the vicinity of 8th Street. The City is in the process of master planning the
undeveloped area between Dundee and the Willamette River. At a future date, Figure 6-1 of
the Dundee shall be amended to reflect either the Tier 2 DEIS Preferred Alternative for the
overcrossing or the location for the overcrossing identified in the adopted Riverfront master
plan. ODOT will continue to coordinate with the City on location of the overcrossing and
is flexible on the ultimate location with the UGB if it could serve all property ownerships
between the Bypass and the Willamette River. [Revise as a City policy statement. Update to
acknowledge the approximate locations identified in the Riverside District Master Plan.]

13. The City recognizes that the Oregon Highway Plan seeks to avoid UGB expansions
along Statewide Highways and around interchanges unless ODOT and affected cities and
counties agree to an Interchange Area Management Plan to protect interchange operation or
access management for segments along the highways. (OHP Action 1B.4).

C. Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities

1. In areas of new development the City of Dundee shall investigate the existing and future
opportunities for bicycle and pedestrian accessways. Existing accessways such as user trails
established by school children distinguish areas of need and should be incorporated into the
transportation system.

2. Bike lanes and/or sidewalks shall be included on all new arterials and collectors within the
Urban Growth Boundary, as referenced by the Transportation System Plan.

3. Sidewalks shall be included on all new streets within the Urban Growth Boundary, as
referenced by the Transportation System Plan.

4. Where feasible, bikeways and pedestrian accessways shall connect to local and regional
travel routes.

5. Bikeways and pedestrian accessways shall be designed and constructed to minimize
potential conflicts between transportation modes. Design and construction of such facilities
shall follow the guidelines established by the Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan.

                          Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria             Page 10
                          Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                February 10, 2012

6. Maintenance and repair of existing bikeways and pedestrian accessways (including
sidewalks) shall be given equal consideration to the maintenance and repair of motor vehicle
facilities.

7. To achieve a safe, continuous and direct network of sidewalks and bikeways, one of the
City's priorities is to construct these facilities on the streets depicted on the
Pedestrian/Bicycle Plan Map as incorporated within the Transportation System Plan.

8. The City of Dundee shall consider the potential to establish or maintain accessways, paths,
or trails prior to the vacation of any public easement or right-of-way.

9. Where possible and financially feasible, the City will upgrade existing substandard
sidewalks.

D. Public Transportation

1. The City shall encourage the creation of a customer-based and oriented regionally
coordinated public transit system that is efficient, effective, and founded on present and
future needs.

2. Promote regional planning of public transportation services and encourage the use of
innovative technology to maximize efficiency of operation, planning and administration of
public transportation.

3. The City encourages the development of a daily transit shuttle service to the major activity
centers in Newberg and McMinnville as well as the Portland and Salem metropolitan areas.
[Update to reflect existing Yamhill County Transit Area service and future review/coordination/updates to
service.]

E. Rail and Pipeline Transportation

1. The City shall coordinate land use planning adjacent to the Willamette and Pacific
Railroad facilities in order to promote industrial development with rail access.

2. The City will work with the local rail operator, the Oregon Department of Transportation
and other affected agencies or businesses to improve the at-grade railroad crossings within
the community.

3. The City supports the concept of commuter rail service serving the West Valley and
providing connections with the Portland metropolitan area. If passenger rail service does
become a reality, the City will encourage the development of a passenger rail depot in
Dundee, including necessary Development Ordinance revisions to permit construction.

4. The City supports activities that maintain adequate pipeline operations such as natural gas
service into, within and through Dundee.


                            Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Criteria                  Page 11
DATE:           April 24, 2012

TO:             Dundee TSP Update Project Management Team

FROM:           Carl Springer, P.E., DKS Associates
                Ray Delahanty, DKS Associates

SUBJECT:        Dundee Transportation System Plan Update
                Existing Conditions


The purpose of this memorandum is to present existing transportation conditions for the City of
Dundee. Questions addressed in this document include:

    •   What makes Dundee different?
    •   Where do people want to go?
    •   How do people get there?
    •   What transportation infrastructure is available?
    •   How is system performance measured?
    •   What conditions do transportation system users face?


What	  Makes	  Dundee	  Different?	  
The City of Dundee is located in the Willamette
Valley, in the heart of Oregon wine country.
The setting provides a small town feel, with
working vineyards nestled up against
established neighborhoods, and all city
destinations within about a half-mile of the city
center. The topography is characterized by the
Dundee Hills rising to the northwest, and the
city sloping down toward the Willamette River
to the southeast. The setting has proved
attractive to new residents, with the population
growing from 2,598 in the 2000 census to 3,162
in 2010.                                                Dundee neighborhoods and working
                                                           vineyards exist side by side
Dundee’s location (see Figure 1) also makes it
an attractive for visitors, as the city itself is home to world-class wineries, and county roads that
converge on the city provide access to several other wineries and popular nearby vineyards. Also,
travelers from the Portland metropolitan region on their way to destinations like the Evergreen



                                                    Existing Conditions            Page 1
                         Dundee Transportation System Plan Update              April 24, 2012

Aviation and Space Museum in McMinnville, recreational activities in the Grand Ronde area,
and the Oregon coast often pass through Dundee.




Figure 1: Dundee Vicinity Map
The city was incorporated in 1895, and its location on key freight corridors has always been part
of its identity. Early on, it was a key shipping hub along the Willamette River, and later it gained
interurban rail service when the Red Electric line opened between Portland and Eugene. The
automobile age saw the opening of the Capitol Highway through the center of Dundee, which in
1930 was assigned the US Route number 99W. The role of 99W as a key route between the
Portland region, the Oregon coast, and
attractions is as important to the character of
Dundee today as it was when the highway first
opened.

The City of Dundee continues to make
important progress towards balancing its small-
town feel with its role on a key transportation
corridor. A master plan for the currently
undeveloped Riverside District envisions a mix
of residential, commercial, tourism, and open
space stretching toward the Willamette. Also,


                                                   Existing Conditions             Page 2
                        Dundee Transportation System Plan Update           April 24, 2012

the City has worked closely with state and regional partners to plan and design a 99W bypass
route that will alleviate some of the traffic issues on Dundee’s main street. These planning
efforts define key future transportation issues that the City seeks to address in this
Transportation System Plan (TSP) update. Figure 2, below, shows the study area for the TSP,
including major roadways and intersections that were reviewed for motor vehicle, pedestrian,
and freight activity.




Figure 2: Dundee Roadways and Study Intersections

                              	  




                                                Existing Conditions            Page 3
                             Dundee Transportation System Plan Update          April 24, 2012


Where	  Do	  People	  Want	  to	  Go?	  
Planning for a transportation system that meets the City’s needs requires an understanding of
key travel destinations throughout Dundee – locations that create demand for travel because
they are where people go to work, to school, or to take care of other daily needs. These key
destinations can be thought of as activity generators, or trip attractors.

Activity generators may be destinations that residents use for their daily needs, or they may be
attractions that draw travelers from around the region. The most common categories of activity
generators in Dundee include:

    •    Recreational (e.g., parks, trails)
    •    Schools (e.g., Dundee Elementary)
    •    Places of employment (e.g. business and industrial locations)
    •    Shopping (e.g., grocery stores, restaurants)
    •    Public transportation (e.g., bus stops)

All of these activity generator types represent important starting and ending points for travel in
Dundee, and they provide a basis for assessing important travel routes. Figure 3 shows the
general location of some of the City’s key activity generators.




                                                   Existing Conditions             Page 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9TH ST
                                                                                                             CROSS CREEK RD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RED HILLS DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                   11TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T




                                     FIG. 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MA H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VIEW CREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                   CREST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AW
                                                                                                                                                                         FIR CT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      K




                                                                                                                                          NIEDERBERGER RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VIEW CREST DR




                                                                                                      99W
                                                                                                                                             CHARLES ST                                                                                                                                                                                                        WALNUT ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CARMEN
                                                                                                                                                                              MYRTLE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HEIGHTS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2ND ST




                                                                                                                                                                    13TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R




                                                                                  City of Dundee
                                                                                                                                                ALDE R ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2ND PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UPLAND DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ALDE R ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ALDER DR
                                                                                                             P&
                                                                                                               W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9T
                                                                                                                   RA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H
                                                                                                                      I   LR                                                     JA                                                                                                                                                                                             BRIER PL
                                                                                                                                                                                   ME                                                                                              GR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                               OA
                                                                                                                                 D                                                       S                                                          SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OT                         ST AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SM                    ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LIN                        AN                 E                                              DOGW OOD DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N




                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HAWTHORNE CT




                                                                                                                                                                   TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LAUREL ST




                                                                                                                                                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SPRUCE ST                                 CHARDONNAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5T




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST




                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HEMLOCK ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Y9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9W




                                                                                                                                                                                      TH




                                         ACTIVITY GENERATORS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIEWMONT DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RM




                                                               TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                             MA                                                                                                                         BIRCH ST




                                                                                                                                     PARKS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PL                                                                                                                                                                    E             L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8T
                                                                                                                                                                                                       E

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                                         CE                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                            D




                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                    AR




                                                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PEACH ST




                                                                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                                                          EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99W




                                                                                                                                                              ST            M




                                                                                                                                                                                         9T




                                                                                                                                                        ST
                                                                                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OL




                                                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4T




                                                                                                                                                      BE                                                                                                                                               NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PLUM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H




                                                                                                                                                         E                                                                            PL                                                                  M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHERRY




                                                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3R




                                                                                                                                                             CH    OA                                                                                                                                         IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D




                                                                                                                                                                     K                                                                         ST
                                                                                                                                      AS                                                                                  LO                                                                                           CT
                                                                                                                                                                         ST                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST




                                                                                                                                         H                                            CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 US
                                                                                                                                                  ST                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H




                                                                                                                                                                                             AR                                       TS                                                                                                                            IONE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2N




                                                                                                                                                                          OA                                                               T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST




                                                                                                                                                                            K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ST




                                                                                                   FULQUARTZ LANDING RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4T




                                                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H




                                                                                                                                                            EDWARDS DR                                                                                                                                                                                      ALPINE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EDWARDS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                             LOGAN LN


                                                                                                                                                                                          BOYSEN LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6TH ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3RD ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I   LR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D                                                   FOX FARM RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          YT




                                                                                                                                                                                8TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HAGEY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RAMSEY RD




                                 W
                                          il
                                              la
                                                   m
                                                        e
                                                           tt
                                                               e
                                                                  R
                                                                      iv
                                                                            er




YEAGENS LAND
            ING RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Legend




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UGB



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Parcel



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Trip Generators
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                School




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bus Stop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Shopping
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Civic/Professional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Recreation/Entertainment




    April 2012, Real Urban Geographics
                             Dundee Transportation System Plan Update          April 24, 2012


How	  Do	  People	  Get	  There?	  
Planning for an effective transportation system also means understanding how Dundee residents
choose to travel to and from destinations, whether by foot, bicycle, public transportation, motor
vehicle, or other mode. Understanding mode choice includes assessing existing travel patterns
and activity levels, and looking at the underlying factors particular to Dundee that inform mode
choice.

The	  Commute	  to	  Work	  
Travel occurs for many reasons, including school, shopping, and recreation. The trip type that
people most often associate with traffic problems, though, is their work trip, which often occurs
in peak traffic conditions. 80% of working Dundee residents commute to work by driving alone
(single occupant motor vehicle, or SOV), and 10% carpool to work. Public transportation (2%),
walking (2%), and bicycling (1%) are not common modes for the journey to work, and 6% work
at home.

Table 1 compares Dundee residents’ mode choice for commute to Yamhill County and to
Oregon statewide. The proportion of Dundee residents driving alone to work is higher than that
of all Oregon residents, and the percentage commuting by every other mode (transit, walking,
biking) is lower in Dundee than it is statewide. The comparisons are similar between Dundee
and Yamhill County as a whole, with the proportion of Dundee residents driving alone to work
exceeding that of all County residents. However, a slightly higher proportion of Dundee
residents commute by transit than is seen countywide.

Table 1: Percent of Commuters Using Modes

               Transportation Mode                   Dundee       Yamhill Co.        Oregon
Motor Vehicle – Single Occupant                        80%               75%           72%
Motor vehicle - Carpool                                10%               12%           11%
Walked                                                  2%                5%            4%
Biked/Other                                             1%                2%            3%
Public Transportation                                   2%                1%            4%
Worked from Home                                        6%                5%            6%
Source: 2006-2010 American Community Survey

While data on commute mode choice is important in understanding major travel patterns, it is
important not to confuse this with overall levels of activity for different travel modes. Work
trips for Dundee residents cover long distances in many cases, while trips to and from other
activity generators like schools, recreation, and shopping may be much shorter. Non-motor
vehicle modes tend to be more likely for these non-work trips, although travel into neighboring
Newberg is necessary for certain types of school and shopping trips.




                                                   Existing Conditions            Page 6
                               Dundee Transportation System Plan Update         April 24, 2012

Existing	  Activity	  Levels	  
Pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicle activity at intersections throughout Dundee was reviewed
for the p.m. peak period (3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.) on a typical weekday in February.1 In summer
months, activity levels are generally higher due to an increase in the number of visitors and
vacationers traveling through. Also, weekend activity levels were not measured, but because of
the higher level of shopping and recreational travel on weekends, pedestrian and bicycle activity
would be expected to be higher.

Pedestrian	  Volumes	  
Of all the intersections reviewed, two locations
on Highway 99W had notable levels of
pedestrian crossing activity. The highest
pedestrian volume was on the crosswalk at 10th
Street, near the location of the southbound
transit stop for the commuter bus from the
Portland metro area. The second highest
volume was at Dundee’s only signalized
intersection on 99W, at 5th Street, where
Dundee Elementary School is located.
Pedestrian activity at all study intersections for
the one-hour p.m. peak period is shown in
Figure 4. Note that counts were taken in                     After-school crossing at 5th
February, which due to weather is likely to have                   Street and 99W
lower pedestrian activity than sumer months. In
busy tourism months, the crosswalk at 7th Street, which connects restaurants, shops, and
wineries, may be significantly busier than other crosswalks.

Bicycle	  Volumes	  
During the p.m. peak period on a February weekday, bicycle volumes are low through Dundee.
Bicycle use tends to vary seasonally, as warmer, dryer weather and longer daylight hours make it
a more attractive travel mode. Bicycle activity at all study intersections for the one-hour p.m.
peak period is shown in Figure 4.

Motor	  Vehicle	  Volumes	  
Review of traffic count data showed that the evening peak period for roadways in Dundee
occurs between 4:45 p.m. and 5:45 p.m. Motor vehicle activity varies depending on time of year,
however, as the level of tourism increases during summer months. Warmer weather brings an
influx of visitors to Dundee and other Yamhill County destinations, and it also brings an
increase in vacation travel to the Oregon Coast along 99W. Because of these important seasonal



1   Based on counts conducted February 7, 2012 and February 2, 2011


                                                          Existing Conditions      Page 7
                                Dundee Transportation System Plan Update                  April 24, 2012

variations, traffic count data was adjusted to represent two separate conditions: p.m. peak hour
traffic conditions during (1) the peak month weekday, and (2) the average weekday.

Traffic count data was collected in Dundee in the month of February, and required adjustment
in order to represent average weekday and peak seasonal conditions using methodology from the
Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) Analysis Procedures Manual.2 Because seasonal
travel patterns on the street system off of 99W are expected to reflect a commuter trend rather
than a coastal destination trend, separate adjustment factors were used. The seasonal and average
adjustment factors for 99W are, respectively, 1.14 and 1.03, and the factors for all non-99W
intersections are 1.11 and 1.05. The final p.m. peak seasonal and average weekday traffic
volumes developed for the study
intersections are displayed in
Figure 5.

Generally, volumes in the p.m.
peak hour on 99W are higher at
the north end of Dundee,
between Fox Farm Road and 5th
Street, with around 15% more
daily traffic than locations south
of 5th Street. The chart on the
right shows how northbound
and southbound volumes on
99W vary during the day               Hourly Vehicle Volumes on 99W North of 7th Street
            th      th
between 5 and 7 Streets, a
segment which currently experiences an average daily traffic (ADT) level of about 30,000
vehicles3. The northbound direction shows heavier morning activity, suggesting commuter
traffic towards Newberg and the Portland metro area, while the southbound direction carries the
most traffic during the afternoon and the p.m. peak hour, suggesting returning commuter traffic.




2   See appendix for more information on seasonal factoring.
3   24-hour traffic count data on Highway 99W collected at 6th Street on July 22, 2011.


                                                              Existing Conditions            Page 8
                                                                                AL
                                                                                   DE
                                                                                      RC
                                                                                         R       ES
                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Legend




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FOX FARM RD
                                                                                                                                                        VIEWMONT DR                                                                                                                                                              RAMSEY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Peak Evening Hour*




                                                                                                ALDE R ST


                                                                                                             BRIER PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pedestrian Counts




                                                                                                                                                          CHARDONNAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PLUM




                                                                                                                                          LAUREL ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E




                                                                 WALNUT ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AV




                                                                                                                                                                                                        PEACH ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ALPINE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          None (0)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IONE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CHERRY
                                                                                                                                                                                          L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   YT




                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DA




                                                                                                                                                                                      RM
                                                                                                                           DOGW OOD DR
                                                                                             1ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Low (1-5)




                                                                                                                                                                                   CA
                                              DR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Moderate (6-10)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HAGEY RD
                                            T




                                                                                                                                                                          HEMLOCK ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OL
                                         ON



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T




                                                                                                                                         HAWTHORNE CT
                                                                                 2ND ST




                                                                                                                                                         SPRUCE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IV




                                                                                                                                                                                       BIRCH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ER
                                         M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OA
                                       EW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          High (11+)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LR
                                      VI




                                                                                      2ND PL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Peak Evening Hour*




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Z
                                                                              UPLAND DR                                                                                                                                                       D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M     IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bicycle Counts




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                     5T
                                                                                                                                                                          H
                                                                                                                                                                              ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          None (0)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EDWARDS DR
                    RED HILLS DR




                                                                 7TH ST                                                                                                                                                                                                             3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4T
                                                                                                              ST AY                                                                                                          H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Low (1-5)
                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                GR
                                                                                                                ON
                                                VIEW CREST




                                                                              HEIGHTS DR
                                                                               CARMEN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Moderate (6-10)
                                                                                                 ALDER DR




9TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          none shown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          High (11+, none shown)
                                                                                                                           AN




                                                                                                                                                                                                        99W
                                                                                                                        SM




                                                                                                                                                                       7T
                                                                                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          none shown
                                                                                                                    OT




                                                                                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                         LN




                                                     K
                                                                                                                  SC




                                                  AW
                                              MA H
                                                                                                                                    N




                                                                                                             9T
                                                             VIEW CREST DR




                                         TO
                                                                                                                                DE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ST
                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                            LIN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  US
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UGB
                                                                                                                                                                              9W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6TH ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LO
                                                                                                                                                                          Y9
                                              FA




                                                                                                                                                                                               8T
                                                                                                                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                                                                     HW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7T
                                                LC




                                                                                                                                                                                                        ST                              H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Parcel
                                               ON




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BOYSEN LN
                                                 CREST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LOGAN LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Street
                                                                                                                                                                                             ST




                       11TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                          PL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Water
                                                                                                                                                                                       MA




                                                                                                                                                                                10                                 9T              AR
                                                                                MYRTLE ST




                                                                                                                                                                                     TH                                 H
                                                                                                                  S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                               ME




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CE

                                                                                                                                                                                          ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Railroad
                                                                                                             JA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST
                                                   FIR CT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      K
                                                                                                                                                                                                          M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OA



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  * 4:45 - 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                        EL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EDWARDS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST




                                                                              13TH ST                                                    12
                                                                                                                                              TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              K




                                                                                                                                                        ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OA
                                                                 CHARLES ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                            ALDE R ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                           T   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    AR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST




                                    NIEDERBERGER RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                  D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                                                                                               CE




                                                                                                                                                                       PARKS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AS
   CROSS CREEK RD




                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                               OA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FULQUARTZ LANDING RD
                                                                                                             LRI
                                                                                                            RA
                                                                                                          W
                                                                                                        P&




                                                             99W




                                   City of Dundee
                                   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 iv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e

                                   FIG. 4                           PEDESTRIAN and BICYCLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ING RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i   ll
                                                                      PEAK HOUR ACTIVITY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W                                            YEAGENS LAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     April 2012, Real Urban Geographics
                                                                                                                                     FARM
                                                                                                                                      FOX
                                                                          DOGWOOD DR




                                                                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                         1
NO SCALE                                                                                        1ST ST
                                                                                                                                                   HAGEY RD




                                                                                                                                         RR
                                                                                             3RD ST                       2




                                                                                                                                     &P
                                                                8




                                                                                                                                     W
                                              UPLAND                    DR                  5T
                                                                                                H




                                                             ALDER ST
                                                                                                    ST            99W                     3RD ST

                                                                                 7T
                                                                                        H
                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                              3

                                                                9        9T                          4                     10
                                                                                H                                                                          Dundee City Limit Line
                                                                                        ST




                                                                                                                        EDWARDS DR
                                                                                                5
                                          11TH ST                                           6
                                                                                                         10                                     8TH ST                                                      er
                                                                                                            TH                                                                                          iv
                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                   ST                                                                             te
                                                                                                                                                                                               et
                                                                                                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                                                                                         illa
                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                             NIEDERBERGER RD 7                                                  PARKS DR                11

        OR 99W @ Fox Farm Rd.                                           OR 99W @ 1st St./Driveway                                             OR 99W @ 5th St.                          OR 99W @ 7th St.
1                                                           2                                                                             3                                         4
                     LT 1000




                                                                                              TH 110
                       TH 5




                                                                                            LT 1230




                                                                                                                                                         LT 1140
                                                                                                                                                           TH 30
                          RT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TH 25
                                                                                                RT




                                                                                                                                                             RT
                        2




                                                                                                                                                                                                              114
                                                                                               25




                                                                                                                                                            80




                                                                                                                                                                                                             RT
                                                                           20                                RT                                    60                  RT                       15
          230




                                                                              L                            TH 45                                 10 LT               TH 40                    15 LT
                                                                          0T T
          10
          5




          RT TH LT
                                  RT                                    10 H                             LT 0                                  10 TH               LT 5                          RT
                                TH 2                                      RT                                10                                    RT                  15
                              LT 5




                                                                                                                                                                                                        10 20 LT
                                                                                                                                                                                                             TH
                                                                                            10 15 LT




                                 13                                                                                                                       99 0 LT
                                                                                            10 TH




                                                                                                                                                         10 H
                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                                          00
                                                                                                                                                            5T
                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                               RT




                                                                                                                                                            RT
                                                                                              70
                 10 20 LT
                 55 TH
                    RT
                   60




        OR 99W @ 9th St.                                                OR 99W @ 10th St.                                                     OR 99W @ Niederberger Rd./                Alder St. @ Upland Dr.
5                                                           6                                                                             7   Parks Dr.                             8
                     LT 1095
                       TH 60




                                                                                            LT 1060
                                                                                              TH 0




                                                                                                                                                       LT 1040




                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                         TH 25
                         RT




                                                                                                RT




                                                                                                                                                                         RT 5


                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RT 10
                                                                                               55
                        2




                                                                                                                                                           RT




                                                                                                                                                                                             RT TH LT
                                                                                                                                                          10




               30                                                                                            RT                                                          TH 0                                    TH 20
                                                                            2L
             20 LT                 RT                                     0T T                             TH 20                                                         LT 0                                    LT 30
                RT               LT 0                                    2R H                            LT 0
                                    0                                      T                                15                                 10 LT                                          2 LT
                                                                                                                                                           10 20 LT




                                                                                                                                                0 TH                                         10 TH
                                                                                                                                                           10 TH
                      99 5 LT




                                                                                                                                                                                                             LT TH RT
                                                                                             10 2 LT




                                                                                                                                                              RT
                           H




                                                                                                                                               20 RT
                                                                                             20 TH




                                                                                                                                                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                              5 RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                        0T




                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                             55
                         3




                                                                                                RT
                                                                                               05




        Alder St. @ 9th St.                                10           Edwards Dr. @ 5th St.                                            11   Edwards Dr. @ Parks Dr.
9
              20
              5
              5




                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                            5
                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                         5




              RT TH LT                                                                      RT TH
                                 RT                                                                                                                      RT TH
                               TH 15
                             LT 0
                                  6
               20               10
             55 LT                                                                       2
                                                                                       50 LT                                                       20 LT         LT TH
                 T
             5R H                                                                        RT         LT TH                                           2 RT
                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                 5




                T
                                                                                                    35
                                                                                                     5




                            LT TH RT
                             5
                            20
                             5




LEGEND                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure       5A
    1    - Study Intersection                             - Lane Configuration
                                                                                                                                                                              2012 EXISTING 30 HV
         - Stop Sign                             000 - PM Peak Hour Traffic Volumes
                                         LT TH RT - Volume Turn Movement
                                                                                                                                                                          MOTOR VEHICLE VOLUMES
         - Traffic Signal               Left Thru Right                                                                                                                             (PM Peak Hour)
                                                                                                                                     FARM
                                                                                                                                      FOX
                                                                          DOGWOOD DR




                                                                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                         1
NO SCALE                                                                                        1ST ST
                                                                                                                                                   HAGEY RD




                                                                                                                                         RR
                                                                                             3RD ST                       2




                                                                                                                                     &P
                                                                8




                                                                                                                                     W
                                              UPLAND                    DR                  5T
                                                                                                H




                                                             ALDER ST
                                                                                                    ST            99W                     3RD ST

                                                                                 7T
                                                                                        H
                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                              3

                                                                9        9T                          4                     10
                                                                                H                                                                          Dundee City Limit Line
                                                                                        ST




                                                                                                                        EDWARDS DR
                                                                                                5
                                          11TH ST                                           6
                                                                                                         10                                     8TH ST                                                      er
                                                                                                            TH                                                                                          iv
                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                   ST                                                                             te
                                                                                                                                                                                               et
                                                                                                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                                                                                         illa
                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                             NIEDERBERGER RD 7                                                  PARKS DR                11

        OR 99W @ Fox Farm Rd.                                           OR 99W @ 1st St./Driveway                                             OR 99W @ 5th St.                          OR 99W @ 7th St.
1                                                           2                                                                             3                                         4
                                                                                              TH 105
                     LT 940
                       TH 5




                                                                                            LT 1155




                                                                                                                                                         LT 1070
                                                                                                                                                           TH 25
                          RT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 70
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TH 25
                                                                                                RT




                                                                                                                                                             RT
                        2




                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                            75




                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                             RT
                                                                           20                                 RT                                   55                  RT                      15
          215




                                                                              L                            TH 45                                 10 LT               TH 40                   15 LT
                                                                          0T T
          10
          5




          RT TH LT
                                  RT                                    10 H                             LT 0                                  10 TH               LT 5                         RT
                                TH 2                                      RT                                5                                     RT                  15
                              LT 5




                                                                                                                                                                                                        93 0 LT
                                                                                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                            10 15 LT




                                 12                                                                                                                       93 0 LT




                                                                                                                                                                                                          5T
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                            10 TH




                                                                                                                                                         10 H
                                    5                                                                                                                       0T
                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                               RT




                                                                                                                                                            RT
                                                                                              00
                  99 0 LT
                 55 H
                    0T
                     2

                    RT




        OR 99W @ 9th St.                                                OR 99W @ 10th St.                                                     OR 99W @ Niederberger Rd./                Alder St. @ Upland Dr.
5                                                           6                                                                             7   Parks Dr.                             8
                     LT 1030
                       TH 55




                                                                                            LT 1000
                                                                                              TH 0




                                                                                                                                                         TH 25
                         RT




                                                                                                RT




                                                                                                                                                       LT 980




                                                                                                                                                                         RT 5


                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RT 10
                                                                                               50
                        2




                                                                                                                                                           RT




                                                                                                                                                                                             RT TH LT
                                                                                                                                                          10




               30                                                                                            RT                                                          TH 0                                    TH 15
                                                                            2L
             20 LT                 RT                                     0T T                             TH 20                                                         LT 0                                    LT 25
                RT               LT 0                                    2R H                            LT 0
                                    0                                      T                                15                                 10 LT                                         2 LT
                                                                                                                                                            94 0 LT




                                                                                                                                                0 TH                                         5 TH
                                                                                                                                                           10 H
                      92 0 LT




                                                                                                                                                                                                             LT TH RT
                                                                                              93 2 LT




                                                                                                                                                              0T
                                                                                                                                                               2

                                                                                                                                                              RT
                           H




                                                                                                                                               15 RT
                                                                                             20 TH




                                                                                                                                                                                             5 RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                        5T




                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                             55
                         3




                                                                                                RT
                                                                                                5




        Alder St. @ 9th St.                                10           Edwards Dr. @ 5th St.                                            11   Edwards Dr. @ Parks Dr.
9
              15
              5
              5




                                                                                            5
                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                         5




              RT TH LT                                                                      RT TH
                                 RT                                                                                                                      RT TH
                               TH 15
                             LT 0
                                  6
               20               10
             50 LT                                                                       2
                                                                                       45 LT                                                       15 LT         LT TH
                 T
             5R H                                                                        RT         LT TH                                           2 RT
                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                 5




                T
                                                                                                    35
                                                                                                     5




                            LT TH RT
                             5
                            20
                             5




LEGEND                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure       5B
    1    - Study Intersection                             - Lane Configuration
                                                 000 - PM Peak Hour Traffic Volumes
                                                                                                                                                       2012 EXISTING AVERAGE WEEKDAY
         - Stop Sign
                                         LT TH RT - Volume Turn Movement
                                                                                                                                                               MOTOR VEHICLE VOLUMES
         - Traffic Signal               Left Thru Right                                                                                                                  (PM Peak Hour)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 99W -- SW Niederberger Rd/SE Parks Dr                                                                      QC JOB #: 10617213
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                  DATE: 2/2/2011
                      956 0.95 876                          Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                 2.8       3.9

                       21 926   9
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 2.9 0.0

       41      9                     2       3
                                                                                                            0.0   11.1                    50.0   33.3
        0.73   0         0.93        0   0.63
                                                                                                                  0.0                      0.0
       29      20                    1     16
                                                                                                            3.4   0.0                      0.0    0.0

                       20 865   7
                                                                                                                          0.0 3.7 0.0

                      947 0.85 892
                                                                                                                          2.9       3.6



                           0                                                                                              0     0   0


                                                                                                                  0                         0

               0                     0                                                                            0                         0

                                                                                                                  0                         0


                           0                                                                                              0     0   0




 5-Min Count                OR 99W                         OR 99W
     Period                                                                 SW Niederberger Rd/SE ParksSW
                                                                                                        Dr Niederberger Rd/SE Parks Dr
                         (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                                                                         Hourly
Beginning At                                                                     (Eastbound)                (Westbound)           Total
                    Left Thru Right      U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left  Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right       U                Totals
     4:00 PM          2    59      0     0         0      66     3     0     2     0      3     0       0      0      0     0      135
     4:05 PM          0    66      0     0         0      62     3     0     1     0      2     0       0      0      0     0      134
     4:10 PM          2    73      1     0         0      74     3     0     1     0      2     0       0      0      0     0      156
     4:15 PM          1    82      0     0         0      65     2     0     1     0      0     0       1      1      0     0      153
     4:20 PM          2    80      1     0         0      84     2     0     1     0      1     0       0      0      0     0      171
     4:25 PM          0    80      0     0         2      72     0     0     0     0      4     0       0      0      0     0      158
     4:30 PM          1    65      0     0         1      75     0     0     1     0      2     0       1      0      0     0      146
     4:35 PM          1    64      0     0         0      78     1     0     1     0      2     0       0      0      0     0      147
     4:40 PM          4    64      0     0         1      89     2     0     1     0      1     0       0      0      0     0      162
     4:45 PM          3    89      1     0         1      68     2     0     0     0      1     0       0      0      1     0      166
     4:50 PM          2    63      0     0         4      84     1     0     1     0      0     0       0      0      0     0      155
     4:55 PM          0    61      2     0         0      72     0     0     1     0      3     0       0      0      0     0      139        1822
     5:00 PM          0    58      1     0         0      87     2     0     0     0      0     0       0      0      1     0      149        1836
     5:05 PM          0    66      0     0         0      78     3     0     0     0      3     0       0      0      0     0      150        1852
     5:10 PM          1    84      1     0         0      70     2     0     0     0      2     0       0      0      0     0      160        1856
     5:15 PM          1    76      2     0         0      70     3     0     2     0      3     0       0      0      0     0      157        1860
     5:20 PM          3    97      0     0         1      78     4     0     1     0      1     0       0      0      0     0      185        1874
     5:25 PM          4    78      0     0         1      77     1     0     1     0      2     0       0      0      0     0      164        1880
     5:30 PM          1    67      0     0         1      62     2     0     3     0      1     0       0      0      0     0      137        1871
     5:35 PM          3    62      2     0         1      82     2     0     0     0      0     0       0      0      1     0      153        1877
     5:40 PM          1    71      0     0         1      59     2     0     1     0      0     0       0      0      1     0      136        1851
     5:45 PM          0    63      1     0         2      80     2     0     3     0      0     0       0      0      0     0      151        1836
     5:50 PM          1    67      0     0         0      75     1     0     3     0      1     0       1      0      0     0      149        1830
     5:55 PM          0    56      2     0         0      63     0     0     4     0      1     0       0      0      1     0      127        1818
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                    Southbound               Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right      U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       32 1004       8     0         8     900    32     0    16     0     24     0       0      0      0     0           2024
 Heavy Trucks         0    32      0               0      24     0           0     0      0             0      0      0                  56
  Pedestrians               0                              0                       0                           0                          0
   Bicycles           0     0      0               0       0     0           0     0      0             0      0      0                   0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: Video Only
Report generated on 5/20/2011 1:56 PM                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 99W -- SE 10th St                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10617212
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                    DATE: 2/2/2011
                     1034 0.97 929                          Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                                   2.9       4.0

                      0   984 50
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 2.7 6.0

       1       2                     18     31
                                                                                                             0.0    50.0                     16.7      9.7
        0.63   0          0.95        0   0.77
                                                                                                                    0.0                       0.0
       4       2                     13     69
                                                                                                             25.0   0.0                       0.0      4.3

                      1   909 19
                                                                                                                            0.0 3.6 0.0

                     999 0.87 929
                                                                                                                            2.7       3.6



                           10                                                                                               0     0   0


                                                                                                                    0                          0

               6                      2                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                    0                          0


                           0                                                                                                0     0   1




 5-Min Count               OR 99W                          OR 99W                  SE 10th St                   SE 10th St
     Period             (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                   Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                     Totals
     4:00 PM         0    72       0    0          2      69     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0         143
     4:05 PM         0    55       1    0          2      72     0     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      3         0         134
     4:10 PM         0    70       1    0          0      89     0     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      3         0         164
     4:15 PM         0    90       1    0          1      68     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0         160
     4:20 PM         0    78       1    0          0      94     0     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      2         0         176
     4:25 PM         0    84       1    0          5      70     0     0     0      0      0      0     2        0      0         0         162
     4:30 PM         0    74       0    0          3      81     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      1         0         159
     4:35 PM         0    55       1    0          3      94     0     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      4         0         158
     4:40 PM         0    87       1    0          4      86     0     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      3         0         182
     4:45 PM         1    77       2    0          8      77     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      2         0         167
     4:50 PM         0    70       1    0          5      89     0     0     1      0      0      0     1        0      2         0         169
     4:55 PM         0    72       0    0          0      85     0     0     1      0      0      0     2        0      1         0         161             1935
     5:00 PM         0    53       0    0          7      85     0     0     0      0      0      0     2        0      2         0         149             1941
     5:05 PM         0    76       2    0          3      87     0     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0         0         169             1976
     5:10 PM         0    70       3    0          1      77     0     0     0      0      1      0     2        0      1         0         155             1967
     5:15 PM         0    82       2    0          9      77     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0         170             1977
     5:20 PM         0    96       1    0          1      80     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      3         0         181             1982
     5:25 PM         0    83       3    0          6      80     0     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      2         0         175             1995
     5:30 PM         0    77       2    0          2      75     0     0     0      0      1      0     2        0      1         0         160             1996
     5:35 PM         0    66       2    0          4      86     0     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      1         0         160             1998
     5:40 PM         0    65       0    0          3      69     0     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      2         0         140             1956
     5:45 PM         0    68       1    0          3      83     0     0     0      0      1      0     1        0      4         0         161             1950
     5:50 PM         0    80       0    0          4      81     0     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      2         0         168             1949
     5:55 PM         0    59       0    0          4      69     0     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      2         0         135             1923
 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates        Left Thru Right      U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       0 1044       24    0         64     948     0     0     0      0      0      0     4        0     20         0                 2104
 Heavy Trucks        0    28       0               4      36     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                            68
  Pedestrians              0                              16                        0                            0                                   16
   Bicycles          0     0       0               0       0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: Video Only
Report generated on 5/20/2011 1:56 PM                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 99W -- SW 1st St                                                                                           QC JOB #: 10617211
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                  DATE: 2/2/2011
                      1265 0.95 1047                        Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                                 2.8       4.4

                       99 1143 23
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                          1.0 3.1 0.0

       111     18                      40     48
                                                                                                             0.9   0.0                      5.0      4.2
        0.63   0          0.97          0   0.81
                                                                                                                   0.0                      0.0
       28      10                       8     31
                                                                                                             0.0   0.0                      0.0      3.2

                       12 989    8
                                                                                                                          0.0 4.4 12.5

                      1161 0.96 1009
                                                                                                                          3.0       4.5



                            0                                                                                             0     0   0


                                                                                                                   0                         0

               0                        2                                                                          0                         0

                                                                                                                   0                         0


                            0                                                                                             0     0   0




 5-Min Count                OR 99W                         OR 99W                  SW 1st St                    SW 1st St
     Period              (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                              Total
                    Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
     4:00 PM          0    96      3     0           1    71     7     0     2      0      1      0     2        0      5       0         188
     4:05 PM          0    68      2     0           2    79     6     0     1      0      0      0     1        0      3       0         162
     4:10 PM          0    66      2     0           2    97     4     0     3      0      0      0     1        0      2       0         177
     4:15 PM          1    83      0     0           1    87     8     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      2       0         183
     4:20 PM          0    91      0     0           1    92     6     0     1      0      0      0     1        0      6       0         198
     4:25 PM          0    77      1     0           3    88     3     0     1      0      1      0     1        0      4       0         179
     4:30 PM          0    94      3     0           0    91     5     0     1      0      1      0     0        0      1       0         196
     4:35 PM          1    54      3     0           2    96    10     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      7       0         174
     4:40 PM          1    84      0     0           2   105     9     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      2       0         204
     4:45 PM          1    90      2     0           5    97    12     0     0      0      1      0     0        0      2       0         210
     4:50 PM          0    76      0     0           2    96     6     0     1      0      0      0     2        0      7       0         190
     4:55 PM          0    85      0     0           0    96     9     0     2      0      0      0     0        0      2       0         194             2255
     5:00 PM          0    71      0     0           2   103    10     0     3      0      0      0     1        0      5       0         195             2262
     5:05 PM          2    84      1     0           0    91     7     0     0      0      1      0     1        0      2       0         189             2289
     5:10 PM          2    76      1     0           1    81     8     0     2      0      3      0     1        0      4       0         179             2291
     5:15 PM          1    90      0     0           1   105     8     0     1      0      1      0     0        0      1       0         208             2316
     5:20 PM          1    77      2     0           3    86     7     0     2      0      0      0     0        0      4       0         182             2300
     5:25 PM          1    90      1     0           0    83     7     0     0      0      0      0     1        0      5       0         188             2309
     5:30 PM          3    83      0     0           6    99     7     0     3      0      3      0     0        0      3       0         207             2320
     5:35 PM          0    83      1     0           1   101     9     0     4      0      1      0     1        0      3       0         204             2350
     5:40 PM          1    69      3     0           0    93    11     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      4       0         182             2328
     5:45 PM          1    80      1     0           3    82    11     0     1      0      0      0     1        0      7       0         187             2305
     5:50 PM          1    80      3     0           1    94     5     0     1      0      1      0     0        0      3       0         189             2304
     5:55 PM          0    60      3     0           2    85     8     0     2      0      0      0     1        0      5       0         166             2276
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                  Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        8 1000       8     0          36 1192    108     0     4      0      4      0    12        0     44       0                 2416
 Heavy Trucks         0    40      0                 0    40     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                          80
  Pedestrians               0                              0                        0                            4                                  4
   Bicycles           0     0      0                 0     0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: Video Only
Report generated on 5/20/2011 1:56 PM                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 99W -- 5th St                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10577713
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                    DATE: 2/1/2011
                      1149 1.00 1034                           Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                2.3       3.1

                          25 1054 70
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 2.3 4.3

       39      52                       37     52
                                                                                                               0.0   3.8                      2.7      1.9
        1.00   9             1.01        3   1.00
                                                                                                                     0.0                      0.0
       70      9                        12     88
                                                                                                               2.9   0.0                      0.0      3.4

                          11 945    9
                                                                                                                            0.0 3.1 0.0

                      1075 0.97 965
                                                                                                                            2.2       3.0



                              4                                                                                             0     0   0


                                                                                                                     0                         0

               2                         0                                                                           1                         0

                                                                                                                     0                         0


                              2                                                                                             0     0   0




15-Min Count                   OR 99W                         OR 99W                    5th St                      5th St
   Period                   (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                    Left     Thru Right       U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right    U    Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
   4:00 PM            2      227     2        0      14     246     9     0    18      3       3   0      0        0       6      0         530
   4:15 PM            0      248     1        0      18     247     3     0     7      0       0   0      3        1      11      0         539
   4:30 PM            2      202     4        0      18     269     3     0    10      0       1   0      4        0      18      0         531
   4:45 PM            5      216     3        0      18     273     1     0    13      1       3   0      4        0      15      0         552             2152
   5:00 PM            4      237     2        0      14     256     9     0    16      5       2   0      4        0       9      0         558             2180
   5:15 PM            0      248     1        0      18     256     8     0    13      1       1   0      1        0       9      0         556             2197
   5:30 PM            2      244     3        0      20     269     7     0    10      2       3   0      3        3       4      0         570             2236
   5:45 PM            1      206     1        0      10     279     8     0     9      1       3   0      1        0       9      0         528             2212




 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                 Southbound                   Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates         Left     Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right    U      Left   Thru Right    U    Left    Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles        0      992      4     0        72 1024    32     0       52      4      4    0      4       0     36    0                     2224
 Heavy Trucks         0       24      0               0   28     0              4      0      0           0       0      0                           56
  Pedestrians                  0                           4                           0                          0                                   4
   Bicycles           0        0      0               0    0     0              0      0      0           0       0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/7/2011 6:26 AM                                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: NE Fox Farm Rd -- OR 99W                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10577712
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                    DATE: 2/1/2011
                      219 0.91 26                               Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                               1.4       3.8

                      207    3     9
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                            1.4 0.0 0.0

      1264    19                         3    941
                                                                                                               2.1   5.3                      0.0      2.4
       0.95   1001          1.00       937   1.00
                                                                                                                     3.4                      2.5
      1071    51                         1   1012
                                                                                                               3.5   3.9                      0.0      3.5

                      120    4     2
                                                                                                                            0.8 0.0 50.0

                      55 1.00 126
                                                                                                                            3.6       1.6



                             0                                                                                              0     0   0


                                                                                                                     0                         0

              0                          0                                                                           0                         0

                                                                                                                     0                         0


                             0                                                                                              0     0   0




15-Min Count              NE Fox Farm Rd                   NE Fox Farm Rd              OR 99W                      OR 99W
   Period                  (Northbound)                     (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                   Left     Thru Right   U          Left     Thru Right   U   Left   Thru Right    U    Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
   4:00 PM          25        0     2    0            0        1     20   0     6    249     12    0      0      259     0        0         574
   4:15 PM          24        1     0    0            0        1     39   0    10    245     10    0      0      220     0        0         550
   4:30 PM          34        0     0    0            1        0     55   0     3    214      7    0      0      219     1        0         534
   4:45 PM          25        1     1    0            0        1     57   0     5    242     13    0      1      231     0        0         577             2235
   5:00 PM          28        1     0    0            2        0     53   0     4    235     17    0      0      238     0        0         578             2239
   5:15 PM          30        1     0    0            3        1     56   0     3    270      8    0      0      214     3        0         589             2278
   5:30 PM          37        1     1    0            4        1     41   0     7    254     13    0      0      254     0        0         613             2357
   5:45 PM          24        1     1    0            1        0     40   0     7    202      6    0      1      245     2        1         531             2311




 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                     Southbound              Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates    Left         Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right    U      Left    Thru Right    U
  All Vehicles 120            4      0     0         12       4   224     0    12 1080     32    0        0     856     12    0                     2356
 Heavy Trucks    0            0      0                0       0     0           0   36      0             0      28      0                           64
  Pedestrians                 0                               0                      0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles      0            0      0                0       0     0           0    0      0             0       0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/7/2011 6:26 AM                                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Edwards Dr -- SE Parks Dr                                                                                QC JOB #: 10709006
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Feb 07 2012
                     12          21                      Peak-Hour: 4:55 PM -- 5:55 PM                                  0.0         0.0

                     10    2     0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 5:40 PM -- 5:55 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0

       10    18                        0    0
                                                                                                          0.0   0.0                         0.0      0.0
             0            0.73         0
                                                                                                                0.0                         0.0
       20    2                         0    0
                                                                                                          5.0   50.0                        0.0      0.0

                     0     3     0
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0

                     4           3
                                                                                                                        25.0        0.0



                           0                                                                                             0     0    0


                                                                                                                0                            0

             0                         0                                                                        0                            0

                                                                                                                0                            0


                           0                                                                                             0     0    0




                          NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                       NA                                                                        NA                          NA




                          NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count           SE Edwards Dr                 SE Edwards Dr             SE Parks Dr                  SE Parks Dr
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                  Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                              Total
                  Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            0             23
     4:05 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     1     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            2             23
     4:10 PM        0      1      0     0         0     1     1     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            4             26
     4:15 PM        0      1      0     0         0     0     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            1             27
     4:20 PM        0      2      0     0         0     1     1     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            4             30
     4:25 PM        0      2      0     0         0     0     0     0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0         0            4             34
     4:30 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            0             34
     4:35 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     2     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            3             34
     4:40 PM        0      1      0     0         0     0     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            1             26
     4:45 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     1     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            2             27
     4:50 PM        0      0      0     0         0     1     1     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            3             28
     4:55 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     1     0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0         0            3             27
     5:00 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            1             28
     5:05 PM        0      1      0     0         0     0     1     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            2             28
     5:10 PM        0      0      0     0         0     1     0     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            2             26
     5:15 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     3     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            4             29
     5:20 PM        0      0      0     0         0     1     0     0     3      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            4             29
     5:25 PM        0      1      0     0         0     0     0     0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            3             28
     5:30 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     3      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            3             31
     5:35 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            1             29
     5:40 PM        0      1      0     0         0     0     0     0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            2             30
     5:45 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     1     0     2      0      1      0     0        0      0         0            4             32
     5:50 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     4     0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            6             35
     5:55 PM        1      0      0     0         0     1     0     0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0            2             34
 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                  Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                  Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles      0      4      0     0         0     0    20     0    20      0      4      0     0        0      0         0                   48
 Heavy Trucks       0      0      0               0     0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                              0
  Pedestrians              0                            0                        0                            0                                     0
   Bicycles         0      0      0               0     0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/9/2012 1:21 PM                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Alder St -- SW 9th St                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10709005
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, Feb 07 2012
                        24          51                        Peak-Hour: 4:50 PM -- 5:50 PM                                 0.0        2.0

                        13    6     5
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

       77    20                          12   80
                                                                                                               0.0   5.0                       0.0      0.0
             50              0.82        59
                                                                                                                     2.0                       0.0
       74    4                            9   62
                                                                                                               2.7   0.0                       0.0      1.6

                         5    19    7
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

                        19          31
                                                                                                                            0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                              0    0    0


                                                                                                                     0                          0

             0                            2                                                                          0                          0

                                                                                                                     0                          0


                              2                                                                                              0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                  NA




             NA                          NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count                  SW Alder St                  SW Alder St               SW 9th St                    SW 9th St
     Period                  (Northbound)                 (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        1           2      0     0       0       0      1    0     2      4      0      0     3        4      1       0           18            164
     4:05 PM        0           1      2     0       0       0      1    0     4      9      1      0     1        4      0       0           23            173
     4:10 PM        0           0      0     0       0       2      1    0     4      8      0      0     1        2      0       0           18            181
     4:15 PM        0           1      1     0       1       2      2    0     1      1      1      0     0        2      0       0           12            176
     4:20 PM        0           0      0     0       0       1      1    0     5      6      0      0     0        1      1       0           15            175
     4:25 PM        0           2      0     0       0       0      0    0     3      5      0      0     1        2      2       0           15            183
     4:30 PM        0           0      0     0       0       1      2    0     1      4      0      0     2        5      1       0           16            188
     4:35 PM        0           1      0     0       0       0      0    0     1      3      2      0     1        7      1       0           16            186
     4:40 PM        0           1      1     0       0       0      2    0     2      4      1      0     0        6      0       0           17            187
     4:45 PM        0           0      0     0       1       0      3    0     1      3      0      0     2        2      0       0           12            189
     4:50 PM        0           1      0     0       0       0      2    0     3      2      0      0     1        3      1       0           13            188
     4:55 PM        1           2      2     0       0       0      0    0     2      0      0      0     0        5      2       0           14            189
     5:00 PM        0           1      1     0       0       2      0    0     1      3      0      0     1        9      0       0           18            189
     5:05 PM        1           4      1     0       0       1      2    0     3      7      1      0     2        4      0       0           26            192
     5:10 PM        0           1      0     0       1       0      1    0     3      2      0      0     1        5      1       0           15            189
     5:15 PM        1           3      0     0       2       0      0    0     2      6      2      0     1        5      1       0           23            200
     5:20 PM        0           2      0     0       0       1      4    0     0      5      0      0     2        6      0       0           20            205
     5:25 PM        1           1      0     0       1       0      1    0     1      2      0      0     0        5      3       0           15            205
     5:30 PM        0           2      0     0       0       1      0    0     2      5      0      0     0        4      3       0           17            206
     5:35 PM        0           2      1     0       0       1      2    0     1      6      0      0     0        4      0       0           17            207
     5:40 PM        1           0      1     0       0       0      1    0     1      8      0      0     0        4      1       0           17            207
     5:45 PM        0           0      1     0       1       0      0    0     1      4      1      0     1        5      0       0           14            209
     5:50 PM        0           1      1     0       0       0      1    0     1      2      0      0     0        5      1       0           12            208
     5:55 PM        0           1      1     0       0       0      0    0     0      2      0      0     3        4      0       0           11            205
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                  Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      8          32      4     0      12       4    12     0    32     60     12      0    16       56      8       0                  256
 Heavy Trucks       0           0      0             0       0      0          0      4      0            0        0      0                           4
  Pedestrians                   8                            0                        0                            0                                  8
   Bicycles         0           0      0             0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/9/2012 1:21 PM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Alder St -- SW Upland Dr                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10709004
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Feb 07 2012
                        10          14                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                              0.0        0.0

                         0    3     7
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 4:55 PM -- 5:10 PM
                                                                                                                         0.0 0.0 0.0

       23    1                            8   50
                                                                                                            0.0   0.0                       0.0      4.0
             7               0.88        16
                                                                                                                  0.0                       0.0
       14    6                           26   65
                                                                                                            0.0   0.0                       7.7      3.1

                         7    5     51
                                                                                                                         0.0 0.0 3.9

                        35          63
                                                                                                                         5.7        3.2



                              1                                                                                           0    0    0


                                                                                                                  0                          0

             0                            0                                                                       1                          1

                                                                                                                  0                          0


                              0                                                                                           0    0    1




                              NA                                                                                               NA




             NA                          NA                                                                       NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                               NA



 5-Min Count                  SW Alder St                  SW Alder St            SW Upland Dr              SW Upland Dr
     Period                  (Northbound)                 (Southbound)             (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                              Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        0           0       3    0       0       0      0    0     0     2      0      0     0    2      0         0            7            118
     4:05 PM        0           0       8    0       1       0      0    0     0     1      0      0     1    1      0         0           12            118
     4:10 PM        0           0       3    0       0       0      0    0     0     0      0      0     2    0      0         0            5            114
     4:15 PM        0           1       4    0       2       1      0    0     0     1      1      0     4    3      1         0           18            113
     4:20 PM        0           1       3    0       1       1      0    0     0     0      0      0     1    0      0         0            7            103
     4:25 PM        2           0       7    0       0       0      0    0     0     2      1      0     1    1      0         0           14            110
     4:30 PM        0           0       3    0       0       0      0    0     0     0      0      0     2    0      0         0            5            108
     4:35 PM        0           1       2    0       1       0      0    0     0     1      0      0     0    0      0         0            5            100
     4:40 PM        0           0       2    0       1       0      0    0     0     0      0      0     2    0      1         0            6            100
     4:45 PM        0           1       0    0       0       1      0    0     0     0      0      0     5    0      1         0            8            101
     4:50 PM        1           0       5    0       2       0      0    0     0     1      1      0     3    0      1         0           14            110
     4:55 PM        2           1       6    0       0       0      0    0     0     0      1      0     1    1      0         0           12            113
     5:00 PM        1           0       3    0       1       0      0    0     1     1      0      0     2    2      0         0           11            117
     5:05 PM        0           0       7    0       1       1      0    0     0     0      1      0     3    3      0         0           16            121
     5:10 PM        0           1       5    0       0       0      0    0     0     1      1      0     1    2      0         0           11            127
     5:15 PM        1           0       6    0       0       0      0    0     0     0      1      0     0    3      0         0           11            120
     5:20 PM        0           0       4    0       1       0      0    0     0     1      0      0     4    0      1         0           11            124
     5:25 PM        1           0       5    0       0       1      0    0     0     1      1      0     1    2      1         0           13            123
     5:30 PM        1           1       7    0       0       0      0    0     0     0      0      0     2    1      3         0           15            133
     5:35 PM        0           0       1    0       1       0      0    0     0     2      0      0     2    1      0         0            7            135
     5:40 PM        0           1       2    0       1       0      0    0     0     0      0      0     2    1      1         0            8            137
     5:45 PM        1           0       1    0       1       0      0    0     0     1      1      0     0    1      0         0            6            135
     5:50 PM        1           2       1    0       0       0      0    0     0     0      0      0     1    2      0         0            7            128
     5:55 PM        0           0       1    0       1       0      0    0     0     0      0      0     0    2      2         0            6            122
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                  Southbound               Eastbound                Westbound
                                                                                                                                                  Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles     12           4      64    0       8       4      0    0     4     4      8      0    24   24      0         0                  156
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       4            0       0      0          0     0      0            0    0      0                             4
  Pedestrians                   0                            4                       0                        0                                    4
   Bicycles         0           0       0            0       0      0          0     1      0            0    0      0                             1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/9/2012 1:21 PM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Edwards Dr -- SE 5th St                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10709003
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Feb 07 2012
                     3           9                       Peak-Hour: 3:30 PM -- 4:30 PM                                  0.0        0.0

                     3     0     0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 3:45 PM -- 4:00 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0

       44    7                         0    0
                                                                                                           2.3   0.0                       0.0      0.0
             0            0.86         0
                                                                                                                 0.0                       0.0
       50    43                        0    0
                                                                                                           6.0   7.0                       0.0      0.0

                     41    2     0
                                                                                                                        2.4 0.0 0.0

                     43          43
                                                                                                                        7.0        2.3



                           0                                                                                             0    0    0


                                                                                                                 0                          0

             0                         0                                                                         0                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          0


                           0                                                                                             1    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                  NA




             NA                       NA                                                                         NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count           SE Edwards Dr                 SE Edwards Dr               SE 5th St                    SE 5th St
     Period             (Northbound)                 (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                             Total
                  Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right       U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     3:00 PM        2      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     1       0      0      0     0        0      0       0            3
     3:05 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     2     0     0       0      0      0     0        0      0       0            2
     3:10 PM        1      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     0       0      3      0     0        0      0       0            4
     3:15 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     2     0     1       0      3      0     0        0      0       0            6
     3:20 PM        2      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     0       0      2      0     0        0      0       0            4
     3:25 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     1     0     0       0      2      0     0        0      0       0            3
     3:30 PM        3      0      0     0         0     0     1     0     1       0      4      0     0        0      0       0            9
     3:35 PM        5      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     0       0      4      0     0        0      0       0            9
     3:40 PM        5      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     0       0      4      0     0        0      0       0            9
     3:45 PM        3      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     1       0      5      0     0        0      0       0            9
     3:50 PM        2      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     0       0      5      0     0        0      0       0            7
     3:55 PM        4      1      0     0         0     0     1     0     0       0      6      0     0        0      0       0           12              77
     4:00 PM        2      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     3       0      2      0     0        0      0       0            7              81
     4:05 PM        3      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     0       0      3      0     0        0      0       0            6              85
     4:10 PM        3      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     0       0      3      0     0        0      0       0            6              87
     4:15 PM        2      1      0     0         0     0     0     0     1       0      3      0     0        0      0       0            7              88
     4:20 PM        4      0      0     0         0     0     1     0     0       0      0      0     0        0      0       0            5              89
     4:25 PM        5      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     1       0      4      0     0        0      0       0           10              96
     4:30 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     0       0      2      0     0        0      0       0            2              89
     4:35 PM        1      0      0     0         0     0     5     0     1       0      9      0     0        0      0       0           16              96
     4:40 PM        3      1      0     0         0     0     1     0     0       0      4      0     0        0      0       0            9              96
     4:45 PM        1      1      0     0         0     0     0     0     0       0      5      0     0        0      0       0            7              94
     4:50 PM        4      0      0     0         0     1     1     0     0       0      3      0     0        0      0       0            9              96
     4:55 PM        0      0      0     0         0     0     0     0     1       0      5      0     0        0      0       0            6              90
 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                  Southbound                 Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right       U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     36      4      0     0         0     0     4     0     4       0     64      0     0        0      0       0                  112
 Heavy Trucks       0      0      0               0     0     0           0       0      0            0        0      0                           0
  Pedestrians              0                            0                         0                            0                                  0
   Bicycles         0      0      0               0     0     0           0       0      0            0        0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/9/2012 1:21 PM                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 99W -- 9th St                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10709002
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Feb 07 2012
                    1115          947                     Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                 1.6        5.3

                     59 1055 1
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                        1.7 1.6 0.0

       91    32                          0   0
                                                                                                           1.1   6.3                       0.0      0.0
             0             0.92          0
                                                                                                                 0.0                       0.0
       45    13                          0   1
                                                                                                           6.7   7.7                       0.0      0.0

                     32 915        0
                                                                                                                        0.0 5.2 0.0

                    1068          947
                                                                                                                        1.7        5.1



                            0                                                                                            0    0    0


                                                                                                                 0                          0

             1                           0                                                                       0                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          0


                            0                                                                                            0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                 NA




             NA                         NA                                                                       NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                 NA



 5-Min Count                99W                            99W                     9th St                       9th St
     Period            (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                             Total
                  Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        3    77      0     0           0    70      3    0     1      0       2     0     0        0       0      0          156         1782
     4:05 PM        0    72      0     0           0    73      5    0     5      0       4     0     0        0       0      0          159         1816
     4:10 PM        0    71      0     0           0    94      5    0     5      0       3     0     0        0       0      0          178         1870
     4:15 PM        0    82      0     0           0    94      1    0     2      0       1     0     0        0       0      0          180         1910
     4:20 PM        0    71      0     0           0    72      4    0     2      0       0     0     0        0       0      0          149         1919
     4:25 PM        2    76      0     0           0    76      5    0     3      0       1     0     0        0       0      0          163         1951
     4:30 PM        1    81      0     0           0    79      6    0     3      0       2     0     0        0       0      0          172         1976
     4:35 PM        0    64      0     0           0    88      9    0     2      0       2     0     0        0       0      0          165         1991
     4:40 PM        3    62      0     0           0    88      5    0     5      0       1     0     0        0       0      0          164         1978
     4:45 PM        1    70      0     0           0    89      3    0     1      0       0     0     0        0       0      0          164         1968
     4:50 PM        2    86      0     0           0    74      4    0     0      0       4     0     0        0       0      0          170         1986
     4:55 PM        3    76      0     0           0    88      5    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0      0          172         1992
     5:00 PM        2    65      0     0           0    89      6    0     3      0       1     0     0        0       0      0          166         2002
     5:05 PM        1    65      0     0           0    88      8    0     7      0       0     0     0        0       0      0          169         2012
     5:10 PM        7    76      0     0           0    92      1    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0      0          176         2010
     5:15 PM        3    89      0     0           0    99      7    0     4      0       0     0     0        0       0      0          202         2032
     5:20 PM        6    91      0     0           0    84      5    0     4      0       2     0     0        0       0      0          192         2075
     5:25 PM        3    85      0     0           0    85      1    0     4      0       1     0     0        0       0      0          179         2091
     5:30 PM        1    86      0     0           1    91      5    0     2      0       2     0     0        0       0      0          188         2107
     5:35 PM        0    77      0     0           0    78      4    0     0      0       6     0     0        0       0      0          165         2107
     5:40 PM        1    58      0     0           0    72      4    0     3      0       3     0     0        0       0      0          141         2084
     5:45 PM        2    70      0     0           0    79      6    0     7      0       1     0     0        0       0      0          165         2085
     5:50 PM        3    72      0     0           0    93      2    0     1      0       3     0     0        0       0      0          174         2089
     5:55 PM        2    63      0     0           0    89      3    0     0      0       1     0     0        0       0      0          158         2075
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     48 1060       0     0           0 1072      52    0    48      0      12     0     0        0       0      0                  2292
 Heavy Trucks       0    48      0                 0    28      0          0      0       0           0        0       0                          76
  Pedestrians             0                              0                        4                            0                                   4
   Bicycles         0     0      0                 0     0      0          0      0       0           0        0       0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/9/2012 1:21 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 99W -- SW 7th St                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10709001
 CITY/STATE: Dundee, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Feb 07 2012
                    1109          958                     Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                                 2.9        5.0

                     25 1084 0
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 3.0 0.0

       42    11                          0   0
                                                                                                           4.8   0.0                       0.0      0.0
             0             0.92          0
                                                                                                                 0.0                       0.0
       25    14                          0   0
                                                                                                           0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0

                     17 947        0
                                                                                                                        11.8 5.1 0.0

                    1098          964
                                                                                                                        2.9        5.2



                            4                                                                                            0    0    0


                                                                                                                 0                          0

             1                           0                                                                       0                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          0


                            0                                                                                            0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                 NA




             NA                         NA                                                                       NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                 NA



 5-Min Count                99W                            99W                   SW 7th St                    SW 7th St
     Period            (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                             Total
                  Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        0    81      0     0           0    68      2    0     2      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          154         1777
     4:05 PM        2    67      0     0           0    86      0    0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          156         1813
     4:10 PM        1    80      0     0           0    99      2    0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          184         1868
     4:15 PM        0    93      0     0           0    95      1    0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          191         1913
     4:20 PM        0    76      0     0           0    72      3    0     5      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          156         1928
     4:25 PM        1    71      0     0           0    80      2    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          154         1952
     4:30 PM        1    84      0     0           0    84      4    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          175         1976
     4:35 PM        0    69      0     0           0    95      2    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          167         1991
     4:40 PM        0    72      0     0           0    90      3    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          166         1987
     4:45 PM        0    58      0     0           0    89      1    0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          149         1955
     4:50 PM        3    88      0     0           0    76      2    0     2      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          172         1979
     4:55 PM        0    85      0     0           0    99      2    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          187         2011
     5:00 PM        1    61      0     0           0    99      0    0     1      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          164         2021
     5:05 PM        2    67      0     0           0    88      0    0     3      0      3      0     0        0      0       0          163         2028
     5:10 PM        1    75      0     0           0    87      2    0     0      0      3      0     0        0      0       0          168         2012
     5:15 PM        3    93      0     0           0   104      3    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          203         2024
     5:20 PM        1    92      0     0           0    90      4    0     2      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          190         2058
     5:25 PM        2    87      0     0           0    85      2    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          176         2080
     5:30 PM        3    84      0     0           0    95      4    0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          188         2093
     5:35 PM        1    85      0     0           0    82      2    0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          172         2098
     5:40 PM        0    61      0     0           0    77      1    0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          141         2073
     5:45 PM        1    75      0     0           0    89      0    0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          166         2090
     5:50 PM        3    69      0     0           0    90      4    0     1      0      3      0     0        0      0       0          170         2088
     5:55 PM        3    61      0     0           0    90      2    0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          158         2059
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     24 1088       0     0           0 1116      36    0     8      0      4      0     0        0      0       0                  2276
 Heavy Trucks       8    40      0                 0    52      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                           100
  Pedestrians             0                              0                        4                            0                                   4
   Bicycles         0     0      0                 0     0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/9/2012 1:21 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
