City of La Pine

DRAFT TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEM PLAN
October 2013

VOLUME 2
La Pine Transportation System Plan                                                      August 2013
Volume 2                                                                                     Page 1




LA PINE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM PLAN: VOLUME 2
The following documents make up the content of Volume 2 of the La Pine Transportation System Plan
(TSP). This material supports the Volume 1 of the TSP.


VOLUME 2 CONTENTS
Appendix 1           Plan & Policy Review
Appendix 2           Transportation Impact Analysis Requirements
Appendix 3           Existing Conditions Analysis & System Inventory
Appendix 4           Future No-build Conditions & Needs Analysis
Appendix 5           Adopting Ordinances
       Appendix 1
Plan & Policy Review
Technical Memorandum 1: Plan & Policy Review
This memorandum summarizes existing plans, policies, standards, rules, regulations, and other
applicable federal, state, regional, and local documents as they pertain to development of the City
of La Pine Transportation System Plan (TSP). This summary will serve as a reference for the
project team throughout the project, and if new policies are proposed as part of the TSP they will
be reviewed for consistency with existing policies.

The documents reviewed by the City of La Pine and Kittelson & Associates, Inc. (KAI) are
identified in Table 1 and summarized in the following sections.

                            Table 1          Documents and Policies Reviewed

                                    Document/Policy                                     Page Reference
                                         Applicable Statewide Policies

Statewide Planning Goal 12 (OAR chapter 660 division 012, known as the Transportation
                                                                                              2
Planning Rule or TPR)
Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP)                                                              2

Oregon Highway Plan (with 2006 & 2012 amendments)                                             4
Oregon Bicycle/Pedestrian Plan                                                                6

Oregon Freight Plan                                                                           7

Oregon Public Transportation Plan                                                             7

Oregon Rail Plan                                                                              7

OAR Chapter 734, Division 051                                                                 8

Statewide Transportation Improvement Program                                                  8

                                           Applicable Regional Plans

Central Oregon Rail Plan                                                                      9

Deschutes County Comprehensive Plan                                                           9

Deschutes County TSP                                                                         10

                                       Applicable City of La Pine Policies

Comprehensive Plan                                                                           10

Land Use Code                                                                                10

Buildable Lands Inventory                                                                    10

La Pine Parks and Recreation District Comprehensive Plan                                     10

Highway 97/ La Pine Corridor Plan                                                            11

Wickiup Junction Plan                                                                        11
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                            October 5, 2012



STATE OF OREGON/ODOT

Transportation Planning Rule-OAR Chapter 600 Division 012

Statewide Planning Goal 12, known as the Transportation Planning Rule (TPR), requires cities,
counties, Metropolitan Planning Organizations, and ODOT to develop Transportation System
Plans (TSPs) that support the provision of a safe, convenient, and economic transportation
system. Per Goal 12, there are nine basic requirements of TSPs, as outlined below.

       All modes must be considered.
       The plans must be based on an inventory of local, regional and statewide needs.
       The social consequences of utilizing different combinations of modes must be considered.
       No one mode shall be relied upon as the principal form of transportation.
       Adverse social, economic, and environmental impacts and costs must be minimized.
       Energy must be conserved.
       The needs of the transportation disadvantaged shall be met by improving transportation
        services.
       The flow of goods and services shall be facilitated to strengthen local and regional
        economies.
       The TSP must conform with local and regional comprehensive plans.
The City of La Pine’s TSP will meet the requirements of the TPR.

Oregon Transportation Plan (2006)

The Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) is the state’s long-range multimodal transportation plan.
This plan provides the framework for prioritizing transportation improvements based on future
revenue conditions. The OTP is the overarching policy document among a series of plans that
together form the state's Transportation System Plan. The plan calls for a transportation system
that has a modal balance, is both efficient and accessible, provides connectivity among rural and
urban places and between modes, and is environmentally and financially stable.

The Plan outlines the following seven goals, each with associated policies, to guide local, regional
and state transportation plans:

       Goal 1 – Mobility and Accessibility: Enhance the state’s economic vitality and quality of
        life by providing a balanced, multimodal transportation system. Promote transportation
        choices that are efficient, integrated, and cost-effective.
       Goal 2 – Management of the System: Improve the efficiency of the transportation system
        by optimizing operations and management. Manage transportation assets to extend their
        life and reduce maintenance costs.
       Goal 3 – Economic Vitality: Expand and diversify the state’s economy by transporting
        people, goods, services and information in safe, energy-efficient and environmentally
                                                                                             Page 2
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                                       October 5, 2012



            sound ways. Provide Oregon with a competitive advantage by promoting an integrated
            freight system.
           Goal 4 – Sustainability: Provide a transportation system that meets today’s needs without
            compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs with respect to the
            environment, the economy and communities perspectives.
           Goal 5 – Safety and Security: Build, operate and maintain the transportation system so
            that it is safe and secure. Take into account the needs of all users: operators, passengers,
            pedestrians and property owners.
           Goal 6 – Funding the Transportation System: Create revenue sources that support a
            viable transportation system today and in the future. The goal recognizes that it is
            essential to maximize existing resources, invest strategically, consider return on
            investment and provide equity among rural and urban areas, equity among income
            groups and access to transportation options throughout Oregon.
           Goal 7 – Coordination, Communication and Cooperation: Foster coordination,
            communication and cooperation between transportation users and providers so various
            means of transportation function as an integrated system. Work to help all parties align
            interests, remove barriers and offer innovative, equitable solutions.
The OTP, as the guiding document for regional and local TSPs, establishes goals, policies,
strategies and initiatives that address the core challenges and opportunities facing transportation
in Oregon. The OTP includes modal components that outline recommendations for standards for
various forms of transportation. Table 2 identifies the relevant modal elements as well as the year
of adoption by the OTC. Further details on the modal elements are summarized below.

                               Table 2        OTP Modal Plan Components

  Oregon Transportation Plan Element                                   Year Adopted
                                             Originally adopted in 1999 (with subsequent amendments); Access
Highway Plan
                                             Management and Mobility Standards Amendments in 2011
                                             Originally adopted in 1995; Second Part of Plan updated in 2011 and
Bicycle/ Pedestrian Plan
                                             retitled the Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Design Guide
Freight Plan                                 Adopted in 2011
Public Transportation Plan                   Adopted in 1997
Rail Plan                                    Adopted in 2001
Aviation Plan                                Adopted in 2007




                                                                                                          Page 3
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                               October 5, 2012



Oregon Highway Plan (with 2006 & 2012 amendments)

The Oregon Highway Plan (OHP) defines policies and investment strategies for Oregon’s state
highways for the next 20 years. The OHP has three main elements:

       A vision for the future of the State highway system that describes economic and
        demographic trends in Oregon, future transportation technologies, the policy and legal
        context of the Highway Plan, and pertinent information on the current highway system.

       Goals, policies, and actions items for system definition, system management, access
        management, travel alternatives, and environmental and scenic resources.

       An analysis of the 20-year State highway needs, revenue forecasts, descriptions of
        investment strategies and implementation strategies, and performance measures.

The OHP provides policy and investment guidance for local corridor plans and TSPs, but it leaves
the responsibility for identifying specific projects and modal alternatives to the individual plans.

The OHP has been amended several times since its original adoption in 1999. These amendments
have addressed items such as the designation of expressways, changes in mobility standards,
designation of Special Transportation Areas, and other changes affecting the classification and
standards for highways throughout the state.

Several of the policies in the OHP pertinent to the La Pine TSP are described below.

OHP Goal 1: System Definition

       Policy 1A, State Highway Classification System: This policy identifies functions and
        objectives for state highways in order to serve different types of traffic. Greater mobility is
        expected on interstate and statewide highways than on regional or district highways. The
        facility classification is used to guide planning, management and investment decisions
        regarding state highway facilities.

        Through La Pine, US 97 is classified as a Statewide Highway with Expressway
        designation.

       Policy 1B, Land Use and Transportation: This policy establishes the relationship between
        the highway and adjacent land uses. It emphasizes development patterns that maintain
        state highways for regional and intercity mobility, and supports compact development.
        This policy is designed to clarify how ODOT will work with local governments and others
        to link land use and transportation in transportation plans, facility and corridor plans,
        plan amendments, access permitting and project development.

       Policy 1C, State Highway Freight System: This policy identifies the need to balance the
        movement of goods and services with other uses and the importance of maintaining
        efficient through movement on major freight routes.


                                                                                                Page 4
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                                       October 5, 2012



          US 97 is a designated freight route in La Pine.

         Policy 1E, Lifeline Routes: This policy identifies the need to provide a secure lifeline
          network of streets, highways and bridges to facilitate emergency services response, and to
          support rapid economic recovery after a disaster.

          US 97 is a designated Lifeline Route.

         Policy 1F, Highway Mobility Standards1: This policy provides standards to ensure a
          reliable and acceptable level of mobility on the highway system. These standards:
              o Identify state highway mobility performance expectations for planning and plan
                  implementation;
              o Evaluate the impacts on state highways of amendments to transportation plans,
                  acknowledged comprehensive plans and land use regulations; and
              o Guide operations decisions such as managing access and traffic control systems to
                  maintain acceptable highway performance.

          The current OHP’s mobility targets use maximum volume to capacity ratios as the
          primary metric. If a different metric is used (e.g. Travel Time Reliability), coordination
          with ODOT on how it complies with OHP Policy 1F is necessary.

          The mobility standards are to be applied over a 20-year planning horizon when
          developing state, regional or local transportation plans. When evaluating highway
          mobility for amendments to transportation system plans, acknowledged comprehensive
          plans and land use regulations, local governments should use the planning horizons in
          adopted local and regional transportation system plans or a planning horizon of 15 years
          from the proposed date of amendment adoption, whichever is greater. Policy 1G, Major
          Improvements: This policy requires maintaining performance and improving safety by
          improving efficiency and management before adding capacity. ODOT works with
          regional and local governments to address highway performance and safety.

          The applicable standard for US 97 through La Pine is a mobility standard of 0.70.s

OHP Goal 2: System Management

         Policy 2B, Off-System Improvements: Helps local jurisdictions adopt land use and access
          management policies.

         Policy 2E, Intelligent Transportation Systems: consider a broad range of Intelligent
          Transportation Systems services to improve system efficiency and safety in a cost-effective
          manner.

          Variable message signs displaying roadway conditions are currently in place in La Pine
          south of 1st Street.


1
    The Oregon Transportation Commission reviewed and adopted changes to Policy 1F in December 2011.
                                                                                                        Page 5
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                             October 5, 2012



       Policy 2F, Traffic Safety: continually improve safety for all highway system users with
        solutions involving engineering, education, enforcement and emergency medical services.

       Policy 2G, Rail and Highway Compatibility: increase safety and efficiency by reducing
        conflicts between rail and highway users.

        Improvements to the Wickiup Junction are currently being considered for funding by
        ODOT, the County and the City.

OHP Goal 3: Access Management

       Policy 3A, Classification and Spacing Standards: Access spacing standards for
        driveways and approaches to the state highway system are identified, including the
        location, spacing and type of road and street intersections and approach roads on state
        highways. The adopted spacing standards, which can be found in Appendix C of the
        OHP, include standards for each highway classification. Generally, the access spacing
        distance increases as either the highway’s importance or posted speed increases.

        Within the downtown, the OHP identifies a minimum spacing of 500 feet for US 97. North
        of 1st Street and south of Finley Butte, US 97 is classified as an Urban Expressway resulting
        in a minimum spacing standard of 2,640 feet.

       Policy 3D, Deviations: defines general policies and procedures for deviations from
        adopted access management standards and policies.

OHP Goal 4: Travel Alternatives

       Policy 4A, Efficiency of Freight Movement: This policy identifies the need to maintain
        and improve the efficiency of freight movement on the state highway system and access to
        intermodal connections. The State seeks to balance the needs of long distance and through
        freight movements with local transportation needs on highway facilities in both urban
        areas and rural communities.

Oregon Bicycle/Pedestrian Plan

The Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan is divided into two parts: the Policy and Action Plan and
the Bicycle and Pedestrian Design Guide. The first section was adopted in 1995, while the second
was updated in 2011. The Plan outlines key characteristics that should be considered relative to
providing for bicycles and pedestrians when planning and designing state facilities. The Oregon
Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan does not define specific standards for non-ODOT facilities. However,
the plan recommends that land use patterns, transportation system layout, public transportation
system design, and other related issues consider the impact to both bicycle and pedestrian users
and facilities. To this end, the plan provides specific design recommendations for bicycle and
pedestrian friendly facilities.

The Bicycle and Pedestrian Design Guide recognizes the role that safe, attractive, convenient and
easy to use bicycle and pedestrian facilities play in the provision of the state and local

                                                                                              Page 6
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                            October 5, 2012



transportation systems. To address these issues, the design guide includes seven chapters that
provide guidance on on-road bikeways, restriping, bicycle parking, walkways, street crossings,
intersections and shared use paths.

Oregon Freight Plan

The purpose of the Oregon Freight Plan (OFP) is to “improve freight connections to local, state,
regional, national and global markets in order to increase trade-related jobs and income for
Oregon workers and businesses.” The OFP addresses challenges facing the freight system,
including system operation and development, safety, communications, environmental
considerations, and funding.

The OFP identifies US 97 as a major freight route for the state of Oregon. Further, La Pine has
identified lands east of US 97 as high priority industrial development. The TSP will need to
consider ways to efficiently connect the industrial lands to the statewide transportation system.

Oregon Public Transportation Plan

As a modal element of the OTP, the Oregon Public Transportation Plan provides a long range
vision for the public transportation system in Oregon. This system incorporates public and
private transportation providers and is comprised of ridesharing and volunteer programs, taxi
and minibus service, and inter-city and intra-city bus and passenger rail services. The Public
Transportation Plan outlines three primary goals and associated policies and strategies that guide
public transportation through the year 2015.

The Plan recognizes that the public transportation must grow to accommodate a growing
population. However, in recognition of limited resources, the Plan prioritizes elements that
deliver service to “those Oregonians most dependent on the public transportation system
(seniors, disabled, low-income, and youth)”.

Within La Pine, fixed route transit service is not provided today, though regional service is
provided through Cascades East Transit (CET) and Central Cascade Lines, Inc. (CCL). CET
connects the La Pine Park and Ride lot with the Bend Hawthorne Station Monday through Friday
on Route 4. CCL provides a similar service, with additional connections in La Pine at the senior
center, South County Building, or park and ride lot, connecting riders to their desired location in
Bend.

Oregon Rail Plan

The Oregon Rail Plan, adopted in 2001, serves as a comprehensive assessment of the state’s rail
systems. The Plan focuses on three elements: Rail Policies and Planning Process, Freight Rail, and
Passenger Rail. For each of these elements, the Plan summarizes state goals and objectives,
measures current and past performance, and updates rail related revenues and costs. The Rail
Policies and Planning Process focuses specifically on increasing accessibility and mobility to
create a more integrated and connected rail system. The Freight and Passenger elements focus on
the development and challenges of the freight and passenger rail systems, respectively.


                                                                                             Page 7
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                           October 5, 2012



A Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) Mainline runs through the City of La Pine. The BNSF
intersects US 97 at an at-grade crossing within Wickiup Junction. This Junction has been the
subject of considerable study by Deschutes County, as discussed below.

OAR Chapter 734, Division 051

ODOT had adopted OAR 734-051 to establish procedures and criteria to govern highway
approaches, access control, spacing standards, medians and restriction of turning movements in
compliance with statewide planning goals, in a manner compatible with acknowledged
comprehensive plans and consistent with state law and the OTP. Any new street or driveway
connections, as well as any changes to existing street or driveway connections, to state roads
within the city’s urban growth boundary must be in compliance with these rules.

OAR 734-051 policies address the following:

       bringing existing and future approaches into compliance with access spacing standards,
        and ensure the safe and efficient operation of the highway;

       the purpose and components of an access management plan; and

       requirements regarding mitigation, modification and closure of existing approaches as
        part of project development.

The access management standards adopted by ODOT and applicable to the City of La Pine’s TSP
are summarized in Appendix C of the Oregon Highway Plan. OHP Policies 3A and 3C establish
access management objectives for state highways based on facility type and set standards for
spacing of approaches. These standards have also been adopted as part of OAR 734-051, which
provides the regulatory basis for implementation.

Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (2012-2015)

The Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) is Oregon’s four-year transportation
capital improvement program that identifies the funding for, and scheduling of, transportation
projects and programs. It includes projects on the federal, state, county and city transportation
systems, multimodal projects (highway, passenger rail, freight, public transit, bicycle and
pedestrian) and projects in the National Parks, National Forests and Indian tribal lands. Oregon’s
STIP covers a four-year construction period, but is updated every two years in accordance with
federal requirements. The currently approved program is the 2012-2015 STIP. The Draft 2015-2018
STIP is currently under development.

When adopted, the 2015-2018 STIP should be reviewed for projects to consider during the
development of La Pine’s TSP for complementary or conflicting traffic impacts. The approved
2012-2015 STIP identifies two projects within the City of La Pine, as summarized in 3.




                                                                                            Page 8
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                                      October 5, 2012



           Table 3          2012-2015 Approved STIP Projects within the City of La Pine



                                                                                                   Year
             Section            Total Cost            Description                 Status          (FFY)

          US 97 @ 1st St.       $801,000       Intersection Improvements          Design          2014

                                             Develop Plans and Environmental
     US 97 @ Wickiup Junction                 Documents for Intersection and
                                $3,518,000                                     Land Purchase      2012
           Development                           Improvements and Land
                                                        Acquisition


REGIONAL PLANS

Central Oregon Rail Plan

The Central Oregon Rail Plan, adopted in 2009, identifies a regional strategy to address rail safety
and congestion in Crook, Jefferson, and Deschutes Counties. The Plan primarily addresses rail
crossings and freight mobility relative to expected population growth in central Oregon. The Plan
identifies possible safety and congestion issues caused by at-grade railway crossings, and
proposes methods for improving or eliminating these crossings. The Central Oregon Rail Plan
also discusses procedures for preserving and enhancing freight mobility to improve local
economies and quality of life.

In the City of La Pine, the Plan specifically addresses the high priority at-grade crossing of the
BNSF line and US 97 at Wickiup Junction. An ODOT project to grade separate this crossing is
discussed below.

Deschutes County Comprehensive Plan

The 2030 Deschutes County Comprehensive Plan provides a “blueprint for land use conservation
and development.” Adopted in 2011, the twenty-year plan identifies goals and policies that are
consistent with statewide planning, community values and vision. The Plan highlights programs,
community involvement, and inter-government coordination in the areas of resource
management, rural growth, and urban growth.

The Community Vision within the Plan relates to a quality of life for Deschutes County residents
that is based on a “healthy natural environment, a community of caring people, a strong and
diverse economy, access to a wide variety of outdoor recreational opportunities, the rural
character of the region, and maintaining a balance between property rights and community
interests.”

The Transportation Chapter of the Plan (23.60) will be updated following adoption of the
Deschutes County Transportation System Plan in 2012.




                                                                                                         Page 9
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                            October 5, 2012



Deschutes County Transportation System Plan

The Deschutes County Transportation System Plan will be formally adopted on November 19,
2012. The revised TSP updates the prior plan horizon from 2016 to 2030. Between 2010 and 2030
the TSP anticipates supporting an increase of 108,000 persons (69 percent growth), and identifies
$306.2 million in total needed improvement project costs, the majority of which are identified for
the State Highway system (78 percent of the total, including 71% of the high-priority projects).
Funding for the overall project list (or even high priority projects) has not been identified.

The County TSP contains 18 broad goals that address operations, safety, modal elements,
infrastructure, demand management, asset management, standards, classifications, access, and
future plan updates.

The TSP requires level-of-service “D” be maintained at the collector and arterial intersections
under county jurisdiction. The City of La Pine will also need to adopt standards for city collector
intersections.

The TSP identifies the need for the Wickiup Junction interchange. There are no other projects of
significance outlined within the County’s TSP within the city of La Pine.

The City of La Pine will coordinate with Deschutes County staff to ensure consistency between
the city and county TSPs.



CITY PLANS AND POLICIES

City of La Pine Comprehensive Plan

To be provided by city staff.

City of La Pine Land Use Code

To be provided by city staff.

City of La Pine Buildable Lands Inventory

To be provided by city staff.

La Pine Parks and Recreation District Comprehensive Plan

The La Pine Park and Recreation District provides jurisdiction over 85 acres of land that includes
the City of La Pine. The Park District was established in 1990 (within Deschutes County at the
time). Comprehensive Plan establishes a twenty year plan for the improvement and development
of district administration, park and recreation facilities, and recreational programs. The Plan was
adopted in 2005 and contains an Annual Plan, Five-Year Action Plan, and Facility Master Plan to
focus on both short term and long term goals. Based on extensive community input, the Plan
identified the following primary goals:

                                                                                            Page 10
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                                   October 5, 2012



       Goal 1: Create a sustainable organization and build organizational capacity.

       Goal 2: Improve existing parks and facilities.

       Goal 3: Plan for future parks and facilities.

       Goal 4: Improve existing recreation programs.

       Goal 5: Plan for future recreation programs.

The plan identifies potential locations for new neighborhood and community parks. As part of
the development of the TSP, evaluation of pedestrian and bicycle accessibility to existing and
potential new park facilities will be addressed.

Highway 97/La Pine Corridor Plan

The US 97/La Pine Corridor Plan, completed in June 2011, examines transportation needs for the
downtown La Pine corridor between 1st and 6th Streets. The Plan addresses potential short and
long terms improvements in safety, multi-modal efficiency and comfort, and vehicular and
freight circulation along the corridor. This Plan considers expected development of La Pine and
incorporates input from the public and the project advisory team to make recommendations on
the preferred corridor alternative. These recommendations are outlined in Table 4 below.

               Table 4            Highway 97/La Pine Corridor Plan Recommendations


                 Intersection                                  Description

                                            Signalized intersection and realignment
                            st
                US 97 @ 1 St.               Encourage rural to downtown speed transition
                                            Additional Turn Lanes

                                            High visibility pedestrian treatments
                US 97 @ 4th St.
                                            Pedestrian refuge island in center median

                US 97 @ Finley              Signalized intersection and realignment
               Butte/Morson St.             Left turn lanes




ODOT recently implemented some near term objectives of the plan, most notably reducing US 97
through downtown La Pine to a 3-lane cross-section.

Wickiup Junction Plan

Wickiup Junction is the only at-grade railway/highway crossing on US 97 in the State of Oregon.
Per ODOT documents, there is a documented safety problem at this intersection that requires
mitigation. ODOT, Deschutes County and the City of La Pine have completed a number of
studies and a design effort to explore long-range improvements that will enhance the safety and
operations of this crossing. They are currently pursuing the overcrossing design concept shown in
Figure 1, which realigns US 97 to the east and constructs a grade-separated rail crossing to the

                                                                                                   Page 11
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                          October 5, 2012



south of its current location. As part of these efforts, the Burgess Road intersection with US 97
will be relocated.




                     Figure 1   Wickiup Junction Concept Plan, June 2012




                                                                                          Page 12
TM1: Plan & Policy Review                                                                 October 5, 2012



REFERENCES:

    1. City of La Pine, Highway 97/ La Pine Corridor Plan, 2011.

    2. City of La Pine, La Pine Parks and Recreation District Comprehensive Plan, 2005.

    3. City of La Pine, Wickiup Junction Plan, 2012.

    4. Deschutes County, Deschutes County Comprehensive Plan, 2010.

    5. Deschutes County, Deschutes County Transportation System Plan, 1996.

    6. Oregon Department of Transportation. Oregon Administrative Rule Chapter 660 Division 12,
       2012.

    7. Oregon Department of Transportation. Oregon Administrative Rule Chapter 734 Division 51,
       2012.

    8. Oregon Department of Transportation. Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan, 2011.

    9. Oregon Department of Transportation. Oregon Freight Plan, 2011.

    10. Oregon Department of Transportation. Oregon Highway Plan, 1999.

    11. Oregon Department of Transportation. Oregon Rail Plan, 2001.

    12. Oregon Department of Transportation. Oregon Transportation Plan, 2006.

    13. Oregon Department of Transportation. Public Transportation Plan, 1997.

    14. Oregon Department of Transportation. Statewide Transportation Improvement Program, 2012.

    15. Oregon Department of Transportation. Central Oregon Rail Plan, 2009.




                                                                                                 Page 13
                 Appendix 2
Transportation Impact Analysis
                Requirements
La Pine Transportation System Plan                                                                  August 2013
Transportation Impact Analysis Requirements                                                              Page 1




TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS REQUIREMENTS
This section summarizes the purpose and recommended draft text to supplement the Transportation
Impact Analysis Requirements identified within Deschutes County Code Chapter 17.16. The intent is to
provide the City of La Pine with increased discretion in how it assesses the impact of new development
on the public roadway system, an increased emphasis and priority towards roadway safety, and
increased consideration of the multi-modal elements relevant to an urban environment.

     1. Purpose: Identify appropriate threshold requirements for traffic impact studies within the City.

          Development generating less than 200 weekday or weekend daily trip ends and less than 20
          weekday p.m. peak hour trip ends will be required to address all of the Site Traffic Report (STR)
          elements of DCC 17.16.115 as well as additional items as listed below. Developments generating
          200 or more weekday or weekend daily trip ends or 20 or more weekday p.m. peak hour trips
          will be required to address all elements of the Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) identified in DCC
          17.16.115 as well as items listed below.

          Discussion: This text clarifies what the City considers to be a “significant impact” on a
          transportation facility and adopts trip thresholds that are identical to Deschutes County.

     2. Purpose: require development to collaborate with City, County, and ODOT staff regarding study
        needs and critical study assumptions.

          The applicant shall meet with City staff in a pre-application conference to discuss study
          requirements and analysis assumptions (trip generation, distribution, horizon period, analysis
          periods, etc.). The applicant may also be required to meet with ODOT and County staff as
          applicable. A project site plan identifying intended uses, size, access, and other pertinent details
          should be provided in advance.

          Discussion: This text ensures that the City of La Pine and other affected jurisdictions receive
          appropriate notification and an opportunity to collaboratively discuss the study needs prior to
          receipt of an application. The application needs to contain adequate information for jurisdiction
          staff to understand its potential impacts and corresponding study needs.

     3. Purpose: Allow the City to determine completeness rather than a checklist-style approach. This
        flexibility allows the City to respond to the specific project impacts given a site’s location and
        adjacent land uses.

          The City, in collaboration with Deschutes County and ODOT shall determine when a traffic study
          has satisfied all the requirements of the development’s impact analysis. Incomplete reports shall
          be returned for completion.

          Discussion: The unique nature of individual developments and individual sites may require
          additional assessment or considerations be appropriately addressed and adequately assessed
La Pine Transportation System Plan                                                                 August 2013
Transportation Impact Analysis Requirements                                                             Page 2


          (e.g., pedestrian crossing issues, emergency response concerns, site deliveries, etc.), with the
          determination of adequacy at the discretion of review staff.

     4. Purpose: Provides the City discretion in what a traffic study is required to assess.

          Additional analyses may be required at the City’s discretion to address specific safety or
          operational needs associated with a proposed land use.

          Discussion: Provides further clarity that the purpose of the traffic study is not to complete a
          checklist but to provide a full understanding of the potential impacts, mitigation needs, and
          ensure the design is compatible from a roadway maintenance, management, and operations
          standpoint.

     5. Purpose: Emphasize the safety implications of an application that goes beyond simple historical
        crash rates. The crash analysis needs to consider the actual environment, pre-existing
        conditions, and should help inform the City of potential needs regardless of improvement
        responsibility.

          Crash data shall be obtained from ODOT for all study intersections to assess historical crash
          trends. Crash records are to be reviewed to identify crash patterns, and are to be supplemented
          with field observations of conditions and factors that may affect safety. Where crash trends are
          identified the applicant must also identify potential improvements or considerations.
          Responsibility of providing the improvements as approval conditions will remain at the discretion
          of the City based on severity, proportionality, and other factors.

          Discussion: The purpose of the safety evaluation is not only to meet a burden of proof related
          to development impacts, but to also assist the City in its planning and identification of citywide
          safety needs. Crash rates alone (crashes per million entering vehicles) are a poor indicator of
          potential problems and may not identify specific movement (e.g. eastbound left-turning) crash
          patterns. Intersections with crash rates below 1.0 crashes per million entering vehicles may still
          have safety deficiencies if all the reported crashes occur in a single location or on a specific
          movement.

     6. Purpose: Remove the sole focus on the automotive system. Requires an assessment of the
        multimodal facilities and potential conflicts between modes.

          All traffic assessments (TIA and STRs) shall address any impacts to pedestrian and bicycle
          facilities, crossings, and general safety, accessibility, and connectivity. Assessments shall also
          identify any transit facilities or stops within ¼ mile of the site.

          Discussion: The purpose of this statement is to allow a better integration of land uses with the
          pedestrian, bicycle, and transit system. This can be especially useful in the vicinity of schools
          and school zones.
La Pine Transportation System Plan                                                                  August 2013
Transportation Impact Analysis Requirements                                                              Page 3


     7. Purpose: Enable City staff to perform an objective and holistic look at how the site can be
        served and how adjacent properties will also be served in the future. Allows the City to
        implement access management for the subject property and develop an access plans that will
        allow for development or redevelopment of future properties.

          Site plans must include diagrams of existing access, proposed access, surrounding
          roadways/alleys, and access spacing from adjacent parcel access points. An accompanying
          analysis must include a discussion of the applicability of shared access with adjoining parcels or
          provision of shared access easements for future development of adjoining parcels.

          Discussion: This text enables the City to not only provide access to the proposed site plan
          application, but also allows City staff to look at adjacent properties and ensure that access plans
          are in place to meet long-term roadway management objectives and make efficient use of the
          roadway hierarchy.

     8. Purpose: Document where deviations from standards are proposed as part of the study
        methodology.

          Site trip generation calculations, including pass-by, internal, or other trip reductions must be
          based on information contained in current editions of standard reference manuals. In the
          absence of applicable data, a minimum of three site specific studies of comparable uses must be
          performed. The data collection methodologies must be reviewed by City staff prior to application
          in the study.

          Discussion: Materials within the ITE Trip Generation manuals can be dated or inappropriate to
          address the range of land use applications and flexibility should be provided. However, this
          flexibility should be provided along with adequate information for the City to ensure that the
          data estimation methodology conforms with sound engineering practice and the data collection
          methodologies used within the ITE manuals.

     9. Purpose: Require applicants to provide diagrams showing that delivery and emergency vehicles
        can be appropriately accommodated on-site.

          Turning movement diagrams must be submitted for all commercial, industrial and retail
          applications illustrating delivery, emergency, and passenger vehicle access and circulation within
          the site. Truck turning diagrams may also be required along routes beyond the site frontage
          where deemed appropriate by the City.

          Discussion: This provision helps sites function without truck loading occurring along the public
          roadway system and ensures emergency responders have adequate access to buildings.

     10. Purpose: Requires that the investment in infrastructure provides reasonable longevity beyond a
         single application. This provision will ensure that traffic signals, roundabouts, and all-way stop-
         controlled intersections are appropriately sized or planned for expansion over time.
La Pine Transportation System Plan                                                                  August 2013
Transportation Impact Analysis Requirements                                                              Page 4


          Modifications to intersection control should consider horizon period volume conditions based on
          growth and the horizon period identified within the City or County TSP. This analysis is intended
          to inform planning efforts to ensure that right-of-way acquisition and future widening needs are
          anticipated.

          Discussion: Traffic signals, roundabouts, and other intersection forms should be adequately
          planned to accommodate needed future expansion without placing the burden of
          reconstruction costs on the City. This provision will help to ensure that the placement of signal
          poles, right-of-way dedications, and placement of conduit is provided in a way that minimizes
          the disruption reconstruction places on the traveling public.

     11. Purpose: Establish vehicular performance goals that recognize the need to create a balanced
         multimodal system.

          City performance standards are a Level of Service “D” and a volume-to-capacity ratio less than
          0.90 for signalized and all-way stop-controlled intersections. A volume-to-capacity ratio of less
          than 0.90 and a Level of Service “E” must be maintained for the critical movement at
          unsignalized and at roundabout-controlled intersections. A queuing analysis must be performed
          to assess whether existing turn lane storage is adequate to accommodate 95th percentile
          vehicular queuing during the peak hour. At the City’s discretion, an assessment of conditions
          during peak periods outside of the weekday evening commute period (4:00 to 6:00 p.m.) may be
          required. Mitigation to satisfy intersection performance standards should also consider impacts
          to the multi-modal system and provide adequate accommodations to maintain a safe and
          efficient multi-modal system.

          Discussion: Level of Service, volume-to-capacity ratios, and queuing are separate intersection
          operational performance metrics that describe different attributes of an intersection.
          Intersection Level of Service describes the delay drivers experience and is most relevant metric
          for the traveling public. Volume-to-capacity ratios describe the physical ability of an intersection
          to accommodate the combination of movements, and queue analyses identify if the vehicular
          demand is physically able to efficiently use the available lanes without blocking other
          movements or other adjacent access points. Not meeting any one of these three standards
          would be considered unacceptable and require some type of mitigation, noting that capacity
          mitigation should also consider the multi-modal system. The relatively high unsignalized delay
          tolerance (LOS “E”) allows for more congestion without the need for expensive infrastructure
          investments.

     12. Purpose: Provide the City with the flexibility to modify the traffic study guidelines based on site-
         specific needs. This provision may be applicable for master-planned areas where infrastructure
         needs and timing has already been established.

          The City retains the discretion to reduce or supplement these traffic study guidelines, as
          appropriate, based on the specific project, location, and potential impacts.
La Pine Transportation System Plan                                                            August 2013
Transportation Impact Analysis Requirements                                                        Page 5


          Discussion: Master-planned land uses should be required to demonstrate compliance with the
          master plan, but the requirement for a full Transportation Impact Analysis may be unnecessary
          if the proposed application is compliant and the impacts have already been assessed.
                 Appendix 3
Existing Conditions Analysis &
            System Inventory
Existing Conditions Analysis and System Inventory
This memorandum summarizes the existing transportation system within La Pine City limits,
providing information related to the performance of the City’s transportation system, the
supporting infrastructure, and population and employment. This summary of inventory and
operations is intended to inform the status of the current system to identify improvement needs,
opportunities, and priorities.

This analysis includes the following elements:

      Traffic Volume Inventory
      Traffic Operations Analysis
      Intersection Geometric Review
      Citywide Crash Review
      Roadway Ownership Review
      Roadway Surface Review
      Pedestrian & Bicycle Facility Review
      Access Management Analysis
      Intermodal Connections Analysis

TRAFFIC VOLUME INVENTORY

Weekday commute period traffic volumes were collected throughout the City to identify the
current travel patterns and roadway usage. These counts were collected between 2010 and 2012 at
the locations illustrated in Figure 1, and were obtained specifically for the City TSP effort as well
as from prior analyses.

In addition, 72-hour roadway tube counts were collected on the Huntington Road and US 97
corridors, which provide critical commute, recreation, and service connections north toward
Sunriver and Bend. The locations of these tube counts are also illustrated in Figure 1.
                                                                                                        La Pine TSP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LOOP DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIE                                        W DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PRAIRIE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RIVERVIEW DR
                                                                                                                                        BIG MEADOW DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FOREST RD
                                                                                                                                        ALPINE DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TIMBER LANE LOOP
                                                                                                                                                                 DYKE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BRIDGE DR
                                                                                                                                                                 LEONA LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                          NORTH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         HOWARD LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MURRY DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OAK DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ASH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ELM DR
                                                                                                                                          SOUTH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CAGLE RD
                                                                                                                                                       MEADOW LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SC
                                                                                                                           CEN TER DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RD
                                                                                                                                                                           PAULINA VIEW RD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TLE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DRAFT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LIT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RAILROAD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ANTLER LN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SKIDGEL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DOE LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LOST PONDEROSA RD




                                                                                                                                        WEST DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AMMON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RIVER PINE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PINE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BURGESS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  REASE ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ROSLAND RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ALLEN DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ELENA LN
                                                                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                                               TIC
                                                                                                                                           ARC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WILLOW LN
                                                                                                           ELDERBERRY LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TIN G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HUN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                              COACH RD




                                                                                                                                                HALE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ENE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1ST ST                                                                                                                              REED RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4                                             9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HINKLE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BOX WAY
                                                                                                                                                     PENGRA ST




                                                                                                                                                                                       3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                     WALKER ST




                                                                                                                                                                                             MORSON ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DILLON WAY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FOSS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BONNIE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RUSSELL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WHEELER RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EVANS WAY




                                                                                                                                                            6TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                     136                                                                                                                                                                 FINLEY BUTTE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ANCHOR WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PREBLE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WALLING LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MITTS WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HEATH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AKE L




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FS RD 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RILEY DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SILVE
H:\projfile\12450 - La Pine TSP\gis\01_Traffic Count Locations.mxd - jsommerville - 3:01 PM 12/5/2012




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BASSETT DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #       Study Intersection

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #       Wickiup Junction Analysis

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #       US 97 La Pine Corridor Study

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Roadway Segment Count

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Boundary
                                                                                                                     0                   1,000                     2,000          3,000            4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Traffic Count Locations                                             Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           La Pine, Oregon                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coordinate System: NAD 1983 HARN StatePlane Oregon South FIPS 3602 Feet Intl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Data Source: Delete if there isn't one.
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                 December 6, 2012



The 72-hour tube counts are used to highlight the traffic volume changes throughout the day, as
shown in Exhibit 1 and 2. As shown in Exhibit 1, traffic volumes on US 97 near Finley Butte a
relatively consistent between the late morning and early evening commute period.




Exhibit 1. US 97 Near Finley Butte – Weekday Average Daily Traffic

Exhibits 1 and 2 each highlight the difference in travel characteristics between regional highway
trips (predominant near the Wickiup Junction) and intracity trips that occur within the
downtown area. It was noted that within the La Pine core area (between 1 st Street and 6th Street)
peak travel occurs around the noon hour, but shows very minor change throughout the day with
only slightly higher travel volumes as compared to the typical 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. evening
peak.




                                                                                            Page 3
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                              December 6, 2012




Exhibit 2. US 97 Within Wickiup – Weekday Average Daily Traffic

Each of these profiles show that the traffic volumes experienced within La Pine are more
influenced by a consistent regional/statewide travel demand that occurs throughout the course
of the day rather than a more typical morning and evening commute peaking that is often
experienced in other communities. Therefore, the traffic operations that are reported for the
weekday p.m. peak hour (as discussed below) are fairly reflective of the conditions that occur
between mid-morning and the evening commute period.


OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS RESULTS
Key intersections within La Pine were reviewed to identify if point or system capacity
improvements are needed today. The analysis was conducted at each of the study locations
identified in Figure 1.

Typically, intersection performance is compared against an adopted standard. However, the City
of La Pine does not have adopted intersection performance standards and has historically
deferred to Deschutes County requirements (as contained within Deschutes County Code 17.16).
The County requires that its intersections operate at Level of Service “D” or better during the
peak fifteen minutes of a weekday peak hour.

State mobility targets for US 97 are summarized within the Oregon Highway Plan and its
amendments. The mobility target varies based on the highway classification, location, posted
speed, and functional designation. Throughout La Pine, US 97 is a Statewide Highway and Freight
                                                                                         Page 4
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                                   December 6, 2012



Route. The highway is a designated Expressway between Ponderosa Drive in Bend south to 1st
Street, with the designation resuming at Finley Butte and continuing south beyond the City
boundary to Potter Street in Crescent. This designation places a higher priority for throughput on
the highway. In addition, the posted speed on US 97 varies within City limits; the posted speed is
50 mph in Wickiup, 55 mph between Wickiup and the City core, and 35 mph in downtown La
Pine.

Based on the OHP and Deschutes County policy, the applicable performance standards are
summarized in Table 1. This table also summarizes the existing operational conditions at the
study locations.

                                                    Table 1
                       Existing Conditions Intersection Results, Weekday PM Peak Hour
                                         Traffic                Critical                                      Meets
Intersection            Jurisdiction     Control   Standard    Movement         LOS       Delay     V/C     Standard?
                                          Side-
      1. US 97/
                           ODOT           street     0.951         NBL           C         16.4     0.27        Yes
      Drafter Rd
                                           Stop
     2. Huntington                        Side-
          Rd/              La Pine        street     LOS D         WB            A         9.1      0.05        Yes
        Cagle Rd                           Stop
     3. Huntington
          Rd/              La Pine        Signal     LOS D         N/A           B         17.1     0.41        Yes
      Burgess Rd
     4. Huntington
          Rd/              La Pine        Signal     LOS D         N/A           C         31.3     0.49        Yes
         1st St
     5. Huntington                        Side-
          Rd/              La Pine        street     LOS D         EB            B         14.3     0.13        Yes
         3rd St                            Stop
     6. Huntington                        Side-
          Rd/              La Pine        street     LOS D         NB            B         10.6     0.06        Yes
    Finley Butte Rd                        Stop
                                     US 97/La Pine Corridor Study (2010 Conditions)
                                          Side-
    7. US 97/1st St/
                           ODOT           street     0.951         EB            C         16.8     0.36        Yes
        Reed Rd
                                           Stop
     8. US 97/                            Side-
William Foss Rd –          ODOT           street     0.951         EB            B         13.2     0.27        Yes
       4th St                              Stop
                                          Side-
      9. US 97/
                           ODOT           street     0.951         EB            B         12.0     0.25        Yes
    Huntington Rd
                                           Stop
                                          Side-
      10. US 97/
                           ODOT           street     0.951         WB            B         14.3     0.12        Yes
    Finley Butte Rd
                                           Stop
                                          Side-
      11. US 97/
                           ODOT           street     0.951         WB            B         12.6     0.10        Yes
        6th St
                                           Stop
                                       Wickiup Junction Study (2005 Conditions)
                                          Side-
      12. US 97/
                           ODOT           street     0.951         EB           Not Reported        0.51        Yes
      Burgess Rd
                                           Stop
                                          Side-
      13. US 97/
                           ODOT           street     0.951         WB           Not Reported        0.43        Yes
      Rosland Rd
                                           Stop
1
 Operations reflect the relevant threshold for the stop-controlled sidestreet movement; mainline highway operations vary
                       st
between 0.80 north of 1 Street and south of Finley Butte (designated expressway segments) and 0.85 within the City core.

                                                                                                                Page 5
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                       December 6, 2012



As shown in Table 1, all of the
study intersections currently
operate acceptably. As was
noted within the US 97/La Pine
Corridor Study, the atypical
configuration of many of the
highway intersections coupled
with the high speeds result in
queuing and delays that are
observed to be longer than
those reported. This is further
discussed below.

Intersection Geometric
Review

Within La Pine the roadway
network generally follows a
north-south pattern, with US
97 intersecting diagonally
across     the    City.    This
configuration results in a
number         of     “skewed”
intersections that do not cross
the highway at right angles.        Exhibit 3. Aerial imagery showing the Morson Street alignment with
These “skews” result in             US 97 (prior to the road diet).
varying turning speeds for
northbound and southbound                      Turn Conflict Area
drivers, require a sharper turn
for larger vehicles, and
provide an unconventional
viewing angle for drivers
approaching the intersections.
This      configuration    also
increases the pedestrian and
bicycle crossing distances and
exposure.

Exhibit 3 shows the approach
angle of Morson Street,
presenting one of the most
extreme configurations from         Exhibit 4. 1st Street – Reed Road example of conflicts that occur due
within the City. At this            to intersection offset.
intersection the northbound



                                                                                                  Page 6
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                        December 6, 2012



left-turn from US 97 onto Morson occurs at a high speed due to the flat turning angle, whereas the
southbound right-turn from the highway occurs at a low speed.

Intersection offset is another concern in La Pine. The slight mis-alignment of intersection legs can
create conflicts for turning vehicles whose paths may cross, as illustrated in Exhibit 4. The
approximately 15-foot offset at 1st Street – Reed Road (where the east leg is located slightly to the
north) is an example of this poor offset.

COLLISION HISTORY REVIEW

Crashes within the City of La Pine were reviewed for the five-year period between 2007 and 2011.
Crash data was obtained from reported crashes that are collected and compiled by ODOT. Crash
reports are required for crashes exceeding $1,500 in property damage or resulting in any type of
injury.

Citywide Crash Trends

Throughout        the
past five years there
have been a total of
132         reported
crashes within the
City. These crashes
have involved 235
vehicles and 264
persons.     Annual
crashes over the
past few years have
fluctuated between
21 and 34 with no
strong trend noted
in the data, as
shown in Exhibit 5.        Exhibit 5. Annual summary of total City of La Pine crashes.

Crash severity was also reviewed over this period. Of the 132 crashes, two were reported as
fatalities, 59 resulted in injuries, and 71 were non-injury (property damage only) collisions. One of
the fatal crashes occurred at 8:00 p.m. on December 16, 2010 at the Rosland Road intersection with
US 97. The crash reports show that the westbound driver was not wearing a seatbelt and did not
yield to highway traffic while turning left from Rosland Road, and was struck by a northbound
semi-truck. Alcohol was reported as a contributing factor.

The second fatality occurred at 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, May 29, 2011 approximately 2,000 feet
north of 1st Street along US 97. A pedestrian, wearing dark clothing, was on the highway when
struck by a southbound vehicle. The crash report shows that neither drugs, alcohol, nor speed
were contributing factors in this crash.


                                                                                                   Page 7
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                   December 6, 2012



Other notable trends that were identified through review of the crash records include the
following:

       48% (64 total) of all reported crashes occur along US 97 (including both fatalities and 26 of
        the 59 injury crashes)
       December included the highest number of crashes of any month (26 total), with nearly
        double the number of crashes that occur in June (14 total) when traffic volumes are
        highest.
       Approximately 17% (23 total) of reported crashes occur on icy roadway conditions.
       There were 11 semi-trucks with trailers involved within the reported crashes.
       Twenty-one percent of crashes involved drivers between the ages of 50 and 59 (21%).
       There were four alcohol-involved crashes, no crashes that were reported as drug-involved.
       Four crashes occurred within a school zone, and one within a work zone.
       Twenty-seven crashes cited excessive speed as a crash cause.
       Turning crashes are the most common crash within La Pine (50 total, 38%), followed by
        angle crashes (26 total, 20%) and fixed-object collisions (23 total, 17%).

Based on the review of the reported crash data, future system improvements, design, and policy
should consider the following:

       Increased emphasis on highway safety from an access, geometrics, and winter
        maintenance perspective.
       Consider design treatments within La Pine that address the needs of an older population.
       Continue to invest in treatments that inform or enforce appropriate speeds for roadway
        conditions and context throughout the City.

Pedestrian and Bicycle Crashes

Crashes involving pedestrians and bicycles within La Pine were specifically reviewed to help
identify facility or crossing needs that enhance the comfort, convenience and safety for edestrians
and cyclists. Over the past five years, there were two pedestrian crashes and one reported crash
involving a bicyclist. Further detail of these crashes is discussed below for reference. However,
review of these crashes did not reveal any safety-related patterns that require mitigation.

The two pedestrian crashes include the fatality on US 97 north of 1st Street as previously
described. The second pedestrian crash occurred at the Finley Butte intersection occurred on
Monday, August 8, 2011 at 4:00 p.m. The crash reports indicate that a 19-year old female driver
failed to yield the right-of-way to the pedestrian. The weather was reported as clear, dry, and
sunny at the time of the crash.

The bicycle-involved crash occurred on at 1:00 p.m. on Friday, July 2, 2009 along a rural portion
of Huntington Road about 500 feet north of the Crescent Creek subdivision. Limited data was
available regarding the specific conditions of the crash, but the collision was reported as a non-
motorist illegally in the roadway, and no error was identified on the part of the driver.



                                                                                              Page 8
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                   December 6, 2012



Corridor Crash Trends

Two corridors within La Pine, US 97 and Huntington Road, contain a high proportion of the
overall crashes. Each of these corridors was further reviewed to identify roadway-specific safety
trends.

US 97

There were 64 reported crashes including 16 crashes within Wickiup Junction, 4 crashes between
Wickiup and the City core, and the remainder (44) between 1st Street and 6th Street along US 97
within the five-year period. Twenty-six of these crashes resulted in some type of injuries,
including 2 fatalities, 18 non-incapacitating injuries, and 22 possible injuries (as reported). It
should be noted that these historical crash records do not reflect the 2012 restriping of US 97 into
a three-lane cross-section and other on-going speed treatments.

The following trends were noted for crashes along US 97:
       The crash records show that drivers over the age of 40 are involved in more of the
        highway crashes and are more often at-fault.
       There were nine crashes that involved trucks with trailers on the highway.
       20 reported crashes occurred outside of daylight hours (low-light conditions, 31%).
       Nearly 27% of highway crashes occurred on snow or ice.
       The top crash causes cited were the following:
            o Failure to yield right-of-way (22)
            o Speed too fast for conditions (within legal limits, 14)
            o Passed stop sign (12)
       Five of the highway crashes involved a driveway access.

Based on these patterns, specific to US 97 safety treatments should focus on the following:
       Implementing illumination along the highway, particularly at intersections within the
        City core area and rural to urban transitions.
       Improved speed compliance through design, education, information, and enforcement.
       Focus on design aspects that will better support an older population such as larger street
        signs and illumination.

Huntington Road

There were 44 reported crashes along Huntington Road north of US 97 over the past five years,
excluding a single crash at the intersection with US 97. Crash trends have generally decreased
over the analysis period, with 2011 exhibiting the lowest number of crashes of all five years. None
of the reported crashes along this corridor cited drug or alcohol impairment.

Review of crash trends noted the following:
       Driver age was a significant factor in the crashes, with drivers in the 50 to 59 age category
        at fault in 38% of the crashes on this corridor.



                                                                                              Page 9
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                  December 6, 2012



       Over half of all the reported crashes on Huntington Road occurred at the two signalized
        intersections with 1st Street (9 crashes) and Burgess Road (17 crashes). The Burgess Road
        intersection was signalized in 2009 so many of these crashes reflect the prior stop-
        controlled configuration.
       The vast majority of reported crashes occurred with dry roadway surface conditions (35 of
        44) and during daylight hours (36).

A summary of crashes at the Huntington Road/Burgess Road intersection is further addressed
within the next section.

Intersection Crashes

There were two intersections within the City that experienced a relatively high number of crashes
(approximately double all other intersections in the City): Huntington Road/Burgess Road and US
97/1st Street – Reed Road. Crashes at each of these intersections were further reviewed to identify
potential crash trends that could suggest some type of geometric deficiency.

US 97/1st Street – Reed Road Intersection

The intersection of US 97 and 1st Street experienced 16 crashes over the past five years, exhibiting
a relatively stable number of crashes per year despite recent land use changes in the area. The
reported crashes were nearly all turning or angle crashes (13 total) with failure to yield as the
primary crash cause. Drug or alcohol impairment was not cited as a factor in any of the crashes,
and the majority occurred during daylight hours (14 total). While seven of the crashes involved
some degree of injury, all of these injuries were reported as minor (non-incapacitating or possible
injury).

ODOT has been working to implement treatments at this intersection to address the high speed
rural transition to an urban environment, and recently installed a speed sign with a driver
feedback display. Intersection improvements have been planned and are partially funded within
the ODOT Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (STIP).

Huntington Road/Burgess Road Intersection

The intersection of Burgess and Huntington Road contained stop-control on the north-south
Huntington Road approaches until 2009, when the intersection was signalized. The design of the
intersection included LED illumination and battery back-up systems to help maintain signal
operations during power failures given the high intersection approach speeds and rural
surrounding area.




                                                                                            Page 10
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                      December 6, 2012



As shown in Exhibit 6, with
exception of 2010, crashes have been
declining since a peak in 2007.
Review of only the 2010 and 2011
crash data shows that the crashes
included three fixed object collisions
(these involved a tree, mailbox, and
ditch), two rear-end crashes, and
one incident involving a deer.
Review of these crashes did not
identify any trends or indicate a
need for further review.
                                         Exhibit 6. Huntington and Burgess intersection crash trend

Transportation Infrastructure Inventory
This section of the report details the existing City population, land use, and supporting
transportation infrastructure. This inventory is intended to inform the future identification of TSP
alternatives by highlighting system opportunities, gaps, and the relationships that exist between
these different elements.

LAND USE INVENTORY

The City of La Pine recently developed a Comprehensive Plan that establishes a land use vision
for the City over the next 20 years. As stated within the plan, “A Comprehensive Plan is a blueprint
for community land use decision making to ensure that needs of the community are met as growth occurs
over the term of the planning period.” Exhibit 7 shows the Comprehensive Plan designations within
the city.

As shown, the City is divided into three neighborhoods, each containing some mix of residential,
retail, and employment uses. These are generally the Wickiup area (Neighborhood 1), the
downtown core (Neighborhood 3), and the area separating the two (Neighborhood 2).
Throughout the City, the majority of residential lands are located on the west side of the city, the
majority of industrial lands are located on the east side of the city, and the majority of commercial
lands are located along US 97 within downtown La Pine.

Further, as highlighted in Exhibit 7, there are a number of natural and man-made barriers that
require additional connectivity considerations within the TSP. These include the floodplains that
are located along the Little Deschutes and bordering the west side of the City’s commercial lands
in the southern neighborhood, US 97, and the BNSF line.

The location of existing activity centers, such as the City’s commercial areas, schools, churches,
and public service centers, also require special transportation considerations. These and other
activity centers within La Pine are shown in Figure 2.




                                                                                                Page 11
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis           December 6, 2012




Exhibit 7. La Pine Comprehensive Plan Map



                                                     Page 12
                                                                                                 La Pine TSP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LOOP DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VIE                        W DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PRAIRIE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RIVERVIEW DR
                                                                                                                                BIG MEADOW DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FOREST RD
                                                                                                                                ALPINE DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TIMBER LANE LOOP
                                                                                                                                                   DYKE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BRIDGE DR
                                                                                                                                               LEONA LN


                                                                                                                                  NORTH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IVE
                                                                                                                                                                                  HOWARD LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MURRY DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OAK DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ASH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ELM DR
                                                                                                                                  SOUTH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CAGLE RD
                                                                                                                                        MEADOW LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SC
                                                                                                                   CEN TER DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DE
                                                                                                                                                           PAULINA VIEW RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DRAFT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LIT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RAILROAD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ANTLER LN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SKIDGEL RD
                                                                                                                                WEST DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DOE LN
                                                                                                                                                                                         LOST PONDEROSA RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AMMON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RIVER PINE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PINE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BURGESS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IN GTO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              REASE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HUNT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ROSLAND RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ELENA LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ALLEN DR
                                                                                                                                   DRTIC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WILLOW LN
                                                                                                                                 ARC
                                                                                                   ELDERBERRY LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FO




                                                                                                                                      HALE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                    COACH RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ENE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1ST ST                                                                                                 REED RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HINKLE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BOX WAY
                                                                                                                                                                       3RD ST
                                                                                                                                       PENGRA ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DILLON WAY
                                                                                                                                                     WALKER ST




                                                                                                                                                                             MORSON ST




                                                                                                                                                                                         4TH ST                                                                                  FOSS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BONNIE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RUSSELL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WHEELER RD




                                                                                                                                              6TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EVANS WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FINLEY BUTTE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ANCHOR WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PREBLE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WALLING LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MITTS WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                             HEATH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Elementary/Middle School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AKE L




                                                                                                                                                                                                             RILEY DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FS RD 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Highschool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SILVE




                                                                                                                                                                                                     BASSETT DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Library
H:\projfile\12450 - La Pine TSP\gis\02_Activity Centers.mxd - jsommerville - 3:10 PM 12/5/2012




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Post Office

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City Hall

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Industrial Land

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cemetery

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Park

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City Boundary
                                                                                                             0                   1,000               2,000        3,000             4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                        Feet



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Activity Centers                                 Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            La Pine, Oregon                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Coordinate System: NAD 1983 StatePlane Oregon South FIPS 3602 Feet Intl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Data Source: Deschutes County
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                         December 6, 2012



The City, County and State have identified an economic development priority for the provision of
large lot industrial sites for future development. Within La Pine, these lands are located in the
southeast quadrant of the city. This area has been managed by the Deschutes County-funded La
Pine Industrial Group (LIGI). Transportation service to these lands and other potential
employment areas will be critical to the future growth and prosperity of La Pine. As stated within
the Comprehensive Plan:

         “Community leaders will continue to aggressively focus efforts on attracting large industrial
         development and reducing barriers to all economic development. It is anticipated that these efforts
         will bring forth industries that rely on a large number of employees and create additional family-
         wage jobs in the community. Community leaders have made it clear that large industrial
         development is needed in addition to the sectors identified in the predicted trend data. Likewise,
         there is a companion goal to reduce the daily commute for local residents by the creation of
         additional family wage jobs within the community.”

POPULATION AND DEMOGRAPHICS

The population of La Pine is relatively small (approximately 1,680 persons based on July 2011
data), but the community serves a much broader area of Deschutes County with goods, services,
and employment (approximately 10,000 persons). La Pine has a high proportion of retirement-age
residents. A population breakdown by age of the head of household is shown in Table 2.

                                                   Table 2
                                       La Pine Population Demographics
         Age of Household                           Total                         Percent of Total
           15 to 24 years                            57                                  2.4
           25 to 34 years                            239                                10.3
           35 to 44 years                            404                                17.3
           45 to 54 years                            487                                20.9
           55 to 64 years                            400                                17.2
          65 years and over                          744                                31.9
Source: La Pine Comprehensive Plan, 2000 Census

ROADWAY OWNERSHIP REVIEW

The roadways in La Pine are owned by a mixture of State (ODOT), Deschutes County, City of La
Pine, Forest Service, and private owners. US 97 (Ashton Eaton Boulevard) is maintained by the
State and is the only ODOT facility within city limits. The County has jurisdiction over the
majority of the City’s arterial and collector system, and the city’s ownership is limited to the local
roadway system. Roadway jurisdiction is shown in Figure 3.

ROADWAY SURFACE REVIEW

Throughout the City, road surfaces are a combination of asphalt, gravel, and dirt surfaced. Gravel
and dirt surfaced roads accommodate limited vehicle speeds and carrying capacity and are not
suitable for classification as higher-order urban facilities without improvements. Figure 4
illustrates the City’s roadway inventory by surface type.


                                                                                                     Page 14
                                                                                                  La Pine TSP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LOOP DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VIE             W DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PRAIRIE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RIVERVIEW DR
                                                                                                                           BIG MEADOW DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FOR
                                                                                                                                 ALPINE DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TIMBER LANE LOOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                               DYKE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BRID GE
                                                                                                                                                               LEONA LN


                                                                                                                                 NORTH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IVE
                                                                                                                                                                                 HOWARD LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MURRY DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OAK DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ASH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ELM DR
                                                                                                                                 SOUTH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CAGLE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SC
                                                                                                                    CEN TER DR




                                                                                                                                       MEADOW LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DE
                                                                                                                                                          PAULINA VIEW RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DRAFT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LIT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RAILROAD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ANTLER LN
                                                                                                                                 WEST DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SKIDGEL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DOE LN
                                                                                                                                                                                       LOST PONDEROSA RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AMMON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RIVER PINE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PINE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BURGESS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IN GTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              REASE ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HUNT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA   ND R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GLENWOOD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ELENA LN                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ALLEN DR
                                                                                                                                    DRTIC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WILLOW LN
                                                                                                                                  ARC
                                                                                                    ELDERBERRY LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FO




                                                                                                                                       HALE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                  COACH RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                 1ST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ENE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            REED RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HINKLE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BOX WAY
                                                                                                                                                                         3RD ST
                                                                                                                                       PENGRA ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DILLON WAY
                                                                                                                                                                           MORSON ST
                                                                                                                                                   WALKER ST




                                                                                                                                                                                       4TH ST                                                                              FOSS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BONNIE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RUSSELL RD




                                                                                                                                               6TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EVANS WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FINLEY BUTTE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ANCHOR WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PREBLE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WALLING LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MITTS WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                           HEATH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AKE L




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FS RD 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                           RILEY DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Roadway Ownership
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SILVE




                                                                                                                                                                                                   BASSETT DR
H:\projfile\12450 - La Pine TSP\gis\03_Roadway Ownership.mxd - jsommerville - 2:38 PM 12/5/2012




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              State

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              County

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City of La Pine

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Forest Service

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Public

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Private

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City Boundary
                                                                                                              0                   1,000             2,000         3,000            4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Roadway Ownership                                           Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      La Pine, Oregon                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Coordinate System: NAD 1983 HARN StatePlane Oregon South FIPS 3602 Feet Intl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Data Source: Deschutes County
                                                                               H:\projfile\12450 - La Pine TSP\gis\04_Roadway Surface Material.mxd - jsommerville - 2:36 PM 12/5/2012



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ELDERBERRY LN




                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CEN TER DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             La Pine TSP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ARC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TIC      DR




                                                                                                                  1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WEST DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PENGRA ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SOUTH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MEADOW LN



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ALPINE DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NORTH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BIG MEADOW DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HALE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WALKER ST




                                                                                                                  2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DYKE RD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LEONA LN




                                                                                                                  3,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PAULINA VIEW RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MORSON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HOWARD LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COACH RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LOST PONDEROSA RD




                                                                                                               4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4TH ST




                                                                                                                   Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1ST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PREBLE WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FO                                                                      RIVER PINE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BONNIE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                         RILEY DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                    HEATH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RD




                                                                                                                                                                            BASSETT DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ANCHOR WAY                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EVANS WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BURGESS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ALLEN DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PRAIRIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LOOP DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GLENWOOD                                                         LIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               WALLING LN                                                                                                                                  DR                                                          TL                                                        TIMBER LANE LOOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VIE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HINKLE WAY                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HUNT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IN GTO                                                     DE                                            BRIDGE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N RD                                                       SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FOSS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WHEELER RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ELENA LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BOX WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WILLOW LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DILLON WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                               MITTS WAY

                                                                                                                                                                            SILVE
                                                                                                                                                                                  RL         AKE L
                                                                                                                                                                                                       N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             REASE ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     REED RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FINLEY BUTTE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RIVERVIEW DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PINE DR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DOE LN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RUSSELL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ASH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ANTLER LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CAGLE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OAK DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SKIDGEL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ELM DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L   ENE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WAY                                                                                             RAILROAD ST

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MURRY DR



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DRAFT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ER     RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ROS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA




                                                                                                                                                                                            FS RD 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ND R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D




                                                                                            La Pine, Oregon
                                                                                    Roadway Surface Material
                                                                                                                                   Dirt
                                                                                                                                          Gravel
                                                                                                                                                   Asphalt




                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AMMON RD




                                                                                               Figure
                                                                                                                   City Boundary




Coordinate System: NAD 1983 HARN StatePlane Oregon South FIPS 3602 Feet Intl
                                              Data Source: Deschutes County
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                   December 6, 2012



PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE FACILITIES

Figure 5 illustrates the location of pedestrian facilities throughout La Pine based on a review of
aerial photography. While this figure illustrates the presence of sidewalks, it does not convey
which facilities are clear of obstacles and obstructions (such as vaults, utilities, storm grates, or
poles). As shown, pedestrian facilities within the city are limited and are discontinuous in areas
where present.

Dedicated bicycle facilities were recently installed along US 97 through downtown La Pine in the
form of buffered bicycle lanes. Other roadways in La Pine contain wide shoulders that can
accommodate bicyclists (such as Huntington Road), but no other dedicated bicycle facilities exist.

RAIL INVENTORY

A Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) rail line runs through La Pine, mostly on the east side of
the city. Within Wickiup, the railway crosses US 97 just north of Burgess Road with an extreme
skew angle. ODOT is currently pursuing funding to grade-separate the Wickiup Junction, which
would also include modifications to the adjacent roadway network, most notably the rerouting of
the Burgess Road and US 97 intersection.

No passenger rail service is available within La Pine. The closest passenger rail service is
provided through AMTRAK, and is available in Chemult located approximately 35 miles to the
south on US 97. From Chemult passenger rail service is provided to Eugene and California.

AIR TRANSPORTATION INVENTORY

No airport facilities exist within La Pine. The closest commercial airline service is available at
Roberts Field in Redmond, Oregon which is approximately 45 miles to the north on US 97.
Kingsley Field in Klamath Falls, Oregon is located approximately 100 miles to the south, but also
provides commercial services. General aviation airport options are available in Sunriver and also
in Bend.




                                                                                             Page 17
                                                                               H:\projfile\12450 - La Pine TSP\gis\05_Existing Pedestrian Facilities.mxd - jsommerville - 2:34 PM 12/5/2012



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ELDERBERRY LN




                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CEN TER DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    La Pine TSP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ARC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TIC      DR




                                                                                                                        1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WEST DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PENGRA ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ALPINE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MEADOW LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SOUTH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NORTH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HALE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BIG MEADOW DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WALKER ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DYKE RD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LEONA LN




                                                                                                                        2,000
                                                                                                                        3,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PAULINA VIEW RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MORSON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HOWARD LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COACH RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LOST PONDEROSA RD




                                                                                                                     4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4TH ST




                                                                                                                         Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PREBLE WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FO                                                                         RIVER PINE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BONNIE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                RILEY DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HEATH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                   BASSETT DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1ST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ANCHOR WAY                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EVANS WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BURGESS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ALLEN DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PRAIRIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LOOP DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LIT                                                                        FOREST RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TIMBER LANE LOOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WALLING LN                                                                                                                                                                                                 TL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HINKLE WAY                                                                                               HUNT                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IN GTO                                                        DE                                            BRIDGE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N RD                                                      SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FOSS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WHEELER RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ELENA LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BOX WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WILLOW LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DILLON WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MITTS WAY

                                                                                                                                                                                                   SILVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         RL         AKE L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    REASE ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           REED RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FINLEY BUTTE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RIVERVIEW DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PINE DR



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DOE LN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RUSSELL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ASH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ANTLER LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAGLE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OAK DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SKIDGEL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ELM DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L   ENE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WAY                                                                                                RAILROAD ST

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MURRY DR



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DRAFT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ER     RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FS RD 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ROSLAND RD




                                                                                                La Pine, Oregon
                                                                                    Existing Pedestrian Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                 Both Sides

                                                                                                                                                   Single Side
                                                                                                                                                                              Existing Sidewalks




                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AMMON RD




                                                                                                  Figure
                                                                                                                         Existing Multi-Use Path




Coordinate System: NAD 1983 HARN StatePlane Oregon South FIPS 3602 Feet Intl
                                              Data Source: Deschutes County
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                   December 6, 2012



ACCESS MANAGEMENT ANALYSIS

Exhibit 8 illustrates the relationship
between access and mobility. Facilities
such as US 97 (generically classified as a
Principal Arterial) that have a high
mobility purpose allow less access to the
system, whereas local streets, such as
those in neighborhoods, contain multiple
driveways and provide low throughput.

Access standards for US 97 are contained
within Oregon Administrative Rule 734-
051, commonly referred to as Division 51.
Temporary access rules have been in
effect since January 1, 2012, and were
further amended on May 3, 2012. These
rules provide access management
standards       based     on     functional Exhibit 8. Roadway classification and function.
classification, type of area, posted speed,
and segment designation. Table 4 within Division 51 cites an access spacing standard of 2,640 feet
(1/2 mile spacing) on urban expressways (such as US 97 north of 1st Street and south of Finley
Butte) and a 500-foot spacing standard (approximately 10.5 accesses/mile) in an urban area with a
35 mph posted speed.

Access along US 97 through the downtown core was reviewed based on the inventory conducted
as part of the 2005 La Pine Special Transportation Area (STA) Plan between 1st Street and 6th
Street. This inventory identified 42 accesses onto the highway along this 0.81 mile section of
highway, for a density of 52 accesses per mile, or approximately five times the current access
spacing standard.

Deschutes County Code Section 17.48 describes County access requirements. This code generally
states that no access is permitted to arterial and collector roadways unless there is no other
possible means of access, and residential access onto collectors and arterials is not allowed within
100 feet of an intersection or the maximum allowable spacing on the parcel (whichever is less).

Many of the driveways within La Pine are ill-defined and wide; limiting the width of driveways
would help to define the conflict area between motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians, and inform
all types of facility users of how to cross and use the accesses. The County requires that
commercial access contain a maximum width of 35 feet, with residential access ranging from 14
feet (single) to 20 feet (double). Based on the La Pine STA Plan inventory, there were fifteen
driveways on US 97 that would exceed the current County access width requirements.

Access was also observed along Huntington Road as it serves a key mobility function within the
City. Review of this corridor shows access issues near the intersection with US 97 where there are


                                                                                             Page 19
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                 December 6, 2012



multiple wide accesses to Huntington Road, and the distinction between the accesses, parking
area, and sidewalks is not clearly defined. Exhibit 9 provides an illustration of this segment.




Exhibit 9. Southbound view along Huntington Road near the US 97 intersection.

INTERMODAL CONNECTIONS ANALYSIS

La Pine is served by Cascades East Transit (Route 30). This route runs from the Wickiup Junction
Park/Ride at the intersection of Burgess Road and US 97 in La Pine to the Hawthorne Station in
Bend. One intermediate stop is made at River Woods Baptist Church in Bend at the intersection of
Baker Road and Cinder Butte Road.

The route is served by three northbound and three southbound buses on weekdays; no weekend
service is provided. The arrival and departure times for the buses are shown in Table 3. Current
fares for this route are as follows:
       Single Ride: $3.75 (Adult & Youth), $3.00 (Senior)
       Day Pass: $6:25 (Adult & Youth), $5.00 (Senior)
Ridership information for this route is shown in Exhibit 10. It should be noted that within the
ridership data local Dial-a-Ride customers were required to provide increased notice for trips due
to budget constraints, which has impacted ridership.




                                                                                           Page 20
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                        December 6, 2012



                                                   Table 3
                                    La Pine-Bend Transit Service Schedule
                     Northbound                                          Southbound
   Wickiup                                                                                   Wickiup
   Junction          River Woods                                         River Woods         Junction
  Park/Ride         Baptist Church          Bend            Bend        Baptist Church      Park/Ride
   6:55 a.m.           7:23 a.m.          7:35 a.m.       7:40 a.m.             -            8:20 a.m.

   8:25 a.m.           8:53 a.m.          9:05 a.m.           -                 -                -

        -                  -                  -           3:42 p.m.         3:54 p.m.        4:22 p.m.

   4:27 p.m.               -              5:07 p.m.       5:20 p.m.         5:32 p.m.        6:00 p.m.

Source: Cascades East Transit (CET)




Exhibit 10. La Pine Monthly Transit Ridership Data. Source: Central Oregon Intergovernmental Council

Figure 6 shows the Dial-a-Ride service area in La Pine and the location of the La Pine Park-and-
Ride lot near the Wickiup Junction.




                                                                                                  Page 21
                                                                                                       La Pine TSP

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TWIN DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                      2ND ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SPARKS DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OTTER DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AMBER LN
                                                                                                                                                                                        CAMINO DE ORO AVE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SNOWBERRY LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G  UE
                                                                                                                                                                                               PARKWAY DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HAWKS LAIR RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                      RD




                                                                                                                                                                   CORNELL DR
                                                                                                                                    BOUNDARY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EAGLES NEST RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LINA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PINE DROP LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BIG TIMBER DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DAWN RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RIVERVIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DEEP WOODS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N  L
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ANDREWS RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GE
                                                                                                                                                                         HOLIDAY DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GREEN FOREST RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BRI D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COUGAR LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PINE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WOODSTOCK DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DEER RUN LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AQUA RD
                                                                                                                                                                                           OLD MILL RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FAUN LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DEL PINO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                      SHELLIE LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BUENA VISTA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DAY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                          TARRY LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WOODCHIP LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LOOP
                                                                                                          SHADY LN                                                                                                                                                              BIG MEAD OW DR
                                                                                                                               VD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PINE LN
                                                                                                                             BL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ALPINE DR
                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                      IS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               T RD
                                                                                                                    NR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CEDAR LN
                                                                                                                 SU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DYKE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FIR LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LEONA LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RANCH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                           DEEDON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NORTH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HOWARD LN
                                                                                                                                    DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OAK DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ASH DR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ELM DR
                                                                                                                                        OW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DICK RD                                SOUTH DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NG
                                                                                                                                  RAIN B




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAGLE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MEADOW LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NTI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DRAFTER RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CEN TER DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PAULINA VIEW RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RAILROAD ST
                                                                                                            EMERALD DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ANTLER LN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SKIDGEL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DOE LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RIVER PINE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AMMON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DEER FIELD DR
                                                                                                                           LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PINE DR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CASCADE LN
                                                                                                                     SE
                                                                                                                   RO
                                                                                                                 IM
                                                                                                               PR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BURGESS RD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ROSLAND RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LECH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ELDERBERRY LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LESLIE DR
                                                                                                                       UNION RD




                                                                                                                                                               DUSTAN RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PINE FOREST DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           97
                                                                                                                                                                                                   NER L




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WOODLAND DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                         N

                                                                                                                                                                                                                STEARNS RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WRIGHT AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HU
                                                                                                                                        DORRANCE MEADOW RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DAVIS AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DE
                                                                                                           READ LOOP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LIT
                                                                                                                                                                                               KIWA LN




                                                                                                                                                                PAULINA AVE
                                                                                                          PIN E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HALE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            COACH RD
                                                                                                                L




                                                                                                                                                             RIM DR
                                                                                                            OOP




                                                                                                                                                                  DR
                                                                                                               DR




                                                                                                                                               RIVER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1ST ST                                                             REED RD
                                                                                                         DEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                    AY                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                  EW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AS




                                                                                                                                             R RI                                                                                 ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BOX WAY
                                                                                                                                         SHE                                                                                  P IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PENGRA ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CED




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ENE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HINKLE WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FIR                                                                                                                                           FOSS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MORSON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L
                                                                                                                                                                                       HANN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                       JORY RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RUSSELL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WHEELER RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DAR
                                                                                                                                                                 RIVERLAND AVE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EVANS WAY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FINLEY BUTTE RD
                                                                                                                       WELCH RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MITTS WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DIANNE RD




                                                                                                                                                             SEED RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HEATH DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FS RD 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RILEY DR

                                                                                                                                                                                                 PIERCE RD
H:\projfile\12450 - La Pine TSP\gis\07_Intermodal Connections.mxd - jsommerville - 2:29 PM 12/5/2012




                                                                                                                                                                                        JACKPINE LOOP

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Park-N-Ride

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           La Pine - Bend Route
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WHITE BUCK AVE
                                                                                                                                                                        MASTEN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dial-A-Ride Service Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WAYN E DR

                                                                                                           0             1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               31                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA PINE DR
                                                                                                                                                     Feet



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Intermodal Connections                                                                                  Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     La Pine, Oregon                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Coordinate System: NAD 1983 HARN StatePlane Oregon South FIPS 3602 Feet Intl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Data Source: Deschutes County
TM4: Existing Conditions Analysis                                                  December 6, 2012



KEY FINDINGS

A listing of key findings of the existing conditions and inventory are summarized below:

       Traffic volumes in La Pine are heavily influenced by regional travel, and do not
        experience the same commute peaks common in other communities.
       Intersections throughout La Pine operate acceptably today, but congestion on the highway
        is increased by high travel speeds and poor geometrics.
       Nearly half of all crashes in La Pine occur on US 97. The crashes involve a high proportion
        of older drivers, and increase in the winter months when travel volumes are lower but
        snow and ice are more common. A relatively high number of crashes occur on US 97 at
        night.
       The intersections of US 97/1st Street and Huntington Road/Burgess Road have nearly
        double the crashes of all other intersections in the City. The signalization of Huntington
        and Burgess in 2009 has helped to reduce crashes from their 2007 peaks. The US 97/1 st
        Street intersection remains a priority, and recent efforts by ODOT are addressing speed
        and driver expectation issues within this rural to urban transition area.
       Access on US 97 exceeds State standards by a factor of five.
       Inventory information shows a general lack of bicycle and pedestrian facilities to
        interconnect the City. Transit service is only provided from the Wickiup Junction park-
        and-ride lot, with no service from the City core.
       Since incorporation Deschutes County continues to maintain all of the City’s major
        roadways with exception of US 97, which is maintained by ODOT.

NEXT STEPS

This draft memorandum is provided for review and comment, and will be further discussed by
the Technical Advisory Committee and Public Advisory Committee as part of the January
meeting. The next memorandum will present future needs within La Pine based on projected
traffic volumes and forecast roadway conditions, which will then inform areas where
improvement strategies are needed.



Attachments

       2012 Traffic Count Worksheets
       Existing Conditions Worksheets
       Citywide Crash Trends




                                                                                            Page 23
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Huntington Rd -- Finley Butte                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10791909
 CITY/STATE: La Pine, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Aug 07 2012
                     4           4                        Peak-Hour: 4:15 PM -- 5:15 PM                                   0.0        25.0

                     3     1     0
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 0.0 0.0

       127   4                         0   102
                                                                                                           9.4    25.0                        0.0     11.8
             97           0.80        87
                                                                                                                  16.5                       12.6
       130   29                       15   108
                                                                                                           13.8   3.4                         6.7     14.8

                     37    0     11
                                                                                                                          2.7 0.0 0.0

                     45          48
                                                                                                                          4.4        2.1



                           0                                                                                               0    0     0


                                                                                                                  0                            0

             0                         2                                                                          0                            0

                                                                                                                  0                            0


                           1                                                                                               0    1     1




                          NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                       NA                                                                          NA                          NA




                          NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count           Huntington Rd                  Huntington Rd             Finley Butte                 Finley Butte
     Period            (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                   Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                  Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                         Totals
     3:45 PM        4     0       0    0           0     1      0    0     0     12      2      0     0        7      0         0            26            217
     3:50 PM        0     0       1    0           0     0      1    0     1      6      4      0     1        4      0         0            18            222
     3:55 PM        3     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     0      5      2      0     1        7      0         0            18            229
     4:00 PM        0     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     1     10      2      0     1        7      1         0            22            228
     4:05 PM        0     0       2    0           0     0      0    0     1      9      3      0     0       16      0         0            31            239
     4:10 PM        4     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     0      5      2      0     3        9      0         0            23            238
     4:15 PM        4     0       4    0           0     0      0    0     0     12      2      0     1        7      0         0            30            256
     4:20 PM        3     0       1    0           0     1      2    0     0      6      1      0     6        8      0         0            28            263
     4:25 PM        4     0       1    0           0     0      0    0     1      9      0      0     2        3      0         0            20            263
     4:30 PM        2     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     1      4      0      0     0        8      0         0            15            256
     4:35 PM        1     0       0    0           0     0      1    0     2      8      2      0     2        1      0         0            17            262
     4:40 PM        0     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     0      8      2      0     1        4      0         0            15            263
     4:45 PM        4     0       2    0           0     0      0    0     0      6      4      0     1       11      0         0            28            265
     4:50 PM        1     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     0     11      2      0     0        6      0         0            20            267
     4:55 PM        1     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     0     10      3      0     1        7      0         0            22            271
     5:00 PM        4     0       1    0           0     0      0    0     0     10      5      0     1        9      0         0            30            279
     5:05 PM        7     0       2    0           0     0      0    0     0      8      5      0     0        9      0         0            31            279
     5:10 PM        6     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     0      5      3      0     0       14      0         0            28            284
     5:15 PM        2     0       2    0           0     0      0    0     0      5      1      0     0        8      0         0            18            272
     5:20 PM        2     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     0      5      0      0     2        8      0         0            17            261
     5:25 PM        2     0       1    0           0     0      0    0     0      1      0      0     0        4      0         0             8            249
     5:30 PM        1     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     0      6      1      0     1       14      1         0            24            258
     5:35 PM        0     0       2    0           0     0      0    0     0      5      1      0     1        9      0         0            18            259
     5:40 PM        1     0       0    0           0     0      0    0     0      4      3      0     0        1      0         0             9            253
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles     68     0      12    0           0     0      0    0     0     92     52      0     4      128      0         0                   356
 Heavy Trucks       0     0       0                0     0      0          0     12      0            0       16      0                             28
  Pedestrians             0                              0                        0                            0                                     0
   Bicycles         0     0       0                0     0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 8/22/2012 2:09 PM                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Huntington Rd -- Burgess Rd                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10791908
 CITY/STATE: La Pine, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Aug 07 2012
                   47           70                         Peak-Hour: 3:55 PM -- 4:55 PM                                  4.3        2.9

                    7     32     8
                                                          Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                          14.3 3.1 0.0

       362   11                        12   184
                                                                                                            5.0   0.0                       16.7      6.0
             126         0.96         152
                                                                                                                  10.3                       5.9
       287   150                       20   180
                                                                                                            7.3   5.3                        0.0      7.2

                   203 47       46
                                                                                                                          3.9 0.0 0.0

                   202          296
                                                                                                                          4.5        2.7



                          0                                                                                                1    0    0


                                                                                                                  0                           0

             0                          0                                                                         0                           0

                                                                                                                  1                           0


                          1                                                                                                0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                       NA                                                                          NA                         NA




                         NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count        Huntington Rd                      Huntington Rd             Burgess Rd                   Burgess Rd
     Period         (Northbound)                       (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At Left Thru Right                                                                                                               Total
                                    U             Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                        Totals
     3:25 PM    15     3       1    0               0     2      1    0     2      4     10      0     0        5      1        0           44            725
     3:30 PM    14     1       4    0               0     2      2    0     1      8      9      0     2        9      1        0           53            721
     3:35 PM    21     3       6    0               0     1      0    0     2      9      8      0     3        7      0        0           60            713
     3:40 PM    14     6       6    0               0     5      0    0     5     15     15      0     2       17      1        0           86            752
     3:45 PM    17     3       7    0               1     1      0    0     0     13      9      0     0       12      1        0           64            768
     3:50 PM    12     4       1    0               0     5      2    0     0      6     11      0     2       12      1        0           56            741
     3:55 PM    17     4       4    0               0     2      0    0     1      6     10      0     1       10      0        0           55            741
     4:00 PM    12     2       1    0               3     5      0    0     0     14     23      0     3        8      0        0           71            750
     4:05 PM    15     4       6    0               0     2      0    0     1     13     13      0     3       12      2        0           71            754
     4:10 PM    20     4       4    0               0     6      1    0     1      8     14      0     0       11      1        0           70            766
     4:15 PM     8     7       3    0               2     4      1    0     0     10      9      0     0       11      0        0           55            748
     4:20 PM    14     1       3    0               1     3      1    0     0     18     11      0     2       15      1        0           70            755
     4:25 PM    14     4       5    0               1     1      0    0     3     10     15      0     3       11      3        0           70            781
     4:30 PM    14     9       3    0               0     0      0    0     0     10     12      0     3       10      1        0           62            790
     4:35 PM    24     4       9    0               0     1      1    0     0      9      9      0     0       19      1        0           77            807
     4:40 PM    22     0       3    0               0     2      0    0     0     10      7      0     3        8      1        0           56            777
     4:45 PM    19     3       2    0               0     3      2    0     0     10     12      0     1       20      2        0           74            787
     4:50 PM    24     5       3    0               1     3      1    0     5      8     15      0     1       17      0        0           83            814
     4:55 PM     9     6       3    0               0     4      1    0     0      3     12      0     1       10      0        0           49            808
     5:00 PM    10     2       0    0               0     2      3    0     0      8      7      0     0        7      1        0           40            777
     5:05 PM    28     4       1    0               0     2      0    0     1     11      8      0     1       13      0        0           69            775
     5:10 PM    30     4       5    0               1     1      1    0     0     10      9      0     0       15      0        0           76            781
     5:15 PM    23     3       2    0               0     1      0    0     1      9      5      0     1        7      0        0           52            778
     5:20 PM    15     3       4    0               0     2      0    0     2      9      8      0     0       18      1        0           62            770
 Peak 15-Min             Northbound                        Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right      U             Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles 260    32      32    0               4    32     12    0    20    112    136      0    20      180     12        0                  852
 Heavy Trucks   12     0       0                    0     0      0          0     12      8            0       20      4                           56
  Pedestrians          0                                  0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles      0     0       0                    0     0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 8/22/2012 2:09 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US Hwy 97 -- Drafter Rd                                                                                           QC JOB #: 10791907
 CITY/STATE: La Pine, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Aug 07 2012
                     450            416                         Peak-Hour: 4:00 PM -- 5:00 PM                                 14.7        14.4

                         0   449     1
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 4:35 PM -- 4:50 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 14.7 0.0

       0     0                             3     7
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                        66.7     42.9
             0               0.90          0
                                                                                                                       0.0                         0.0
       0     0                             4     4
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                        25.0     25.0

                         0   413     3
                                                                                                                              0.0 14.0 33.3

                     453            416
                                                                                                                              14.8        14.2



                              0                                                                                                0     0     0


                                                                                                                       0                            0

             0                             0                                                                           0                            0

                                                                                                                       0                            0


                              0                                                                                                0     0     0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                           NA                                                                           NA                          NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                  US Hwy 97                       US Hwy 97                Drafter Rd                   Drafter Rd
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                  Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                         Totals
     3:30 PM        0          29      0     0         0      27      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            56            794
     3:35 PM        0          41      0     0         0      36      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            77            811
     3:40 PM        0          27      0     0         0      40      0    0     0      0       0     0     1        0       0       0            68            821
     3:45 PM        0          41      2     0         0      24      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            67            816
     3:50 PM        0          26      0     0         0      43      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            69            804
     3:55 PM        0          24      0     0         0      25      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            49            798
     4:00 PM        0          34      0     0         0      37      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            71            802
     4:05 PM        0          44      1     0         0      39      0    0     0      0       0     0     1        0       0       0            85            820
     4:10 PM        0          25      0     0         1      36      0    0     0      0       0     0     1        0       1       0            64            823
     4:15 PM        0          35      1     0         0      31      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            67            823
     4:20 PM        0          26      0     0         0      42      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       1       0            69            816
     4:25 PM        0          30      1     0         0      39      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       1       0            71            813
     4:30 PM        0          38      0     0         0      33      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            71            828
     4:35 PM        0          36      0     0         0      39      0    0     0      0       0     0     1        0       0       0            76            827
     4:40 PM        0          40      0     0         0      48      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            88            847
     4:45 PM        0          42      0     0         0      36      0    0     0      0       0     0     1        0       0       0            79            859
     4:50 PM        0          34      0     0         0      31      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            65            855
     4:55 PM        0          29      0     0         0      38      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            67            873
     5:00 PM        0          29      0     0         1      32      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            62            864
     5:05 PM        0          32      0     0         0      33      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       1       0            66            845
     5:10 PM        0          32      0     0         1      32      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            65            846
     5:15 PM        0          37      1     0         0      38      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            76            855
     5:20 PM        0          30      0     0         0      38      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            68            854
     5:25 PM        0          31      0     0         1      36      0    0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0       0            68            851
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles      0         472      0     0         0     492      0    0     0      0       0     0     8        0       0       0                   972
 Heavy Trucks       0          72      0               0      96      0          0      0       0           0        0       0                           168
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                        0                            0                                    0
   Bicycles         0           0      0               0       0      0          0      0       0           0        0       0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 8/22/2012 2:09 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Huntington Rd -- Cagle St                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10791906
 CITY/STATE: La Pine, OR                                                                                             DATE: Tue, Aug 07 2012
                     47          72                     Peak-Hour: 3:40 PM -- 4:40 PM                                 10.6        5.6

                     0     46    1
                                                       Peak 15-Min: 3:40 PM -- 3:55 PM
                                                                                                                      0.0 10.9 0.0

       0     0                         2   5
                                                                                                         0.0   0.0                        0.0      0.0
             0            0.81         0
                                                                                                               0.0                        0.0
       0     0                         3   5
                                                                                                         0.0   0.0                        0.0      0.0

                     0     70    4
                                                                                                                      0.0 5.7 0.0

                     49          74
                                                                                                                      10.2        5.4



                           0                                                                                           0     3    0


                                                                                                               0                           0

             0                         0                                                                       0                           0

                                                                                                               0                           0


                           0                                                                                           0     0    1




                          NA                                                                                                 NA




             NA                       NA                                                                       NA                         NA




                          NA                                                                                                 NA



 5-Min Count           Huntington Rd                Huntington Rd               Cagle St                    Cagle St
     Period            (Northbound)                 (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                            Total
                  Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                        Totals
     3:10 PM        0     6      0     0         0     6      0    0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0        0           13            113
     3:15 PM        0     5      2     0         0     1      0    0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0        0            9            111
     3:20 PM        0     3      0     0         1     5      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            9            113
     3:25 PM        0     5      0     0         0     2      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            7            114
     3:30 PM        0     5      0     0         1     4      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0           10            113
     3:35 PM        0     5      0     0         0     0      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            5            111
     3:40 PM        0     7      2     0         0     5      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0           14            114
     3:45 PM        0     6      0     0         0     3      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            9            120
     3:50 PM        0     6      0     0         0     8      0    0     0      0      0      0     1        0      1        0           16            125
     3:55 PM        0     2      0     0         0     1      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      1        0            4            115
     4:00 PM        0     5      0     0         0     7      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0           12            117
     4:05 PM        0     5      0     0         0     4      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            9            117
     4:10 PM        0     6      0     0         0     5      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0           11            115
     4:15 PM        0     6      2     0         0     7      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0           15            121
     4:20 PM        0     2      0     0         0     3      0    0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0        0            6            118
     4:25 PM        0     6      0     0         0     1      0    0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0        0            8            119
     4:30 PM        0    14      0     0         1     0      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0           15            124
     4:35 PM        0     5      0     0         0     2      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            7            126
     4:40 PM        0     2      0     0         0     4      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            6            118
     4:45 PM        0     3      0     0         1     4      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0            8            117
     4:50 PM        0    10      0     0         0     5      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      1        0           16            117
     4:55 PM        0     5      0     0         0     4      0    0     0      0      0      0     2        0      0        0           11            124
     5:00 PM        0     2      1     0         0     2      0    0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0        0            6            118
     5:05 PM        0     4      0     0         0     2      0    0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0        0            7            116
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                  Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U       Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles      0    76      8     0         0    64      0    0     0      0      0      0     4        0      4        0                  156
 Heavy Trucks       0     8      0               0    16      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                           24
  Pedestrians             0                            0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles         0     0      0               0     2      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                            2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 8/22/2012 2:09 PM                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Huntington Rd -- 3rd St                                                                                     QC JOB #: 10791905
 CITY/STATE: La Pine, OR                                                                                               DATE: Tue, Aug 07 2012
                    252          259                      Peak-Hour: 2:10 PM -- 3:10 PM                                 5.2        4.6

                     19 183 50
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 2:30 PM -- 2:45 PM
                                                                                                                        5.3 5.5 4.0

       41    34                        60   75
                                                                                                           2.4   0.0                       3.3      2.7
             16           0.95         10
                                                                                                                 6.3                       0.0
       67    17                         5   78
                                                                                                           1.5   0.0                       0.0      3.8

                     12 165 12
                                                                                                                        0.0 6.1 0.0

                    205          189
                                                                                                                        4.9        5.3



                           4                                                                                             0    1    0


                                                                                                                 0                          0

             6                          1                                                                        1                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          0


                           2                                                                                             0    0    1




                          NA                                                                                                  NA




             NA                        NA                                                                        NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count           Huntington Rd                  Huntington Rd                3rd St                       3rd St
     Period            (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                             Total
                  Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     2:00 PM        0    14       0    0           4    16      1    0     5      0       1     0     0        0       3      0           44
     2:05 PM        0    12       3    0           3     9      3    0     1      0       3     0     1        1       5      0           41
     2:10 PM        2    17       1    0           5    13      4    0     2      0       4     0     1        2       3      0           54
     2:15 PM        3     8       0    0           5    11      1    0     2      1       1     0     1        0       7      0           40
     2:20 PM        1    12       2    0           5    13      3    0     0      0       1     0     0        2       3      0           42
     2:25 PM        1    20       1    0           0    15      1    0     3      1       2     0     0        0       4      0           48
     2:30 PM        1    19       3    0           6    16      1    0     5      0       1     0     0        0       8      0           60
     2:35 PM        0    12       1    0           1    18      2    0     4      1       1     0     2        1       2      0           45
     2:40 PM        1    12       0    0           4    18      2    0     2      2       1     0     0        0       7      0           49
     2:45 PM        0    13       0    0           8    15      1    0     4      1       2     0     0        1       5      0           50
     2:50 PM        3    12       1    0           1    20      1    0     1      4       0     0     0        0       3      0           46
     2:55 PM        0    13       0    0           5    15      2    0     3      1       2     0     0        1       4      0           46              565
     3:00 PM        0    15       1    0           4    12      1    0     3      4       2     0     0        0       4      0           46              567
     3:05 PM        0    12       2    0           6    17      0    0     5      1       0     0     1        3     10       0           57              583
     3:10 PM        0    14       1    0           2    12      1    0     3      2       2     0     0        2       2      0           41              570
     3:15 PM        0     9       1    0           2    12      5    0     2      2       2     0     0        0       6      0           41              571
     3:20 PM        0     8       1    0           3     7      0    0     3      2       1     0     0        0       5      0           30              559
     3:25 PM        0    12       1    0           2    18      1    0     1      1       0     0     0        1       8      0           45              556
     3:30 PM        1    11       1    0           4    13      1    0     2      2       2     0     0        0       3      0           40              536
     3:35 PM        0     6       1    0           3    13      4    0     3      5       2     0     2        0       4      0           43              534
     3:40 PM        1    12       1    0           3     7      1    0     3      3       1     0     0        0       4      0           36              521
     3:45 PM        0    12       0    0           3    14      4    0     4      2       1     0     0        1       5      0           46              517
     3:50 PM        0     8       0    0           4    12      0    0     1      1       2     0     1        1       4      0           34              505
     3:55 PM        2     8       0    0           4    11      1    0     1      1       1     0     0        0       6      0           35              494
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      8   172      16    0          44   208     20    0    44     12     12      0     8        4     68       0                  616
 Heavy Trucks       0    12       0                4    20      4          0      0       0           0        0       0                         40
  Pedestrians             0                              0                        4                            0                                  4
   Bicycles         0     0       0                0     0      0          0      1       0           0        0       0                          1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 8/22/2012 2:09 PM                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Huntington Rd -- 1st St                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10791904
 CITY/STATE: La Pine, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Aug 07 2012
                    271          375                        Peak-Hour: 4:00 PM -- 5:00 PM                                 4.8        2.9

                     27 181 63
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 4:25 PM -- 4:40 PM
                                                                                                                          7.4 5.5 1.6

       62    43                        121   163
                                                                                                             3.2   0.0                       0.0      0.6
             25           0.85          19
                                                                                                                   8.0                       0.0
       128   60                         23   112
                                                                                                             1.6   0.0                       4.3      2.7

                     16 211 24
                                                                                                                          0.0 5.2 0.0

                    264          251
                                                                                                                          4.2        4.4



                           0                                                                                               0    2    0


                                                                                                                   0                          0

             3                           6                                                                         0                          0

                                                                                                                   0                          0


                           5                                                                                               0    2    0




                          NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                        NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count           Huntington Rd                    Huntington Rd                1st St                       1st St
     Period            (Northbound)                     (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                  Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     3:30 PM        3    16       0    0             4    15      1    0     4      3       4     0     4        1      15      0           70            765
     3:35 PM        0    13       3    0             4    11      1    0     2      1       5     0     2        3       7      0           52            748
     3:40 PM        5    12       1    0             7    10      3    0     2      3       2     0     5        0       6      0           56            744
     3:45 PM        0    17       2    0            11    16      3    0     4      1       2     0     1        0      11      0           68            737
     3:50 PM        2     9       4    0             6     8      1    0     2      1       6     0     1        0       5      0           45            720
     3:55 PM        2    17       2    0             6    11      1    0     1      0       4     0     3        4       6      0           57            705
     4:00 PM        1    13       2    0             6    20      3    0     2      0       8     0     2        0      10      0           67            709
     4:05 PM        3    14       2    0             7    14      2    0     5      1       4     0     1        2      11      0           66            702
     4:10 PM        1    17       3    0             9    17      3    0     6      1       9     0     3        3       7      0           79            734
     4:15 PM        2    11       1    0             4    13      2    0     5      1       4     0     1        2       8      0           54            729
     4:20 PM        1    17       2    0             6    13      1    0     2      0       5     0     1        0      11      0           59            728
     4:25 PM        2    27       1    0             3    16      1    0     2      4       6     0     2        5      13      0           82            755
     4:30 PM        1    23       1    0             7    14      2    0     7      2       6     0     6        1      14      0           84            769
     4:35 PM        1    16       5    0             6    14      4    0     6      3       5     0     3        0      10      0           73            790
     4:40 PM        1    13       1    0             3    19      1    0     1      0       3     0     0        2      10      0           54            788
     4:45 PM        0    24       3    0             5    15      0    0     4      2       6     0     1        0      12      0           72            792
     4:50 PM        0    20       2    0             2    13      4    0     2      4       2     0     2        2       6      0           59            806
     4:55 PM        3    16       1    0             5    13      4    0     1      7       2     0     1        2       9      0           64            813
     5:00 PM        3     7       0    0             8    12      2    0     1      3       5     0     0        2      13      0           56            802
     5:05 PM        3    24       2    0             4    13      1    0     2      2       2     0     0        1       4      0           58            794
     5:10 PM        4    18       0    0             3    15      0    0     2      1       0     0     1        5       9      0           58            773
     5:15 PM        2    20       0    0             3     8      0    0     0      2       0     0     1        0      10      0           46            765
     5:20 PM        1    18       0    0             5    14      0    0     0      3       5     0     1        2       9      0           58            764
     5:25 PM        1    14       1    0             4    10      1    0     0      2       2     0     0        0       5      0           40            722
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                      Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     16   264      28    0            64   176     28    0    60     36      68     0    44       24    148       0                  956
 Heavy Trucks       0    12       0                  0    12      0          0      0       0           0        0       0                         24
  Pedestrians             8                                0                        0                            4                                 12
   Bicycles         0     0       0                  0     1      0          0      0       0           0        0       0                          1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 8/22/2012 2:09 PM                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
