Exhibit D: Traffic Impact Statement
    The Sandy High School Project
                               SANDY HIGH SCHOOL
                                TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY

                                  SANDY, OREGON




DATE:
January 27, 2010

PREPARED FOR:
Oregon Trail School District

PREPARED BY:
Todd Mobley, PE, PTOE
Micah Heckman, EIT
TABLE OF CONTENTS


Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................... 3

Project Description ......................................................................................................................... 5

Trip Generation & Distribution .................................................................................................... 11

Safety Analysis .............................................................................................................................. 23

Operational Analysis .................................................................................................................... 31

Appendix ...................................................................................................................................... 46




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                                                                             2
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


1. The Oregon Trail School District has plans to construct a new high school in Sandy, Oregon.
   The new high school will have a larger capacity in order to better accommodate the existing stu-
   dents. With construction of the new school, the existing school will be used to house district of-
   fices.

2. The new school will take access onto Bell Street with the main access forming the fourth leg of
   the intersection of Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue. Additional access will be taken on Bell
   Street east of the main entrance. A site plan shows the layout in further detail.

3. The existing high school has a student enrollment of 1,600 students and generates approximately
   672 morning peak hour trips with 457 entering and 215 exiting the site. A total of 464 afternoon
   peak hour trips are generated with 153 entering the site and 311 exiting the site. With the new
   high school at capacity, which is 1,800 students, a total of 756 morning peak hour trips are ex-
   pected with 514 entering the site and 242 exiting the site. A total of 522 afternoon peak hour
   trips are expected with 172 entering and 350 exiting the site. This is an increase of 84 trips dur-
   ing the morning peak hour and 58 trips during the afternoon peak hour.

4. The City of Sandy required analysis of eight intersections as part of this study. Traffic counts
   were collected all eight intersections in May, while school was in session. Additional counts
   were collected at five of the study intersections after school was released for the summer. The
   two sets of counts were used to determine a trip distribution for school trips throughout the study
   area.

5. A background growth rate of one-percent per year for three years was applied to existing traffic
   data to approximate future conditions. In-process data was also provided by the City of Sandy
   and added to the background traffic data.

6. Operational analysis at the study intersections show all intersections currently operate at an ac-
   ceptable level of service. All study intersections will continue to operate at acceptable levels
   with the addition of background traffic and site trips.

7. A queuing analysis was conducted at all eight study intersections. Results of the queuing analy-
   sis showed northbound and southbound left-turn queues at the intersection of Highway 26 at
   Bluff Road extend beyond the striped storage for all scenarios. The eastbound left-turn queue
   will extend beyond the striped storage during the background and background plus site trips sce-
   narios. The site traffic has a minimal affect on the queuing at this intersection, therefore, no
   mitigation is recommended at this time.

8. Left-turn lane warrants were analyzed at the intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road, Bell Street
   at the East Access, and Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue for the background plus site trips sce-
   nario. Left-turn lane warrants are met at all three intersections. It is recommended that a
   northbound left-turn lane be constructed at the intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road. At the


Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                                3
    intersection of Bell Street at the East Access it is recommended that a westbound left-turn lane
    be constructed. It is recommended that a westbound left-turn lane be constructed at the intersec-
    tion of Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue.

9. Sight distance was measured at each of the three site access driveways. At the main entrance
   opposite Jewelberry Avenue, sight distance was measured to the east and was found to be re-
   stricted by vegetation on the inside of the horizontal curve. Adequate sight distance is available
   if the vegetation is cleared. At the middle access driveway, sight distance was found to be ade-
   quate to the east but restricted by vegetation to the west. Adequate sight distance is available if
   the vegetation is cleared. At the east access driveway, adequate sight distance is available in
   both directions.

10. A review of the previous five years of crash data showed that no safety deficiencies exist at the
    study intersections. All intersections had crash rates less than 1.0 crashes per million entering
    vehicles. No further analysis is required at this time.

11. Below is a summary of the recommended mitigations associated with development of the new
    Sandy High School:

    a. Add a northbound left-turn lane at the intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road with striped
       storage of 100 feet.
    b. Clear and maintain vegetation on site to achieve sight distance at the site access driveways
    c. Add a westbound left-turn lane at the intersection of Bell Street at the East Access with
       striped storage of 75 feet.
    d. Add a westbound left-turn lane at the intersection of Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue with a
       striped storage of 75 feet.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                                 4
PROJECT DESCRIPTION


INTRODUCTION

The Oregon Trail School District has plans to construct a new high school in Sandy, Oregon. The
new Sandy High School will be located near the intersection of Bell Street and Jewelberry Avenue.
With the opening of the newly constructed high school, the existing school will be used for district
offices.

The purpose of this study is to assess the traffic impact of the proposed new school and redistribution
of trips from the existing school on the nearby street system and to recommend any required mitiga-
tive measures. The analysis will include level of service calculations, queuing analysis and crash
history.

Detailed information on traffic counts, trip generation calculations, and level of service calculations
is included in the appendix to this report.


LOCATION DESCRIPTION

The existing Sandy High School is located north of Highway 26 with frontage on Bluff Road. The
proposed Sandy High School will be located northwest of the existing school, near the intersection of
Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue. The new school will take access onto Bell Street with the main
entrance opposite Jewelberry Avenue and two additional access to the east, one opposite of a
planned extension to Jade Glen Avenue and one at an existing access to the baseball field parking.

The City of Sandy requires a study of the intersections of Highway 26 at Bluff Road, Hood Street at
Bluff Road, Meeker Street at Bluff Road, Bell Street at Bluff Road, Bell Street at Jewelberry Ave-
nue, Green Mountain Street at Bluff Road, Kelso Road at Bluff Road, and Kelso Road at Jewelberry
Avenue.

Highway 26 is under the jurisdiction of the ODOT and is classified as a Principal Arterial. It is gen-
erally a five-lane facility with a posted speed of 40 mph. East of Bluff Road, Highway 26 converts
to a one-way couplet with two-lanes in each direction. There are curbs, sidewalks, and bike lanes on
both sides of the roadway in the vicinity of the site.

Bluff Road is under the jurisdiction of City of Sandy and is classified as a Minor Arterial. It is a
two-lane facility with a posted speed of 35 mph. There are curbs, sidewalks, and bike lanes where
recent development has occurred.

Hood Street is under the jurisdiction of City of Sandy and is classified as a Local Street. It is a two-
lane facility with no posted speed. There are curbs and sidewalks where recent development has oc-
curred.


Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                                  5
Meeker Street is under the jurisdiction of the City of Sandy and is classified as a Local Street. It is a
two-lane facility with no posted speed. There are curbs and sidewalks where recent development has
occurred.

Bell Street is under the jurisdiction of the City of Sandy and is classified as an Urban Collector. In
the future it is to be classified as an Arterial Street. It is a two-lane facility with a posted speed of 25
mph. There are curbs, sidewalks, and bike lanes on both sides of the roadway. The travel lanes are
separated by a raised median.

Green Mountain Street is under the jurisdiction of the City of Sandy and is classified as a Local
Street. It is a two-lane facility with no posted speed. There are curbs and sidewalks on both sides of
the roadway and on-street parking is permitted on both sides of the road.

Kelso Road is under the jurisdiction of the City of Sandy east of the City Limits and Clackamas
County west of the City Limits. It is classified as a Minor Arterial east of the City Limits and a Ru-
ral Major Collector west of the City Limits. It is a two-lane facility with a posted speed of 40 mph.
There are no curbs, sidewalks, or bike lanes.

Jewelberry Avenue is under the jurisdiction of the City of Sandy and is classified as an Urban Col-
lector. It is a two-lane facility with a posted speed of 25 mph. There are curbs, sidewalks, and bike
lanes on both sides of the road near the site. Near the intersection with Kelso Road, a sidewalk is
present only on the east side of the road. The travel lanes are separated by a raised median.

The intersection of Highway 26 at Bluff Road is a four-legged intersection that is controlled by an
actuated traffic signal. East of the intersection, Highway 26 becomes a one-way couplet. Both the
eastbound and westbound Highway 26 approaches have two through lanes and separate right and
left-turn lanes. Both the northbound and southbound Bluff Road approaches have a separate left-turn
lane and a shared through/right-turn lane.

The intersection of Hood Street at Bluff Road is a three-legged intersection that is controlled by a
STOP sign on the westbound Hood Street approach. All approaches are single-lane.

The intersection of Meeker Street at Bluff Road is a three-legged intersection that is controlled by a
STOP sign on the eastbound Meeker Street approach. All approaches are single-lane.

The intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road is a three-legged intersection that is controlled by a
STOP sign on the eastbound Bell Street approach. All approaches are single-lane.

The intersection of Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue is a two-legged intersection that is controlled by
a STOP sign on the southbound Jewelberry Avenue approach. All approaches are single-lane. With
development of the site, Bell Street will be built to the edge of the property line and the intersection
will be four-legged with the east and west legs serving Bell Street, the north leg serving Jewelberry
Avenue, and the south leg serving as a school access.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                                   6
The intersection of Green Mountain Street at Bluff Road is a three-legged intersection that is con-
trolled by a STOP sign on the eastbound Green Mountain Street approach. All approaches are sin-
gle-lane.

The intersection of Kelso Road at Bluff Road is a four-legged intersection and is controlled by a
STOP sign on the eastbound and westbound approaches. All approaches are single-lane.

The intersection of Kelso Road at Jewelberry Avenue is a three-legged intersection and is controlled
by a STOP sign on the northbound Jewelberry Avenue approach. All approaches are single-lane.

Sandy Area Metro (SAM) provides transit service within the City Limits. The STAR service pro-
vides commuter and demand based service along Bluff Road. Although transit service is provided
within one-mile of the site, it is unlikely that students and teachers will use transit. Therefore, no
transit reduction was taken.

Manual turning movement counts were made at the study intersections during May 2009 from 7:00
to 9:00 a.m. and 1:30 to 3:30 p.m. The peak hours typically occur from about 7:00 to 8:00 a.m. and
2:25 to 3:25 p.m. A second set of traffic counts were taken at five study intersections in June 2009.
This second set of counts was taken after school had been released for the summer and was used to
determine trip distribution throughout the study area. Detailed traffic count data is included in the
appendix to this report.

An Automatic Traffic Recorder (ATR) was identified on Highway 26 near Gresham and was used to
calculate a seasonal adjustment factor. ATR 26-003, near SE Powell Valley Road in Gresham,
showed the peak month to be June. Since traffic counts were taken near the end of May, a seasonal
adjustment was applied to the traffic counts. An interpolation between the May and June values was
performed to provide a more accurate adjustment. The result of the calculation shows a seasonal
adjustment of 1.03 should be applied to the May traffic counts.

Figure 1 on page eight shows the project study area and the location of the site. Figure 2 on page
nine shows the existing traffic volumes during the morning peak hour at the study area intersections.
Figure 3 on page 10 shows the existing traffic volumes during the afternoon peak hour.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                                 7
TRIP GENERATION & DISTRIBUTION


TRIP GENERATION

To estimate the number of trips that are generated by the existing school and will be generated by the
new school, trip rates from TRIP GENERATION, Eighth Edition, published by the Institute of Trans-
portation Engineers (ITE), were used. The trip rates used were for land-use code 530, High School.
The trip generation rates used are based on the number of students.

Trip generation calculations estimate there will be approximately 672 morning peak hour trips and
464 afternoon peak hour trips generated by the existing school. With increased capacity, the new
school could accommodate more students and thus will have a potentially higher number of trips
associated. The new school is expected to generate approximately 756 morning peak hour trips and
522 afternoon peak hour trips when at capacity. The increased capacity will result in an increase of
84 morning peak hour trips and 58 afternoon peak hour trips. The table below shows the entering
and exiting trips as well as the total trips during typical morning and afternoon peak hours.



                                           TRIP GENERATION SUMMARY
                                           Morning Peak Hour Afternoon Peak Hour      Evening Peak Hour
                                      Trips Trips Total       Trips   Trips   Total    Trips Trips Total
                             Students In    Out Trips          In     Out     Trips     In   Out Trips
     Existing School          1,600         457   215   672   153     311     464       98     110        208
     New School               1,800         514   242   756   172     350     522       110    124        234
     Total New Trips                        57    27    84     19      39      58       12      14          26




Because a school is typically an origin or destination for trips, no reduction was taken for pass-by
trips. Also, as stated previously, no reduction was made for transit use.

Since traffic counts were available from both while school was in session and after summer vacation
started, the difference in traffic volumes was used to validate the ITE trip rates for the high school.
While the entire trip difference between the two scenarios is not comprised of school traffic, the dif-
ference in trips provides an estimate. The two sets of count data show a difference of approximately
484 trips during the morning peak hour. In the afternoon peak hour there was a difference of ap-
proximately 449 trips. Based on the before and after counts, the morning peak hour was lower than
the ITE trip rates estimate but the afternoon total was very close to the ITE trip rates.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                               11
In order to account for use of the existing school, trips were assigned to the old school based on the
expected use. At this time, the existing Sandy High School building will be used for district offices.
Currently the district has an office on Industrial Way. Once the new school is completed, the district
offices will be relocated to the existing high school. There will be approximately 20 staff that will be
relocated. In order to account for those trips, land-use code 710, General Office, was used. A total
of 10 trips are expected with 9 entering the site and 1 exiting the site. In the afternoon peak hour a
total of 6 trips are expected with 1 entering the site and 5 exiting the site.

In addition, the Oregon Trail School District owns a parcel of land to the northeast of the proposed
school, across Bell Street. The Oregon Trail School District plans to use the house that currently
occupies the lot as a small office of five employees with access being taken to the north via a con-
nection to Jade Glen Avenue. In order to account for site trips generated by the office use, land-use
code 710, General Office, was used. A total of two morning and two evening peak hour trips are
expected. During the morning peak hour the two trips will be entering the site and in the evening the
two trips will be exiting the site.


TRIP DISTRIBUTION

To determine a trip distribution to and from the existing school, existing traffic counts were used.
Traffic counts were taken at the intersections of Highway 26 at Bluff Road, Hood Street at Bluff
Road, Meeker Street at Bluff Road, Bell Street at Bluff Road, and Kelso Road at Bluff Road, both
when school was in session and when school had been released for summer vacation. The two sets
of traffic counts were then compared and a trip distribution of school trips during both the morning
and afternoon peak hours was calculated.

With development of the new school, it is likely the trip distribution will change for trips entering
and leaving from the west. With the school at the new location, alternate routes may prove more
efficient for some students. In order to account for this, district boundaries were examined as well as
student distribution throughout the district. Using this information, the trip distribution was adjusted
to account for change in student driving behavior. It was determined that approximately 10 percent
of the student population lives in an area in which a more direct route is available.

The Sandy Transportation System Plan (TSP) shows a future connection of Bell Street to both 362nd
Drive and Kate Schmitz Avenue to the west. This future connection will likely result in a change in
trip assignment throughout the network but the overall trip distribution will remain the same. School
traffic to and from the west would likely make use of the 362nd Drive connection for access to the
school.

Figures 4 and 5 on pages 13 and 14 show the distribution of trips during the morning and afternoon
peak hours, respectively. Figures 6 and 7 on pages 15 and 16, respectively, show the adjusted trip
distribution to the new school. Figures 8, 9, and 10 on pages 17, 18, and 19 show the assignment of
trips to the proposed school during the morning, afternoon, and evening peak hours, respectively.
Figures 11, 12, and 13 on pages show the assignment of trips to the existing school, which will be
used to house district offices.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                               12
SAFETY ANALYSIS


PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE FACILITIES

In the vicinity of the proposed high school, there is a sidewalk on the north side of Bell Street and
bicycle lanes on both sides of the roadway. On Jewelberry Avenue, there are sidewalks and bicycle
lanes on both sides of the roadway. Due to the close proximity of the Sandy Bluff residential devel-
opment, it is expected that much of the pedestrian and bicycle traffic will come from the north. In
addition to Jewelberry Avenue, a pedestrian path currently connects the Sandy Bluff neighborhood
to Bell Street. The path connection occurs mid-block between two of the proposed school access
driveways. It is proposed to close the mid-block crossing due to concerns with safety of pedestrians
and instead construct a pedestrian path where the future Jade Glen Avenue extension will be con-
structed.

In the future an extension of Jade Glen Avenue to Bell Street is planned. In discussions with the
City of Sandy, it was agreed upon that with development of the school, a pedestrian path would be
acceptable. The pedestrian path will connect to Bell Street opposite of the middle access driveway.

There will be many options available for pedestrians to access the high school. Due to the location
of the proposed school, it is anticipated that much of the pedestrian and bicycle traffic to and from
the school will be to the north, the Sandy Bluff neighborhood. There will be two options available to
pedestrians and bicyclists for access to the school from the north.


CRASH DATA ANALYSIS

A review of the previous five years of crash data at the study intersections was performed. The crash
data was obtained from the ODOT Crash Analysis and Reporting Unit. The crash data and existing
traffic counts were used to determine the crash rate for the study intersections. The crash rate is the
number of crashes per million entering vehicles at the intersection. Typically, crash rates greater
than 1.0 require additional investigation to determine if a safety deficiency exists at the intersection.

The intersection of Highway 26 at Bluff Road had six reported crashes in the previous five years of
data. The crash rate for this intersection was computed to be 0.08 crashes per million entering vehi-
cles.

The intersection of Hood Street at Bluff Road had zero reported crashes in the previous five years of
data. The crash rate for this intersection is zero.

The intersection of Meeker Street at Bluff Road had one reported crash in the previous five years of
data. The crash rate for this intersection was computed to be 0.07 crashes per million entering vehi-
cles.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                              23
The intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road had zero reported crashes in the previous five years of
data. The crash rate for this intersection is zero.

The intersection of Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue had zero reported crashes in the previous five
years of data. The crash rate for this intersection is zero.

The intersection of Green Mountain Street at Bluff Road had zero reported crashes in the previous
five years of data. The crash rate for this intersection is zero.

The intersection of Kelso Road at Bluff Road had zero reported crashes in the previous five years of
data. The crash rate for this intersection is zero.

The intersection of Kelso Road at Jewelberry Avenue had zero reported crashes in the previous five
years of crash data. The crash rate for this intersection is zero.

Over the previous five years of crash data, all study intersections have a crash rate below 1.0 crashes
per million entering vehicles. Therefore, no safety deficiencies are noted and no further study is re-
quired at this time.


SIGHT DISTANCE VERIFICATION

The City of Sandy has requested sight distance be verified at each of the proposed school access
driveways. The main access driveway will be located directly across Bell Street from Jewelberry
Avenue.

The posted speed along Bell Street is 25 mph at which a total of 280 feet is required for intersection
sight distance. In the future, with connection to the west, Bell Street is scheduled to become a Minor
Arterial street. It is believed that at that time the speed limit will be increased to 35 mph. In antici-
pation of that, sight distance was checked to ensure that 390 feet is available which is required for 35
mph.

Sight distance was measured at each of the three site access driveways. Figure 11 on page 28 shows
the sight lines and approximate sight distance at each of the driveways.

At the main (Jewelberry Avenue) access, sight distance was measured to the east on Bell Street. Ap-
proximately 335 feet of sight distance is available currently. The sight distance is limited by over-
grown vegetation on the inside of the horizontal curve. With development of the site, vegetation will
be removed and additional sight distance will be available. Currently, Bell Street is terminated west
of Jewelberry Avenue and therefore, sight distance could not be measured to the west.

At the middle access driveway onto Bell Street, sight distance was measured to both the east and
west. Sight distance to the east of the proposed access was found to be in excess of 500 feet. Sight
distance to the west was found to be approximately 175 feet with sight lines currently obstructed by
vegetation. With development of the site, the vegetation will be removed and adequate sight dis-
tance will be available. The figure on the following page shows the sight lines at all three site access
driveways.

Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                                24
At the east access driveway sight distance was measured to both the east and west. To the east, sight
distance is available through the intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road, which is approximately
390 feet. To the west, there is in excess of 500 feet of intersection sight distance available.


TURN LANE WARRANTS

At the intersections of Bell Street at Bluff Road, Bell Street at the East Access, Bell Street at Jewel-
berry Avenue, and Bluff Road at the access to the Junior lot, left-turn lane warrants were analyzed to
determine if the addition of site trips triggered the need for left-turn lanes. The ODOT left-turn lane
warrant was used for this analysis and the analysis focused on only the year 2012 background plus
site trips scenario.

At the intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road, the left-turn lane warrant is met during both peak
hours. Therefore, it is recommended that a northbound left-turn lane be constructed at the intersec-
tion. It is recommended that the left-turn lane have 100 feet of striped storage based on the results of
a queuing analysis at this intersection. The queuing analysis reports the 95th percentile queue length.
Therefore, 95 percent of the time the queue length will be equal to or less than 100 feet. Simulation
software was used to determine the queue at this intersection. The simulation software allowed for
the high number of buses to be accounted for.

Based on a tax lot map 02s04e11dd near the intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road, there exists 60
feet of right-of-way along Bluff Road. This would allow adequate room for 2 – 12 foot travel lanes,
a 12 foot left-turn lane, 2 – 5 foot bicycle lanes, and 2 – 5 foot sidewalks.

At the intersection of Bell Street at the East Access left-turn lane warrants are met during the morn-
ing peak hour. It is recommended that a westbound left-turn lane be constructed at the intersection.
Based on a queuing analysis at the intersection, a total of 75 feet of striped storage will be required to
accommodate the queues.

At the intersection of Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue, left-turn lane warrants are met during the
morning peak hour. It is recommended that a westbound left-turn lane be constructed at the intersec-
tion. A queuing analysis at the intersection showed that a total of 75 feet of striped storage is needed
to accommodate the morning peak hour queues.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                               25
PARKING AND ON-SITE CIRCULATION

The proposed site plan shows a total of eight separate lots provided for parking on campus. Due to
topography limitations and the location of some of the existing school facilities that will be retained,
parking areas are distributed throughout the site. The parking areas are shown in the Parking Layout
Plan (Figure 15) on page 29.


PARKING AREA ASSIGNMENTS

Each of the eight lots has a specific use which will be regulated by parking permits provided to stu-
dents, faculty, and staff. Lots 1, 3, and 6 will be reserved for staff parking. Lot 2 will be reserved
for visitors to the school and handicapped parking. Lot 4 will be reserved for buses during the
school day. The lot will be used for athletic event parking after school hours. Lots 5 and 8 will be
reserved for senior parking only. Juniors and sophomores will be allowed to park in Lot 7.


PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION

Figure 15 also shows pedestrian routes from the parking areas to the school building. Parking for
juniors in Lot 7 is farthest from the school building, but a continuous walking path is provided from
that lot to the school. This path passes through the senior parking in Lots 5 and 8. Other lots are
adjacent to the building and there are many potential routes to the school.

The use of Lot 4 will be restricted to bus traffic only during the school day and will have a counter-
clockwise circulation pattern. During the morning peak hour, students will be dropped off along the
north curb of the lot, adjacent to the school. Buses will stage in the lot prior to school release in the
afternoon and be available for boarding when school is released. Students will walk from the school
building to the staged buses. During this time there will be no conflicts between moving vehicle
traffic and students since all buses will be on-site and parked, and there is no other vehicular traffic
in the lot at that time.


VEHICULAR CIRCULATION

The Onsite Circulation Plan (Figure 16) on page 30 shows how vehicular traffic will circulate
through the site, including ingress and egress from Bell Street. There are three proposed access
driveways onto Bell Street with each serving a different function. On-site circulation in front of the
school through Lot 2 will be one-way, with traffic entering at the access driveway opposite Jewel-
berry Avenue (western access) and exiting at the middle site access aligned with the future extension
of Jade Glen Avenue. The western access will be limited to entering traffic only and the middle ac-
cess will be limited exiting traffic only. Prominent signing and pavement markings will be placed
on-site at the western access to make it clear to drivers that exiting traffic is not allowed. The same
will hold true for restricting entering traffic at the middle access.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                               26
Student drop-offs and pickups will take place on the north side of the school building in the area
shown in Figure 16. This is along the one-way portion between the western and middle accesses.
Adjacent to the drop-off/pickup zone there will be three lanes of traffic to allow for continuous circu-
lation through the area, even while drop-off and pickup activities are taking place. It should be noted
that there will be no drop-offs or pickups in the area immediately adjacent to the western entrance.
In addition to signage, the curb in this area will be painted red to reinforce that it is a no drop-off
zone. Given the relatively short driveway throat depth, such activities would likely cause entering
traffic to queue into Bell Street. To ensure that this does not happen, the loading area is located
nearly 400 feet to the east of the driveway.

The east access driveway will carry the highest traffic volumes and will serve as the primary en-
trance and exit for buses, seniors, and some staff. Although a high number of site trips utilize this
driveway to access the site, not all vehicles will be entering and exiting at the same time. Staff,
buses, and senior student parking all experience activities at separate times, which is an important
consideration in the operation of the east access.

During the morning peak hour, staff will be at the school prior to students arriving. In addition, there
will be little to no exiting traffic besides buses at the driveway. Although drivers will quickly be-
come familiar with the site, clear guide signing will be provided at the first on-site intersection to
guide separate users to their various parking areas. During the afternoon school peak hour the buses
will load in the staging area of Lot 4 as described above and will exit the site first. Traffic from the
senior lot will be held by school staff until the buses have departed. At that time, the seniors will be
allowed to leave. Staff will typically be the last to leave at the end of the day and can use either the
middle access or the east access.

This staggering of traffic during both peak hours will improve traffic flow on the site, particularly at
the eastern driveway. There is approximately 140 feet of vehicle storage in the throat of the eastern
driveway between Bell Street and the first on-site intersection. As demonstrated in the queuing sec-
tion of this report, the vehicle storage provided is adequate to accommodate the queue from vehicles
exiting the site.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                                27
OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS


RE-DISTRIBUTION OF SCHOOL TRAFFIC

In order to show the impact of school traffic on the surrounding road network, existing school trips
were removed from the existing traffic data and re-distributed to the new school. Based on the trip
distribution calculated from the school year traffic counts and the summer traffic counts, trips from
the existing school were subtracted from the existing traffic count data. The existing school trips, as
well as the additional trips as a result of the increased capacity at the new school, were distributed
throughout the surrounding roadway network to the new school. Therefore, the change in results
from the background conditions scenario to the background plus site trips scenario shows the overall
impact of the school traffic.


BACKGROUND TRAFFIC

Since traffic counts at the eight study intersections represent existing conditions, a background
growth rate of one-percent per year was added to the counts at the study intersections to approximate
background conditions. This growth rate was calculated based on ODOT’s Transportation Volume
Tables from the previous seven years. It is expected that the new high school will be ready for occu-
pation in time for the 2012 school year. Therefore, the growth rate was applied for three years.

In addition to the background growth rate, several developments in Sandy were identified as ap-
proved but not yet built. The City of Sandy provided traffic volumes associated with these develop-
ments. The traffic volumes were added to the study intersections as in-process trips. Below is a list
of the developments that were accounted for in this report. The highlighted developments in the fol-
lowing list will not add any trips to the study intersections. A map, provided by the City of Sandy,
showing the location and size of these developments is included in the appendix to this report.

    •    Avamere Villas                                     •   Sandy Bluff 4 and 5
    •    Champion Village Subdivision                       •   Sandy Bluff 6
    •    Deer Pointe Phase 2                                •   Sandy Meadows 2 Subdivision
    •    Double Creek Condos                                •   Sleepy Hollow Estates I & II
    •    Dubarko Estates Subdivision                        •   Snowberry Subdivision
    •    Jack in the Box                                    •   The 8 on Ten Eyck
    •    Jewelberry Meadows                                 •   Thorson Ridge
    •    Jones Ridge Subdivision                            •   Tickle Creek Terrace
    •    Maiden Foundry                                     •   Timber Valley Subdivision
    •    Panda Express                                      •   Trimble PD
    •    Parmele Subdivision                                •   Troutner Subdivision
    •    Salmon Creek Estates PD                            •   Tupper Hill Apartments



Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                             31
Figures 12 and 13 on pages 33 and 34, respectively, show the background traffic volumes at the
study intersections. The background traffic is comprised of existing traffic volumes with a growth
rate applied and in-process traffic volumes. Figures showing the existing volumes with growth rate
applied and in-process trips separately can be found in the appendix. Figure 14 on page 35 shows
the background plus site trips traffic volumes at the study intersections during the morning peak
hour. Figure 15 on page 36 shows the background plus site trips traffic volumes at the study inter-
sections during the afternoon peak hour.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                          32
CAPACITY ANALYSIS

To determine the level of service at the study intersections, a capacity analysis was conducted. The
analysis was conducted according to the signalized and unsignalized intersection analysis method-
ologies in the 2000 HIGHWAY CAPACITY MANUAL (HCM) published by the Transportation Re-
search Board. Level of service can range from A, which indicates little or no delay, to F, which indi-
cates a significant amount of congestion and delay. City of Sandy operational standards require level
of service D or better at signalized intersections and level of service E or better at unsignalized inter-
sections. The intersection of Highway 26 at Bluff Road is under the jurisdiction of ODOT and there-
fore must operate with a v/c ratio of 0.85 or better. Detailed level of service descriptions are in-
cluded in the appendix to this report.

The intersection of Highway 26 at Bluff Road currently operates at level of service C during both the
morning and afternoon peak hours. The intersection will continue to operate at a level of service C
during both the morning and afternoon peak hours of background conditions. With the addition of
site trips, the intersection will continue to operate at a level of service C during both peak hours.

The intersection of Hood Street at Bluff Road currently operates at a level of service B during morn-
ing peak hour and B during the afternoon peak hour. The level of service is reported for the west-
bound approach since that is the minor street approach. With the addition of background traffic, the
intersection will continue to operate at a level of service B during both the morning and afternoon
peak hours. With the addition of site trips, the level of service will degrade to C during the morning
peak hour and remain at B during the afternoon peak hour.

The intersection of Meeker Street at Bluff Road currently operates at a level of service B during both
the morning and afternoon peak hours. The level of service is reported for the eastbound approach
since that is the minor street approach. With the addition of background traffic the intersection will
continue to operate at a level of service B during both the morning and afternoon peak hours. The
addition of site trips will cause the level of service to degrade to C during both the morning and af-
ternoon peak hours.

The intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road currently operates at a level of service A during both the
morning and afternoon peak hours. The level of service is reported for the eastbound approach. The
level of service will remain A during both the morning and afternoon peak hours for background
conditions. With the addition of site trips, the level of service will degrade to B during both the
morning and evening peak hours.

At the intersection of Bell Street at the East Access Driveway it is recommended that a westbound
left-turn lane as well as separate northbound left and right-turn lanes be constructed with develop-
ment of the site. With the left-turn lane constructed the intersection will operate at a level of service
C during the morning peak hour of the background plus site trips scenario.

The intersection of Bell Street at the Middle Access Driveway will be an exit only from the school.
It is recommended that separate northbound left and right-turn lanes be constructed with develop-
ment of the site. With development the intersection will operate at a level of service B during the
morning peak hour of the background plus site trips scenario.

Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                               37
The intersection of Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue currently operates at a level of service A during
both the morning and afternoon peak hours. The level of service is reported for the southbound ap-
proach. The intersection will continue to operate at a level of service A during both peak hours of
background conditions. With development of the site it is recommended that a westbound left-turn
lane be constructed at the intersection. With the westbound left-turn lane built and with the addition
of site trips, the intersection level of service will degrade to C during the morning peak hour and de-
grade to B during the afternoon peak hour.

The intersection of Green Mountain Street at Bluff Road currently operates at a level of service A
during both the morning and afternoon peak hours. The level of service is reported for the eastbound
approach. With the addition of background traffic the intersection will continue to operate at a level
of service A during the morning peak hour but will degrade to level of service B during the afternoon
peak hour. The level of service will degrade to B during the morning peak hour but will remain at B
during the afternoon peak hour with the addition of site trips.

The intersection of Kelso Road at Bluff Road currently operates at a level of service B during both
the morning and afternoon peak hours. The level of service will remain B during both peak hours
with the addition of background traffic. With the addition of site trips, the intersection will continue
to operate at a level of service B during both the morning and afternoon peak hours.

The intersection of Kelso Road at Jewelberry Avenue currently operates at a level of service A dur-
ing both the morning and afternoon peak hours. The intersection will continue to operate at a level
of service A during both peak hours with the addition of background traffic. With the addition of
site trips, the level of service will degrade to B during both the morning and afternoon peak hours.

The results of the capacity analysis, along with the Levels of Service (LOS) and delay are shown in
the following table. Detailed capacity analysis results are included in the appendix to this report.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                              38
                                   LEVEL OF SERVICE SUMMARY
                                            Table 1 of 2

                                              AM Peak Hour         Afternoon Peak Hour
                                                       V/C or                    V/C or
                                                       Critical                 Critical
                                           LOS Delay Movement     LOS Delay Movement
       Highway 26/Bluff Road
          Existing                          C    21      0.66      C     22      0.56
          Background                        C    25      0.76      C     26      0.64
          Background + Site                 C    31      0.82      C     32      0.76
       Hood Street/Bluff Road
          Existing                          B    13      WB        B     12      WB
          Background                        B    14      WB        B     13      WB
          Background + Site                 C    16      WB        B     13      WB

       Meeker Street/Bluff Road
          Existing                          B    11      EB        B     11       EB
          Background                        B    12      EB        B     13       EB
          Background + Site                 C    24      EB        C     20       EB
       Bell Street/Bluff Road
           Existing                         A     9      EB        A     9        EB
           Background                       A     9      EB        A     10       EB
           Background + Site                B    12      EB        B     12       EB
       Bell Street/East Access
           Background + Site                C    18     NBL        B     12      NBL
       Bell Street/Middle Access
           Background + Site                B    11     NBL        B     10      NBL
       LOS = Level of Service
       Delay = Average Delay per Vehicle in Seconds




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                   39
                                   LEVEL OF SERVICE SUMMARY
                                            Table 2 of 2

                                              AM Peak Hour           Afternoon Peak Hour
                                                       Critical                   Critical
                                           LOS Delay Movement       LOS Delay Movement
      Bell St/Jewelberry Ave
          Existing                          A     9      SB          A       9          SB
          Background                        A     9      SB          A       9          SB
          Background + Site                 C    16      SB          B       12         SB
      Green Mountain St/Bluff Rd
         Existing                           A     9      EB          A       10        EB
         Background                         A    10      EB          B       10        EB
         Background + Site                  B    10      EB          B       10        EB

      Kelso Rd/Bluff Rd
          Existing                          B    10      WB          B       11        WB
          Background                        B    10      WB          B       11        WB
          Background + Site                 B    11      WB          B       12        WB
      Kelso Rd/Jewelberry Ave
          Existing                          A    10      NB          A       9         NB
          Background                        A    10      NB          A       10        NB
          Background + Site                 B    11      NB          B       10        NB

      LOS = Level of Service
      Delay = Average Delay per Vehicle in Seconds




As shown in the table above, all study intersections currently operate acceptably during both the
morning and afternoon peak hours and will continue to operate acceptably with the new Sandy High
School at capacity.



QUEUING ANALYSIS

An analysis of the queuing at the study intersections was conducted for all of the scenarios during the
morning and evening peak hours. The queue length for the signalized intersection was calculated
from the Poisson distribution of the traffic volumes for each of the lane groups at the intersection.


Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                            40
The 95th percentile of the distribution is used to estimate queue length for the traffic movements.
This means that 95-percent of the time, the queue length will be less than or equal to what is calcu-
lated.

The queue lengths for the unsignalized intersections were based upon the ITE Journal article “Esti-
mation of Maximum Queue Lengths at Unsignalized Intersections,” from the November 2001 issue.
John T. Gard prepared this methodology for the estimation of queue lengths at unsignalized intersec-
tions.

At the intersections of Bell Street at Bluff Road and Bell Street at the East Access, traffic conditions
were simulated using SimTraffic to determine the queue lengths. A total of five runs were conducted
and an average of the five funs was taken. SimTraffic was used at these intersections due to the high
percentage of heavy vehicles (buses). The simulation allows the user to specify truck percentages
which is important with high truck percentages as seen here.

Queue lengths at all intersections for all scenarios are presented in the following tables. More de-
tailed queuing worksheets are included in the appendix to this report.

At the intersection of Highway 26 at Bluff Road, the westbound right-turn lane has approximately
260 feet of striped storage. The westbound left-turn lane has approximately 190 feet of striped stor-
age. The eastbound right-turn lane has approximately 90 feet of striped storage. Additional storage
is restricted by on-street parking. The eastbound left-turn lane has approximately 145 feet of striped
storage. No other study intersections currently have striped storage and therefore, queuing will not
exceed the available storage. With development, turn lanes will be added to several study intersec-
tions. Where a turn lane is constructed with development, it is noted in the table.


                               Highway 26/Bluff Road, Queuing Analysis

                                                 Estimated Queue Length (feet)               Available
                                             AM Peak Hour        Afternoon Peak Hour          Storage
    Approach/Movement                      Existing/Bkgd/Total   Existing/Bkgd/Total           (feet)

Northbound Left Turn                          100/125/125           100/125/125                  85
Northbound Through-Right                       75/100/150            100/125/125
Southbound Left Turn                           75/75/125             125/150/200                100
Southbound Through-Right                       75/125/150            125/175/200
Eastbound Left Turn                            75/100/125            125/150/175                145
Eastbound Through                             125/150/150            225/225/225
Eastbound Right Turn                            25/25/25              75/75/75                   90
Westbound Left Turn                             75/75/75             100/125/125                190
Westbound Through                             275/300/300            200/225/225
Westbound Right Turn                           75/100/200            75/100/100                 260




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                                41
                              Hood Street/Bluff Road, Queuing Analysis

                                              Estimated Queue Length (feet)         Available
                                       AM Peak Hour           Afternoon Peak Hour   Storage
   Approach/Movement                 Existing/Bkgd/Total      Existing/Bkgd/Total    (feet)

  Southbound                                75/100/100            75/75/100            --
  Westbound                                  0/75/275              0/50/175            --



                            Meeker Street/Bluff Road, Queuing Analysis

                                              Estimated Queue Length (feet)         Available
                                       AM Peak Hour           Afternoon Peak Hour   Storage
   Approach/Movement                 Existing/Bkgd/Total      Existing/Bkgd/Total    (feet)

  Northbound                                 25/25/25               50/50              --
  Eastbound                                   0/0/225              0/50/200            --



                               Bell Street/Bluff Road, Queuing Analysis

                                              Estimated Queue Length (feet)         Available
                                       AM Peak Hour           Afternoon Peak Hour   Storage
   Approach/Movement                 Existing/Bkgd/Total      Existing/Bkgd/Total    (feet)

  Northbound (Left*)                0/50/75                         0/75/75           100*
  Eastbound                        0/75/100                        0/75/100            --
  *Storage provided with development of site


                               Bell Street/East Access, Queuing Analysis

                                              Estimated Queue Length (feet)         Available
                                           AM Peak Hour       Afternoon Peak Hour    Storage
   Approach/Movement                          Total                  Total            (feet)
  Northbound Left                     50                              50              140*
  Northbound Right                    75                              75              140*
  Westbound Left                       75                             50               75*
  *Storage provided with development of site




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                        42
                             Bell Street/Middle Access, Queuing Analysis

                                              Estimated Queue Length (feet)         Available
                                           AM Peak Hour       Afternoon Peak Hour   Storage
   Approach/Movement                          Total                  Total           (feet)

  Northbound Left                               50                    100              --
  Northbound Right                              50                     0               --



                         Bell Street/Jewelberry Avenue, Queuing Analysis

                                              Estimated Queue Length (feet)         Available
                                       AM Peak Hour           Afternoon Peak Hour   Storage
   Approach/Movement                 Existing/Bkgd/Total      Existing/Bkgd/Total    (feet)

  Northbound                        --/--/25                        --/--/50           --
  Southbound                        0/0/225                         0/0/125            --
  Westbound (Left*)                  0/0/50                         0/0/75            75*
  *Storage provided with development of site


                      Green Mountain Street/Bluff Road, Queuing Analysis

                                              Estimated Queue Length (feet)         Available
                                       AM Peak Hour           Afternoon Peak Hour   Storage
   Approach/Movement                 Existing/Bkgd/Total      Existing/Bkgd/Total    (feet)

  Northbound                                  0/50/50               0/50/50            --
  Eastbound                                  25/75/75               0/50/75            --



                              Kelso Road/Bluff Road, Queuing Analysis

                                              Estimated Queue Length (feet)         Available
                                       AM Peak Hour           Afternoon Peak Hour   Storage
   Approach/Movement                 Existing/Bkgd/Total      Existing/Bkgd/Total    (feet)

  Northbound                                 50/50/50              50/50/50            --
  Southbound                                   0/0/0                 0/0/0             --
  Eastbound                                    0/0/0               50/75/75            --
  Westbound                                    0/0/0                 0/0/0             --



Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                        43
                         Kelso Road/Jewelberry Avenue, Queuing Analysis

                                             Estimated Queue Length (feet)              Available
                                       AM Peak Hour          Afternoon Peak Hour        Storage
   Approach/Movement                 Existing/Bkgd/Total     Existing/Bkgd/Total         (feet)
  Northbound                               75/100/150              0/0/100                   --
  Westbound                                  0/0/0                  0/0/0                    --



As shown in the tables above, the addition site trips does not significantly affect queues at the study
intersections. At the intersection of Highway 26 at Bluff Road, the northbound and southbound left-
turn queues extend beyond the striped storage for all scenarios. With the addition of background
traffic the eastbound left-turn queue will extend beyond the striped storage during the afternoon peak
hour. The addition of site trips will increase the queue length by one car.

The impact of the queues extending beyond the striped storage will be minimal at the intersection
and will not affect the overall operations on Bluff Road or at the intersection of Bluff Road at High-
way 26. Due to the small impact of the site trips on queuing at the intersection of Highway 26 at
Bluff Road, no mitigation is recommended at this time. Mitigation costs would not be proportional
to the impact from the site traffic.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                             44
CONCLUSIONS

The Oregon Trail School District plans to construct a new Sandy High School which is scheduled to
open for the 2012 school year. The new school will be located south of the intersection of Bell
Street at Jewelberry Avenue. The site will have three site access driveways with the main entrance
serving as the south leg of the Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue intersection.

The City of Sandy requested eight intersections for analysis. All study intersections currently oper-
ate at an acceptable level of service and will continue to operate acceptably with the addition of
background traffic and site trips.

The results of a capacity analysis at the study intersections showed that all study intersections oper-
ate at an acceptable level of service currently. With the addition of background traffic, all study in-
tersections will continue to operate at an acceptable level of service. All study intersections will con-
tinue to operate acceptably during the year 2012 background traffic and site trips scenario.

A queuing analysis was conducted at the study intersections and the results showed the site trips had
little impact on queuing. At the intersection of Highway 26 at Bluff Road, northbound and
southbound left-turn queues extend beyond the striped storage during all analysis scenarios. In addi-
tion, the eastbound left-turn queue will exceed the striped storage for background and background
plus site trips scenarios. The addition of site trips had minimal impact on the queuing at the intersec-
tion of Highway 26 at Bluff Road and therefore, no mitigations are recommended at this time. Miti-
gation costs would not be proportional to the impact of the site trips.

A left-turn lane warrant analysis was conducted at the intersections of Bell Street at Bluff Road, Bell
Street at the East Access, and Bell Street at Jewelberry Avenue. Left-turn lane warrants are met at
all three intersections for the background plus site trips scenario. It is recommended that a
northbound left-turn lane be constructed at the intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road and a west-
bound left-turn lane be constructed at both the intersection of Bell Street at the East Access and Bell
Street at Jewelberry Avenue. At the intersection of Bell Street at Bluff Road the turn lane should
provide 100 feet of striped storage. The two remaining turn lanes will require 75 feet of striped stor-
age based on the results of a queuing analysis at each intersection.

Intersection sight distance was measured at all three site access driveways. Currently the site is va-
cant and overgrown vegetation exists on much of the site. At the main entrance opposite Jewelberry
Avenue, sight distance was measured to the east. Sight distance was restricted by vegetation but
with the vegetation cleared, adequate sight distance is available. At the middle access driveway,
sight distance was measured in both directions. Adequate sight distance exists to the east but sight
distance to the west is restricted by vegetation. Removal of the vegetation will provide adequate
sight distance. At the east access driveway sight distance was measured in both directions and found
to be adequate in both directions.

A review of the previous five years of crash data at the study intersections showed no safety defi-
ciencies. No further analysis is required at this time.




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study                                                              45
APPENDIX




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study   46
APPENDIX




Sandy High School – Traffic Impact Study   42
                                LEVEL OF SERVICE


        Level of service is used to describe the quality of traffic flow. Levels of service
A to C are considered good, and rural roads are usually designed for level of service C.
Urban streets and signalized intersections are typically designed for level of service D.
Level of service E is considered to be the limit of acceptable delay. For unsignalized
intersections, level of service E is generally considered acceptable. Here is a more
complete description of levels of service:

        Level of service A: Very low delay at intersections, with all traffic signal cycles
clearing and no vehicles waiting through more than one signal cycle. On highways, low
volume and high speeds, with speeds not restricted by other vehicles.

        Level of service B: Operating speeds beginning to be affected by other traffic;
short traffic delays at intersections. Higher average intersection delay than for level of
service A resulting from more vehicles stopping.

        Level of service C: Operating speeds and maneuverability closely controlled by
other traffic; higher delays at intersections than for level of service B due to a signifi-
cant number of vehicles stopping. Not all signal cycles clear the waiting vehicles. This
is the recommended design standard for rural highways.

        Level of service D: Tolerable operating speeds; long traffic delays occur at in-
tersections. The influence of congestion is noticeable. At traffic signals many vehicles
stop, and the proportion of vehicles not stopping declines. The number of signal cycle
failures, for which vehicles must wait through more than one signal cycle, are
noticeable. This is typically the design level for urban signalized intersections.

        Level of service E: Restricted speeds, very long traffic delays at traffic signals,
and traffic volumes near capacity. Flow is unstable so that any interruption, no matter
how minor, will cause queues to form and service to deteriorate to level of service F.
Traffic signal cycle failures are frequent occurrences. For unsignalized intersections,
level of service E or better is generally considered acceptable.

        Level of service F: Extreme delays, resulting in long queues which may interfere
with other traffic movements. There may be stoppages of long duration, and speeds
may drop to zero. There may be frequent signal cycle failures. Level of service F will
typically result when vehicle arrival rates are greater than capacity. It is considered
unacceptable by most drivers.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE CRITERIA
 FOR SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS


   LEVEL        CONTROL DELAY
    OF            PER VEHICLE
  SERVICE           (Seconds)
     A                <10
     B               10-20
     C               20-35
     D               35-55
     E               55-80
     F                >80




   LEVEL OF SERVICE CRITERIA
FOR UNSIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS


   LEVEL        CONTROL DELAY
    OF            PER VEHICLE
  SERVICE           (Seconds)
     A                <10
     B               10-15
     C               15-25
     D               25-35
     E               35-50
     F                >50
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Kampa Ln -- SE Kelso Rd                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10433113
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                   DATE: 5/27/2009
                      0   0.00   0                          Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                 0.0       0.0

                      0    0     0
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 7:05 AM -- 7:20 AM
                                                                                                                          0.0 0.0 0.0

      130     0                       0     69
                                                                                                             1.5   0.0                      0.0      1.4
       0.75   40          0.68       69   0.69
                                                                                                                   7.5                      1.4
      48      8                       0     41
                                                                                                             6.3   0.0                      0.0      7.3

                   61      0     1
                                                                                                                          1.6 0.0 0.0

                      8   0.60 62
                                                                                                                          0.0       1.6



                           0




              1                       0




                           1




 5-Min Count              SE Kampa Ln                   SE Kampa Ln               SE Kelso Rd                 SE Kelso Rd
     Period               (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At Left                                                                                                                         Total
                           Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     7:00 AM     4           0      1     0        0       0     0     0     0      5      0      0     0        2      0       0          12
     7:05 AM     8           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      6      1      0     0        7      0       0          22
     7:10 AM    12           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      3      0      0     0        9      0       0          24
     7:15 AM     6           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      2      0     0        8      0       0          20
     7:20 AM     4           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      2      0      0     0        8      0       0          14
     7:25 AM     3           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      2      0      0     0        5      0       0          10
     7:30 AM     2           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      3      0      0     0        7      0       0          12
     7:35 AM     3           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      3      0      0     0        3      0       0           9
     7:40 AM     6           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      6      2      0     0        2      0       0          16
     7:45 AM     6           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      1      1      0     0        8      0       0          16
     7:50 AM     6           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      3      1      0     0        5      0       0          15
     7:55 AM     1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      2      1      0     0        5      0       0           9              179
     8:00 AM     2           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      2      0      0     0        4      0       0           8              175
     8:05 AM     2           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      2      0      0     0        1      0       0           5              158
     8:10 AM     1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      1      3      0     0        6      0       0          11              145
     8:15 AM     4           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      2      0      0     0        3      0       0           9              134
     8:20 AM     0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      3      0      0     0        3      0       0           6              126
     8:25 AM     2           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      3      0      0     0        5      0       0          10              126
     8:30 AM     5           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      0      0      0     0       12      0       0          17              131
     8:35 AM     5           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      6      3      0     0        6      0       0          20              142
     8:40 AM     1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     11      3      0     0        5      0       0          20              146
     8:45 AM     0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      5      0      0     0        1      0       0           6              136
     8:50 AM     0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      6      3      0     0        4      0       0          13              134
     8:55 AM     2           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      0      0     0        3      0       0           9              134
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                   Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                  Total
  Flowrates    Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles 104           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     52     12      0     0       96      0       0                 264
 Heavy Trucks    4           0      0              0       0     0           0      0      0            0        4      0                          8
  Pedestrians                0                             0                        0                            0                                 0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 3:15 PM                                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- SE Burgs Ln/Kelso                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10433107
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                        DATE: 5/27/2009
                       86 0.77 75                                 Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                5.8       4.0

                           9    77    0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 7:20 AM -- 7:35 AM
                                                                                                                               0.0 6.5 0.0

       66      12                         0        3
                                                                                                                  1.5   0.0                      0.0      0.0
        0.59   1               0.88       3   0.38
                                                                                                                        0.0                      0.0
       45      32                         0        2
                                                                                                                  6.7   9.4                      0.0      0.0

                       54       63    1
                                                                                                                               1.9 4.8 0.0

                       109 0.76 118
                                                                                                                               7.3       3.4



                                2




               2                          0




                                0




 5-Min Count                    SE Bluff Rd                    SE Bluff Rd           SE Burgs Ln/Kelso           SE Burgs Ln/Kelso
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right         U                       Totals
     7:00 AM          1           7       0    0         0       9       1   0     1      0      4       0     0      0      0       0          23
     7:05 AM          3           6       0    0         0       5       1   0     2      0      5       0     0      1      0       0          23
     7:10 AM          5           5       1    0         0       5       2   0     3      0      4       0     0      0      0       0          25
     7:15 AM          5           4       0    0         0       5       2   0     1      1      1       0     0      1      0       0          20
     7:20 AM          7           4       0    0         0       6       0   0     0      0      3       0     0      0      0       0          20
     7:25 AM          6           9       0    0         0      10       0   0     1      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          28
     7:30 AM          8           5       0    0         0      10       0   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          24
     7:35 AM          2           6       0    0         0       7       1   0     1      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          19
     7:40 AM          2           7       0    0         0       4       0   0     0      0      3       0     0      1      0       0          17
     7:45 AM          6           4       0    0         0       4       0   0     0      0      4       0     0      0      0       0          18
     7:50 AM          3           4       0    0         0       5       2   0     1      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          17
     7:55 AM          6           2       0    0         0       7       0   0     2      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          18              252
     8:00 AM          3           5       0    0         0       3       0   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          12              241
     8:05 AM          2           5       0    0         0       3       1   0     0      0      4       0     0      0      1       0          16              234
     8:10 AM          2           5       0    0         0       1       1   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          10              219
     8:15 AM          3           4       0    0         0       6       0   0     0      0      3       0     0      1      0       0          17              216
     8:20 AM          1           8       0    0         0       3       2   0     0      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          16              212
     8:25 AM          3           4       0    0         0       7       0   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          15              199
     8:30 AM          7           6       0    0         0       5       3   0     1      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          23              198
     8:35 AM          2           4       0    0         0       6       6   0     1      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          21              200
     8:40 AM          5           5       0    0         0      10       0   0     1      0      4       0     1      1      0       0          27              210
     8:45 AM          0           5       0    0         0       2       1   0     1      0     11       0     0      0      0       0          20              212
     8:50 AM          3           2       0    0         0       7       1   0     2      0      3       0     0      0      0       0          18              213
     8:55 AM          1           5       0    0         0       8       0   0     2      0      5       0     0      0      0       0          21              216
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       84          72       0    0         0     104       0   0     4      0     24       0     0      0      0       0                 288
 Heavy Trucks         0           4       0              0      12       0         0      0      4             0      0      0                         20
  Pedestrians                     0                              0                        0                           0                                 0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 3:15 PM                                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- Green Mountain St                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10433109
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                        DATE: 5/27/2009
                       121 0.84 117                               Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                12.4       3.4

                           3   118    0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 7:20 AM -- 7:35 AM
                                                                                                                               33.3 11.9 0.0

       17      15                         0        0
                                                                                                                  5.9   0.0                       0.0      0.0
        0.75   0               0.84       0   0.00
                                                                                                                        0.0                       0.0
       45      30                         0        0
                                                                                                                  2.2   3.3                       0.0      0.0

                       14 102         0
                                                                                                                               0.0 3.9 0.0

                       148 0.83 116
                                                                                                                               10.1       3.4



                                0




               0                          0




                                14




 5-Min Count                    SE Bluff Rd                    SE Bluff Rd           Green Mountain St           Green Mountain St
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right          U                       Totals
     7:00 AM          1           7       0    0         0      10       1   0     1      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          23
     7:05 AM          0          12       0    0         0      11       0   0     2      0      5       0     0      0      0        0          30
     7:10 AM          2          10       0    0         0       9       0   0     2      0      2       0     0      0      0        0          25
     7:15 AM          1           6       0    0         0       8       1   0     0      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          19
     7:20 AM          1           6       0    0         0       8       0   0     4      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          22
     7:25 AM          1          15       0    0         0      15       0   0     0      0      0       0     0      0      0        0          31
     7:30 AM          1          11       0    0         0      13       0   0     1      0      5       0     0      0      0        0          31
     7:35 AM          1           6       0    0         0       8       0   0     1      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          19
     7:40 AM          2           9       0    0         0       7       1   0     1      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          23
     7:45 AM          2          11       0    0         0      10       0   0     0      0      0       0     0      0      0        0          23
     7:50 AM          2           5       0    0         0       7       0   0     0      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          17
     7:55 AM          0           4       0    0         0      12       0   0     3      0      0       0     0      0      0        0          19              282
     8:00 AM          0           9       0    0         0       5       0   0     1      0      1       0     0      0      0        0          16              275
     8:05 AM          0           5       0    0         0       5       0   0     0      0      0       0     0      0      0        0          10              255
     8:10 AM          0           6       0    0         0       4       0   0     1      0      5       0     0      0      0        0          16              246
     8:15 AM          1           5       0    0         0       9       0   0     1      0      5       0     0      0      0        0          21              248
     8:20 AM          2          13       0    0         0       6       0   0     1      0      2       0     0      0      0        0          24              250
     8:25 AM          0           7       0    0         0       9       0   0     1      0      2       0     0      0      0        0          19              238
     8:30 AM          1          11       0    0         0       7       0   0     1      0      0       0     0      0      0        0          20              227
     8:35 AM          1           4       0    0         0       8       0   0     1      0      0       0     0      0      0        0          14              222
     8:40 AM          0           9       0    0         0      17       0   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0        0          27              226
     8:45 AM          1           5       0    0         0      11       0   0     0      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          20              223
     8:50 AM          0           8       0    0         0      10       1   0     0      0      0       0     0      0      0        0          19              225
     8:55 AM          1           9       0    0         0      13       1   0     1      0      1       0     0      0      0        0          26              232
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right          U
  All Vehicles       12         128       0    0         0     144       0   0    20      0     32       0     0      0      0        0                 336
 Heavy Trucks         0           4       0              0      24       0         0      0      0             0      0      0                          28
  Pedestrians                     0                              0                        0                           0                                  0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 3:15 PM                                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Jewelberry Ave -- Bell St                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10433115
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                    DATE: 5/27/2009
                      18 0.75 10                            Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                  0.0       0.0

                      0    0     18
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 7:00 AM -- 7:15 AM
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.0 0.0

       0       0                      10     10
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
        0.00   0          0.64         0   0.50
                                                                                                                    0.0                      0.0
       0       0                       0     18
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                      0    0     0
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.0 0.0

                      0   0.00   0
                                                                                                                           0.0       0.0



                           0




               0                       0




                           0




 5-Min Count           SE Jewelberry Ave              SE Jewelberry Ave               Bell St                     Bell St
     Period              (Northbound)                   (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                   Left Thru Right       U        Left Thru Right       U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     7:00 AM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           1
     7:05 AM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       3      0           5
     7:10 AM         0      0      0     0          4      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           5
     7:15 AM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           0
     7:20 AM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           3
     7:25 AM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           2
     7:30 AM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           2
     7:35 AM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           3
     7:40 AM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       2      0           3
     7:45 AM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           2
     7:50 AM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           2
     7:55 AM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           0              28
     8:00 AM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           3              30
     8:05 AM         0      0      0     0          4      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           4              29
     8:10 AM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           0              24
     8:15 AM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       2      0           2              26
     8:20 AM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           1              24
     8:25 AM         0      0      0     0          3      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           3              25
     8:30 AM         0      0      0     0          3      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           3              26
     8:35 AM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       2      0           3              26
     8:40 AM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           1              24
     8:45 AM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           1              23
     8:50 AM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           1              22
     8:55 AM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       2      0           4              26
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                    Southbound                 Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates        Left Thru Right       U        Left Thru Right       U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       0      0      0     0         24      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0     20       0                  44
 Heavy Trucks        0      0      0                0      0      0           0      0        0          0        0       0                          0
  Pedestrians               0                              0                         0                            0                                  0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 3:15 PM                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- Bell St                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10433105
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                         DATE: 5/27/2009
                       146 0.79 113                               Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                 5.5       1.8

                           1   145    0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 7:20 AM -- 7:35 AM
                                                                                                                                0.0 5.5 0.0

       15      3                          1        1
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
        0.75   0               0.84       0   0.25
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       21      18                         0        0
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                       14 109         0
                                                                                                                                0.0 1.8 0.0

                       163 0.85 123
                                                                                                                                4.9       1.6



                                4




               0                          0




                                0




 5-Min Count                    SE Bluff Rd                    SE Bluff Rd                 Bell St                     Bell St
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     7:00 AM          4           8       0    0         0      14       1   0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0          27
     7:05 AM          2           8       0    0         0      16       0   0     1      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          29
     7:10 AM          1          11       0    0         0      11       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          25
     7:15 AM          1           6       0    0         0      11       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       1      0          21
     7:20 AM          0           9       0    0         0      11       0   0     1      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          23
     7:25 AM          1          13       0    0         0      15       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          30
     7:30 AM          0          11       0    0         0      20       0   0     0      0        3    0     0        0       0      0          34
     7:35 AM          2           7       0    0         0      11       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          21
     7:40 AM          2          12       0    0         0      10       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          26
     7:45 AM          1          12       0    0         0       9       0   0     1      0        0    0     0        0       0      0          23
     7:50 AM          0           8       0    0         0       9       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          18
     7:55 AM          0           4       0    0         0       8       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          14              291
     8:00 AM          1          10       0    0         0      10       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          23              287
     8:05 AM          0           5       0    0         0       5       0   0     0      0        3    0     0        0       0      0          13              271
     8:10 AM          2           5       0    0         0      10       1   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          19              265
     8:15 AM          2           8       0    0         0      13       0   0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0          23              267
     8:20 AM          0          12       0    0         0       7       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          20              264
     8:25 AM          0           8       0    0         0      12       0   0     1      0        5    0     0        0       0      0          26              260
     8:30 AM          1          11       0    0         0       8       0   0     0      0        3    0     0        0       0      0          23              249
     8:35 AM          1           5       0    0         0       7       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          15              243
     8:40 AM          0          10       0    0         0      18       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          29              246
     8:45 AM          0           7       0    0         0      16       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          24              247
     8:50 AM          0           7       0    0         0      10       0   0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0          17              246
     8:55 AM          2          10       0    0         0      14       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          28              260
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        4         132       0    0         0     184       0   0     4      0      24     0     0        0       0      0                 348
 Heavy Trucks         0           4       0              0      16       0         0      0        0          0        0       0                        20
  Pedestrians                     0                              8                        0                            0                                 8
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 3:15 PM                                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- Meeker St                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10433103
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                         DATE: 5/27/2009
                       242 0.79 268                               Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                 7.0       6.0

                       42 200         0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 7:25 AM -- 7:40 AM
                                                                                                                                0.0 8.5 0.0

       50      44                         0        0
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
        0.47   0               0.79       0   0.00
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       54      10                         0        0
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                           8   224    0
                                                                                                                                0.0 7.1 0.0

                       210 0.70 232
                                                                                                                                8.1       6.9



                                4




               2                          3




                                6




 5-Min Count                    SE Bluff Rd                    SE Bluff Rd               Meeker St                    Meeker St
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     7:00 AM          0          12       0    0         0      17       3   0     9      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          43
     7:05 AM          1          20       0    0         0      15       6   0     5      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          48
     7:10 AM          0          14       0    0         0      14       4   0     9      0      3      0     0        0      0       0          44
     7:15 AM          1          21       0    0         0      19       4   0     3      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          48
     7:20 AM          1          30       0    0         0      19       4   0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          55
     7:25 AM          2          27       0    0         0      19       3   0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          52
     7:30 AM          1          22       0    0         0      27       5   0     4      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          60
     7:35 AM          1          25       0    0         0      18       5   0     7      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          56
     7:40 AM          0          20       0    0         0      19       3   0     4      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          47
     7:45 AM          0          18       0    0         0      12       3   0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          34
     7:50 AM          1          10       0    0         0      13       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          24
     7:55 AM          0           5       0    0         0       8       2   0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          17              528
     8:00 AM          0           9       0    0         0      12       3   0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          25              510
     8:05 AM          0           5       0    0         0      10       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          15              477
     8:10 AM          1          10       0    0         0      16       1   0     2      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          31              464
     8:15 AM          0           6       0    0         0      12       2   0     3      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          23              439
     8:20 AM          0          10       0    0         0      10       1   0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          23              407
     8:25 AM          0          15       0    0         0      12       3   0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          32              387
     8:30 AM          1          20       0    0         0      11       0   0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          33              360
     8:35 AM          0          12       0    0         0      10       0   0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          23              327
     8:40 AM          0           7       0    0         0      16       1   0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          25              305
     8:45 AM          0          10       0    0         0      11       3   0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          26              297
     8:50 AM          0          11       0    0         0      14       2   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          27              300
     8:55 AM          0          15       0    0         0      14       1   0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          31              314
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       16         296       0    0         0     256     52    0    44      0      8      0     0        0      0       0                 672
 Heavy Trucks         0          28       0              0      16       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                         44
  Pedestrians                     4                             12                        0                            0                                16
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 3:15 PM                                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- Hood St                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10433101
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                       DATE: 5/27/2009
                      276 0.71 413                              Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                 14.1       8.7

                          0   227 49
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 7:25 AM -- 7:40 AM
                                                                                                                              0.0 15.9 6.1

       7       0                         38     47
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                       7.9      6.4
        0.25   0              0.75        0   0.73
                                                                                                                       0.0                       0.0
       3       3                          9     92
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                       0.0      5.4

                          7   375 43
                                                                                                                              0.0 8.8 4.7

                      239 0.72 425
                                                                                                                              15.1       8.2



                               0




               0                        214




                               0




 5-Min Count                   SE Bluff Rd                   SE Bluff Rd                Hood St                      Hood St
     Period                   (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                   Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                     Totals
     7:00 AM         0          24       3    0        4      16       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      2        0          50
     7:05 AM         1          39       5    0        3      14       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      6        0          69
     7:10 AM         1          40       6    0        4      18       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      5        0          75
     7:15 AM         0          36       3    0        5      16       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      1        0          61
     7:20 AM         0          40       7    0        5      22       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      5        0          79
     7:25 AM         3          47       6    0        4      17       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      5        0          83
     7:30 AM         0          40       4    0        4      34       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0          82
     7:35 AM         1          41       5    0        6      24       0   0     0      0      1      0     3        0      6        0          87
     7:40 AM         0          29       2    0        4      25       0   0     0      0      1      0     0        0      3        0          64
     7:45 AM         1          20       1    0        3      18       0   0     0      0      1      0     2        0      2        0          48
     7:50 AM         0          12       1    0        5      11       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      2        0          31
     7:55 AM         0           7       0    0        2      12       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      1        0          22              751
     8:00 AM         0           9       1    0        1      16       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0          27              728
     8:05 AM         0           9       0    0        1       7       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0          17              676
     8:10 AM         0          11       0    0        3      17       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0        0          31              632
     8:15 AM         0           7       1    0        3       7       0   0     1      0      0      0     1        0      1        0          21              592
     8:20 AM         0          15       2    0        4      11       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0        0          33              546
     8:25 AM         0          16       2    0        2      12       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0        0          33              496
     8:30 AM         0          16       1    0        2      13       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      1        0          34              448
     8:35 AM         0          13       2    0        0      12       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      4        0          31              392
     8:40 AM         0           7       2    0        5      14       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      0        0          30              358
     8:45 AM         0          14       3    0        4      11       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      1        0          33              343
     8:50 AM         0          17       1    0        6      12       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0        0          37              349
     8:55 AM         0          14       1    0        2      14       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      1        0          32              359
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                   Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates        Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles      16         512      60    0       56     300       0   0     0      0      4      0    16        0     44        0                 1008
 Heavy Trucks        0          28       4             0      40       0         0      0      0            0        0      8                           80
  Pedestrians                    0                             0                        0                          424                                  424
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 3:15 PM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- Hwy 26                                                                                          QC JOB #: 10433111
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                    DATE: 5/27/2009
                    236 0.68 409                              Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                14.0       9.0

                    94    38 104
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 7:25 AM -- 7:40 AM
                                                                                                                           7.4 18.4 18.3

      1257    84                      246   1347
                                                                                                            5.6    7.1                       11.0      6.6
       0.76   412        0.86        1062   0.83
                                                                                                                   14.6                       5.6
      511     15                       39    575
                                                                                                            13.1   6.7                        5.1     14.8

                    101 79      59
                                                                                                                           4.0 5.1 10.2

                    92 0.73 239
                                                                                                                           10.9       5.9



                          2




              12                       48




                          2




 5-Min Count              SE Bluff Rd                      SE Bluff Rd                Hwy 26                    Hwy 26
     Period              (Northbound)                     (Southbound)              (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At Left                                                                                                                           Total
                          Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left Thru Right           U                     Totals
     7:00 AM     9          9       2    0           5       8       6   0     4     22      1      0     2    75     16          0         159
     7:05 AM    10          7       5    0           7       2       5   0     8     27      0      0     1    79     35          0         186
     7:10 AM     1          8       2    0           9       4       5   0     7     32      2      0     1    87     23          0         181
     7:15 AM    14          7       6    0           5       1       8   0     5     27      2      0     2    85     24          0         186
     7:20 AM     5          6       5    0           9       3       6   0     9     24      0      0     1   107     28          0         203
     7:25 AM     7         11       7    0          10       4       7   0    15     26      1      0     5    96     25          0         214
     7:30 AM    15          8       8    0          11       2     19    0    11     34      4      0     9   110     24          0         255
     7:35 AM     9         12       5    0          17       5     10    0     8     25      2      0     4    90     24          0         211
     7:40 AM    12          6       2    0           7       3     13    0     9     49      0      0     2    79     19          0         201
     7:45 AM     7          0       9    0          12       4       7   0     4     52      0      0     4    96     16          0         211
     7:50 AM     7          3       4    0           7       1       4   0     2     50      2      0     5    80      8          0         173
     7:55 AM     5          2       4    0           5       1       4   0     2     44      1      0     3    78      4          0         153             2333
     8:00 AM     6          2       6    0           8       3       6   0     2     55      3      0     1    78      7          0         177             2351
     8:05 AM    11          1       3    0           4       2       3   0     6     32      1      0     4    68      3          0         138             2303
     8:10 AM     4          1       2    0           9       3       2   0     3     63      3      0     3    78      8          0         179             2301
     8:15 AM     7          2       6    0           5       0       5   0     4     44      2      0     1    61      4          0         141             2256
     8:20 AM     6          1       7    0           5       1       4   0     3     54      3      0     1    71     12          0         168             2221
     8:25 AM     4          3       0    0           2       2       7   0     3     45      2      0     1    48     10          0         127             2134
     8:30 AM     9          2       6    0           8       2       6   0     4     50      1      0     2    69     11          0         170             2049
     8:35 AM    12          2       3    0           7       0       6   0     4     62      2      0     3    67     10          0         178             2016
     8:40 AM     5          1       5    0           9       0       6   0     6     49      1      0     2    79      6          0         169             1984
     8:45 AM     9          4       2    0           5       2       3   0     8     71      3      0     2    67      5          0         181             1954
     8:50 AM     7          3       7    0          12       1       5   0     2     65      2      0     3    78     10          0         195             1976
     8:55 AM     9          1       9    0          10       0       3   0     9     49      2      0     5    81      8          0         186             2009
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                      Southbound                Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates    Left       Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left Thru Right           U
  All Vehicles 124        124      80    0         152      44    144    0   136    340     28      0    72 1184    292           0                 2720
 Heavy Trucks    8          0       8               20       0     12          8     28      4            4    68     24                             184
  Pedestrians               8                                4                       16                        92                                    120
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 3:15 PM                                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Kampa Ln -- SE Kelso Rd                                                                                         QC JOB #: 10433114
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                        DATE: 5/27/2009
                           0   0.00   0                          Peak-Hour: 2:25 PM -- 3:25 PM                                 0.0       0.0

                           0    0     0
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 3:05 PM -- 3:20 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

       56      0                           0     47
                                                                                                                  5.4   0.0                       0.0      4.3
        0.78   57              0.77       47   0.73
                                                                                                                        7.0                       4.3
       81      24                          0     58
                                                                                                                  7.4   8.3                       0.0      6.9

                           9    0     1
                                                                                                                               11.1 0.0 0.0

                       24 0.63 10
                                                                                                                               8.3       10.0



                                0




               0                           0




                                0




 5-Min Count                   SE Kampa Ln                   SE Kampa Ln               SE Kelso Rd                 SE Kelso Rd
     Period                    (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     1:30 PM          3           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      1      0     0        1      0       0            9
     1:35 PM          1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      1      0     1        4      0       0           11
     1:40 PM          1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      3      2      0     0        3      0       0            9
     1:45 PM          2           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      1      0      0     0        2      0       0            5
     1:50 PM          2           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      1      0     0        5      0       0           12
     1:55 PM          0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      2      0     0        2      0       0            8
     2:00 PM          1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      1      0     0        5      0       0           11
     2:05 PM          0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      3      2      0     0        6      0       0           11
     2:10 PM          1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      3      0      0     0        0      0       0            4
     2:15 PM          3           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      8      2      0     0        2      0       0           15
     2:20 PM          1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      5      3      0     0        2      0       0           11
     2:25 PM          1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      0      0     0        6      0       0           11              117
     2:30 PM          0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      2      0     0        3      0       0            9              117
     2:35 PM          0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      1      0     0        1      0       0            6              112
     2:40 PM          1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      5      2      0     0        0      0       0            8              111
     2:45 PM          2           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      4      0     0        5      0       0           15              121
     2:50 PM          1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      6      1      0     0        7      0       0           15              124
     2:55 PM          0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      6      2      0     0        3      0       0           11              127
     3:00 PM          2           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      1      4      0     0        1      0       0            8              124
     3:05 PM          0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      8      2      0     0        9      0       0           19              132
     3:10 PM          1           0      1     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      3      0     0        4      0       0           13              141
     3:15 PM          1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      7      2      0     0        3      0       0           13              139
     3:20 PM          0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      4      1      0     0        5      0       0           10              138
     3:25 PM          1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0      5      2      0     1        5      0       0           14              141
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                   Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        8           0      4     0        0       0     0     0     0     76     28      0     0       64      0       0                  180
 Heavy Trucks         0           0      0              0       0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                           0
  Pedestrians                     0                             0                        0                            0                                  0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 12:10 PM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- SE Burgs Ln/Kelso                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10433108
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                         DATE: 5/27/2009
                       114 0.62 115                               Peak-Hour: 2:25 PM -- 3:25 PM                                 7.9       8.7

                           8   106    0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 3:05 PM -- 3:20 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 8.5 0.0

       44      10                         0        2
                                                                                                                  2.3   20.0                      0.0      0.0
        0.79   3               0.79       0   0.50
                                                                                                                        0.0                       0.0
       54      41                         2        6
                                                                                                                  7.4   4.9                       0.0      0.0

                       36 105         3
                                                                                                                                2.8 7.6 0.0

                       149 0.82 144
                                                                                                                                7.4       6.3



                                0




               0                          0




                                0




 5-Min Count                    SE Bluff Rd                    SE Bluff Rd           SE Burgs Ln/Kelso           SE Burgs Ln/Kelso
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right          U                       Totals
     1:30 PM          0           7       1    0         0       8       1   0     3      0      1       0     0      0      0        0          21
     1:35 PM          5           6       0    0         0       9       0   0     0      0      5       0     1      0      0        0          26
     1:40 PM          3           6       0    0         0       4       1   0     1      0      2       0     0      0      0        0          17
     1:45 PM          2           8       1    0         0      12       0   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      1        0          25
     1:50 PM          4          10       0    0         0      11       2   0     1      0      2       0     0      0      0        0          30
     1:55 PM          1           8       1    0         0       4       1   0     2      0      2       0     3      0      0        0          22
     2:00 PM          7          10       0    0         0       5       0   0     3      0      1       0     0      0      0        0          26
     2:05 PM          3           7       0    0         0       6       1   0     0      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          20
     2:10 PM          1           8       0    0         0      12       0   0     1      0      1       0     0      0      0        0          23
     2:15 PM          1           7       0    0         0       9       0   0     0      1      7       0     0      0      0        0          25
     2:20 PM          2           7       1    0         0      12       1   0     1      1      3       0     1      0      0        0          29
     2:25 PM          5           8       0    0         0       7       2   0     2      1      1       0     0      0      0        0          26              290
     2:30 PM          2          10       0    0         0       2       0   0     0      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          17              286
     2:35 PM          1           5       0    0         0      15       0   0     0      0      3       0     1      0      0        0          25              285
     2:40 PM          0           6       1    0         0       4       0   0     1      0      5       0     0      0      0        0          17              285
     2:45 PM          4          11       0    0         0       6       0   0     0      0      4       0     0      0      0        0          25              285
     2:50 PM          6          15       1    0         0       5       1   0     2      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          33              288
     2:55 PM          3           3       0    0         0       7       0   0     1      0      5       0     0      0      0        0          19              285
     3:00 PM          1           9       0    0         0      11       0   0     0      1      2       0     0      0      0        0          24              283
     3:05 PM          8           6       1    0         0       8       0   0     2      0      4       0     0      0      0        0          29              292
     3:10 PM          2           8       0    0         0       9       2   0     0      1      4       0     1      0      0        0          27              296
     3:15 PM          2          12       0    0         0      22       1   0     2      0      4       0     0      0      0        0          43              314
     3:20 PM          2          12       0    0         0      10       2   0     0      0      3       0     0      0      0        0          29              314
     3:25 PM          1           8       0    0         0       8       5   0     2      0      4       0     1      0      0        0          29              317
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right          U
  All Vehicles       48         104       4    0         0     156     12    0    16      4     48       0     4      0      0        0                 396
 Heavy Trucks         0           8       0              0       0       0         0      0      0             0      0      0                           8
  Pedestrians                     0                              0                        0                           0                                  0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 12:10 PM                                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- Green Mountain St                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10433110
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                        DATE: 5/27/2009
                       168 0.69 151                               Peak-Hour: 2:25 PM -- 3:25 PM                                6.5       7.9

                           9   159    0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 3:10 PM -- 3:25 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 6.9 0.0

       44      4                          0        0
                                                                                                                  2.3   0.0                      0.0      0.0
        0.69   0               0.82       0   0.00
                                                                                                                        0.0                      0.0
       25      21                         0        0
                                                                                                                  0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                       35 147         0
                                                                                                                               2.9 8.2 0.0

                       180 0.77 182
                                                                                                                               6.1       7.1



                                0




               2                          1




                                6




 5-Min Count                    SE Bluff Rd                    SE Bluff Rd           Green Mountain St           Green Mountain St
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right         U                       Totals
     1:30 PM          1           9       0    0         0      12       1   0     2      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          26
     1:35 PM          1          10       0    0         0       9       2   0     0      0      0       0     0      0      0       0          22
     1:40 PM          0           6       0    0         0      11       0   0     1      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          20
     1:45 PM          5           9       0    0         0      10       0   0     0      0      0       0     0      0      0       0          24
     1:50 PM          1          18       0    0         0      12       0   0     0      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          33
     1:55 PM          0          11       0    0         0       9       0   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          21
     2:00 PM          2          17       0    0         0       9       0   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          29
     2:05 PM          1          10       0    0         0      11       1   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          24
     2:10 PM          2          11       0    0         0       9       0   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          23
     2:15 PM          1           8       0    0         0      18       0   0     0      0      5       0     0      0      0       0          32
     2:20 PM          0          12       0    0         0      12       0   0     0      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          26
     2:25 PM          4          11       0    0         0      12       1   0     0      0      0       0     0      0      0       0          28              308
     2:30 PM          3          11       0    0         0       3       1   0     1      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          21              303
     2:35 PM          0           6       0    0         0      18       0   0     0      0      0       0     0      0      0       0          24              305
     2:40 PM          2           7       0    0         0      13       0   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          23              308
     2:45 PM          5          12       0    0         0       8       0   0     1      0      5       0     0      0      0       0          31              315
     2:50 PM          1          24       0    0         0      13       0   0     0      0      0       0     0      0      0       0          38              320
     2:55 PM          7          10       0    0         0       9       1   0     0      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          29              328
     3:00 PM          5           9       0    0         0      15       0   0     1      0      4       0     0      0      0       0          34              333
     3:05 PM          4          14       0    0         0      13       0   0     1      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          33              342
     3:10 PM          3          13       0    0         0      13       1   0     0      0      2       0     0      0      0       0          32              351
     3:15 PM          0          14       0    0         0      17       1   0     0      0      3       0     0      0      0       0          35              354
     3:20 PM          1          16       0    0         0      25       4   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          47              375
     3:25 PM          2          12       0    0         0      10       2   0     0      0      1       0     0      0      0       0          27              374
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       16         172       0    0         0     220     24    0     0      0     24       0     0      0      0       0                 456
 Heavy Trucks         0           4       0              0       8       0         0      0      0             0      0      0                         12
  Pedestrians                     0                              0                        0                           0                                 0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 12:10 PM                                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Jewelberry Ave -- Bell St                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10433116
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                    DATE: 5/27/2009
                      22 0.50 15                            Peak-Hour: 2:25 PM -- 3:25 PM                                  4.5       0.0

                      0    0     22
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 2:45 PM -- 3:00 PM
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.0 4.5

       0       0                      15     15
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
        0.00   0          0.62         0   0.63
                                                                                                                    0.0                      0.0
       0       0                       0     22
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                      0.0      4.5

                      0    0     0
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.0 0.0

                      0   0.00   0
                                                                                                                           0.0       0.0



                           0




               0                       0




                           0




 5-Min Count           SE Jewelberry Ave              SE Jewelberry Ave               Bell St                     Bell St
     Period              (Northbound)                   (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                   Left Thru Right       U        Left Thru Right       U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     1:30 PM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           2
     1:35 PM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           1
     1:40 PM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           0
     1:45 PM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           0
     1:50 PM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           0
     1:55 PM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           0
     2:00 PM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           1
     2:05 PM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           1
     2:10 PM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       2      0           3
     2:15 PM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           1
     2:20 PM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           2
     2:25 PM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           2              13
     2:30 PM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           3              14
     2:35 PM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       2      0           4              17
     2:40 PM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           2              19
     2:45 PM         0      0      0     0          7      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           7              26
     2:50 PM         0      0      0     0          3      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       2      0           5              31
     2:55 PM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       2      0           3              34
     3:00 PM         0      0      0     0          2      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       2      0           4              37
     3:05 PM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           2              38
     3:10 PM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       1      0           2              37
     3:15 PM         0      0      0     0          1      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       2      0           3              39
     3:20 PM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           0              37
     3:25 PM         0      0      0     0          0      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0           0              35
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                    Southbound                 Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates        Left Thru Right       U        Left Thru Right       U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       0      0      0     0         44      0      0     0     0      0        0    0     0        0     16       0                  60
 Heavy Trucks        0      0      0                4      0      0           0      0        0          0        0       0                          4
  Pedestrians               0                              0                         0                            0                                  0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 12:10 PM                                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- Bell St                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10433106
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                         DATE: 5/27/2009
                       187 0.78 190                               Peak-Hour: 2:25 PM -- 3:25 PM                                 3.7       4.2

                           0   186    1
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 3:00 PM -- 3:15 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 3.8 0.0

       26      1                          0        0
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
        0.45   0               0.90       0   0.00
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       25      24                         0        1
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                       26 189         0
                                                                                                                                0.0 4.2 0.0

                       210 0.80 215
                                                                                                                                3.3       3.7



                                6




               0                          0




                                10




 5-Min Count                    SE Bluff Rd                    SE Bluff Rd                 Bell St                     Bell St
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     1:30 PM          0          11       0    0         0      14       0   0     0      0        3    0     0        0       0      0          28
     1:35 PM          0          10       0    0         0      10       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          21
     1:40 PM          0           9       0    0         0      10       0   0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0          19
     1:45 PM          1          13       0    0         0      12       0   0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0          26
     1:50 PM          0          19       0    0         0      13       0   0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0          32
     1:55 PM          0          12       0    0         0       8       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          21
     2:00 PM          1          18       0    0         0      12       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          33
     2:05 PM          1          12       0    0         0      10       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          24
     2:10 PM          2          13       0    0         0      11       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          27
     2:15 PM          0          11       0    0         0      23       0   0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0          34
     2:20 PM          2          13       0    0         0      14       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          31
     2:25 PM          2          16       0    0         0      13       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          32              328
     2:30 PM          1          12       0    0         0      14       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          29              329
     2:35 PM          2           8       0    0         0      15       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          26              334
     2:40 PM          2           8       0    0         0      15       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          27              342
     2:45 PM          2          19       0    0         0      13       0   0     0      0        5    0     0        0       0      0          39              355
     2:50 PM          4          24       0    0         0      13       0   0     0      0        5    0     0        0       0      0          46              369
     2:55 PM          2          16       0    0         0      10       0   0     1      0        3    0     0        0       0      0          32              380
     3:00 PM          3          15       0    0         0      20       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          39              386
     3:05 PM          4          19       0    0         0      14       0   0     0      0        2    0     0        0       0      0          39              401
     3:10 PM          2          19       0    0         0      18       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          40              414
     3:15 PM          0          14       0    0         0      19       0   0     0      0        1    0     0        0       0      0          34              414
     3:20 PM          2          19       0    0         1      22       0   0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0          44              427
     3:25 PM          2          13       0    0         0      14       0   0     0      0        0    0     0        0       0      0          29              424
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       36         212       0    0         0     208       0   0     0      0      16     0     0        0       0      0                 472
 Heavy Trucks         0          12       0              0       8       0         0      0        0          0        0       0                        20
  Pedestrians                     4                              8                        0                            0                                12
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 12:10 PM                                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- Meeker St                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10433104
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                     DATE: 5/28/2009
                       294 0.67 234                           Peak-Hour: 2:25 PM -- 3:25 PM                                 5.8       8.5

                       67 227     0
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 2:45 PM -- 3:00 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 7.5 0.0

       84      26                     0        0
                                                                                                               0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
        0.67   0           0.77       0   0.00
                                                                                                                     0.0                      0.0
       43      17                     0        0
                                                                                                               0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                       17 208     0
                                                                                                                            0.0 9.6 0.0

                       244 0.79 225
                                                                                                                            7.0       8.9



                            5




               0                      9




                            23




 5-Min Count                SE Bluff Rd                    SE Bluff Rd               Meeker St                    Meeker St
     Period                (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                    Left    Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     1:30 PM          0      10       0    0         0      17       1   0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          30
     1:35 PM          1      12       0    0         0      10       0   0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          24
     1:40 PM          0      17       0    0         0      20       2   0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          40
     1:45 PM          1       9       0    0         0       9       4   0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          25
     1:50 PM          0      19       0    0         0      18       1   0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          40
     1:55 PM          0      15       0    0         0      18       2   0     3      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          40
     2:00 PM          0      10       0    0         0      13       1   0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          26
     2:05 PM          1      12       0    0         0      16       2   0     3      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          35
     2:10 PM          0      13       0    0         0      20       4   0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          39
     2:15 PM          0      10       0    0         0      16       2   0     2      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          31
     2:20 PM          0      21       0    0         0       7       4   0     2      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          35
     2:25 PM          0      21       0    0         0      15       3   0     3      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          42              407
     2:30 PM          0      14       0    0         0      28       1   0     5      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          49              426
     2:35 PM          0      20       0    0         0      15       6   0     2      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          43              445
     2:40 PM          0      16       0    0         0      17       6   0     1      0      3      0     0        0      0       0          43              448
     2:45 PM          7      16       0    0         0      26     15    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          66              489
     2:50 PM          5      24       0    0         0      25     12    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          68              517
     2:55 PM          0      17       0    0         0      25       6   0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          49              526
     3:00 PM          3      22       0    0         0      17       6   0     3      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          53              553
     3:05 PM          0      20       0    0         0      11       2   0     6      0      3      0     0        0      0       0          42              560
     3:10 PM          0      11       0    0         0      22       4   0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          39              560
     3:15 PM          2      16       0    0         0      12       4   0     2      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          38              567
     3:20 PM          0      11       0    0         0      14       2   0     2      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          30              562
     3:25 PM          0      23       0    0         0      17       4   0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0       0          46              566
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates         Left    Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       48     228       0    0         0     304    132    0     4      0     16      0     0        0      0       0                 732
 Heavy Trucks         0      20       0              0      12       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                         32
  Pedestrians                16                              0                        0                            8                                24
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 12:10 PM                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- Hood St                                                                                           QC JOB #: 10433102
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                      DATE: 5/27/2009
                      343 0.76 282                             Peak-Hour: 2:25 PM -- 3:25 PM                                 7.9       9.9

                          0   281 62
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 2:45 PM -- 3:00 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 7.8 8.1

       0       0                        40     53
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      2.5      1.9
        0.00   0              0.84       0   0.66
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       0       0                        13    103
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0      4.9

                          0   242 41
                                                                                                                             0.0 11.2 0.0

                      294 0.76 283
                                                                                                                             7.5       9.5



                              112




               0                         1




                               22




 5-Min Count                   SE Bluff Rd                  SE Bluff Rd                Hood St                      Hood St
     Period                   (Northbound)                 (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                   Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     1:30 PM         0          10       5    0       5      15       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      6       0          43
     1:35 PM         0           8       3    0       2      11       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      2       0          26
     1:40 PM         0          13       3    0       7      10       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      2       0          35
     1:45 PM         0          17       0    0       1      17       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      2       0          38
     1:50 PM         0          18       1    0       0      15       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      2       0          36
     1:55 PM         0          11       4    0       1      19       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      0       0          37
     2:00 PM         0          13       2    0       5      16       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      3       0          40
     2:05 PM         0          17       6    0       3      12       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      0       0          39
     2:10 PM         0          11       3    0      12      23       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      4       0          54
     2:15 PM         0          17       5    0      11      17       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      4       0          55
     2:20 PM         0           9       3    0       4      16       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0       0          32
     2:25 PM         0          15       5    0       3      14       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      6       0          45              480
     2:30 PM         0          13       3    0       5      11       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      7       0          40              477
     2:35 PM         0          18       1    0       3      18       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      3       0          44              495
     2:40 PM         0          27       3    0       1      23       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      1       0          55              515
     2:45 PM         0          31       6    0       5      19       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      3       0          64              541
     2:50 PM         0          20       6    0      12      32       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      2       0          73              578
     2:55 PM         0          18       7    0       7      28       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      3       0          65              606
     3:00 PM         0          23       3    0       5      29       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      3       0          64              630
     3:05 PM         0          21       2    0       8      31       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      3       0          67              658
     3:10 PM         0          19       1    0       5      26       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      2       0          53              657
     3:15 PM         0          25       1    0       3      24       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      3       0          57              659
     3:20 PM         0          12       3    0       5      26       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      4       0          52              679
     3:25 PM         0          17       3    0       4      25       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0      3       0          52              686
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                  Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates        Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       0         276      76    0      96     316       0   0     0      0      0      0    12        0     32       0                 808
 Heavy Trucks        0          44       0           20      56       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                         120
  Pedestrians                   40                          224                        0                            0                                264
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 12:10 PM                                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SE Bluff Rd -- Hwy 26                                                                                           QC JOB #: 10433112
 CITY/STATE: Sandy, OR                                                                                                     DATE: 5/27/2009
                       319 0.74 288                             Peak-Hour: 2:25 PM -- 3:25 PM                               7.2       10.1

                       104 48 167
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 2:55 PM -- 3:10 PM
                                                                                                                            4.8 4.2 9.6

       1181    101                      147   1206
                                                                                                               7.5   3.0                      12.2      8.5
        0.91   1068         0.93        999   0.93
                                                                                                                     5.1                       8.3
       1270    101                       60   1288
                                                                                                               4.6   2.0                       1.7      5.5

                       78    40    53
                                                                                                                            1.3 20.0 1.9

                       209 0.84 171
                                                                                                                            2.4       5.8



                             7




               12                        73




                             9




 5-Min Count                 SE Bluff Rd                     SE Bluff Rd              Hwy 26                       Hwy 26
     Period                 (Northbound)                    (Southbound)            (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                    Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     1:30 PM          7        1       4    0          4       0       8   0     3   71     12      0     1       92     11       0          214
     1:35 PM          5        0       3    0         12       0       6   0     2   76     10      0     6       87      5       0          212
     1:40 PM          4        0       5    0          8       1       2   0     6   94      5      0     5       81      8       0          219
     1:45 PM          6        3       6    0         11       1       4   0     6   82      2      0     8       67     13       0          209
     1:50 PM          5        2       4    0         15       2     10    0     7   66      5      0     3       95     12       0          226
     1:55 PM          3        1       2    0         15       1       2   0     5   71      7      0     5       73     11       0          196
     2:00 PM          7        2       6    0         13       2       9   0     6   89      4      0     4       89      8       0          239
     2:05 PM          7        4       2    0          8       1       6   0    11   92      2      1     2       90      6       0          232
     2:10 PM          3        4       2    0         13       3       9   0     7   80      2      0     3       88      4       0          218
     2:15 PM          1        3       7    0          4       3       6   0     7   78      6      0     8       89     13       0          225
     2:20 PM          2        4       7    0         15       3       9   0     3   81      5      0     4       91      6       0          230
     2:25 PM          4        1       7    0         12       4       4   0    11   95      4      0     6       84      9       0          241             2661
     2:30 PM          5        2       3    0          6       2       2   0     8   82      9      0     5      100      5       0          229             2676
     2:35 PM          4        7       1    0         13       3       4   0     6   76      5      0     3       81     12       0          215             2679
     2:40 PM          8        2       4    0         12       4       9   0    12   79      3      0     3       97     18       0          251             2711
     2:45 PM          5        9       2    0          8       3       4   0    11   91      8      0     5       76     19       0          241             2743
     2:50 PM         11        3       3    0         12       8     10    0     4   92      7      0     4       66     10       0          230             2747
     2:55 PM          8        2       3    0         16       5     17    0    10   82     11      0    13       79     11       0          257             2808
     3:00 PM          3        3       5    0         19       5     16    0    13   97     14      0     7       94     13       0          289             2858
     3:05 PM          7        3       5    0         14       5     11    0     8   98      8      0     5       75     13       0          252             2878
     3:10 PM          9        3       9    0         22       1       9   0     7   90     12      0     2       72     13       0          249             2909
     3:15 PM          6        1       5    0         16       3       8   0     6   98     10      0     3       87     17       0          260             2944
     3:20 PM          8        4       6    0         17       5     10    0     5   88     10      0     4       88      7       0          252             2966
     3:25 PM          7        2       6    0         17       6     14    0    11   66      6      0     6       68      7       0          216             2941
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                     Southbound              Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates         Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       72       32      52    0        196      60    176    0   124 1108    132      0   100      992   148        0                  3192
 Heavy Trucks         4       12       4              20       0     16          0   44      0            0       80      0                           180
  Pedestrians                 16                               4                     20                           84                                  124
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/5/2009 12:10 PM                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
                         TRIP GENERATION CALCULATIONS



                                Land Use:       High School
                           Land Use Code:       530
                                 Variable:      Students
                           Variable Value:      1600




         AM PEAK HOUR                                               PM PEAK HOUR

               Trip Rate: 0.42                                            Trip Rate: 0.13


                  Enter      Exit      Total                                 Enter    Exit   Total
Directional                                                Directional
                   68%       32%                                              47%     53%
Distribution                                               Distribution
 Trip Ends         457        215       672                 Trip Ends          98     110    208




               WEEKDAY                                     PM PEAK HOUR OF GENERATOR

               Trip Rate: 1.71                                            Trip Rate: 0.29


                  Enter      Exit      Total                                 Enter    Exit   Total
Directional                                                Directional
                   50%       50%                                              33%     67%
Distribution                                               Distribution
 Trip Ends        1,368      1,368     2,736                Trip Ends         153     311    464



                 Source: TRIP GENERATION, Eighth Edition
                         TRIP GENERATION CALCULATIONS



                                Land Use:       High School
                           Land Use Code:       530
                                 Variable:      Students
                           Variable Value:      1800




         AM PEAK HOUR                                               PM PEAK HOUR

               Trip Rate: 0.42                                            Trip Rate: 0.13


                  Enter      Exit      Total                                 Enter    Exit   Total
Directional                                                Directional
                   68%       32%                                              47%     53%
Distribution                                               Distribution
 Trip Ends         514        242       756                 Trip Ends         110     124    234




               WEEKDAY                                     PM PEAK HOUR OF GENERATOR

               Trip Rate: 1.71                                            Trip Rate: 0.29


                  Enter      Exit      Total                                 Enter    Exit   Total
Directional                                                Directional
                   50%       50%                                              33%     67%
Distribution                                               Distribution
 Trip Ends        1,539      1,539     3,078                Trip Ends         172     350    522



                 Source: TRIP GENERATION, Eighth Edition
                           TRIP GENERATION CALCULATIONS




                                Land Use:       General Office Building
                           Land Use Code:       710
                                 Variable:      Employees
                           Variable Value:      20




         AM PEAK HOUR                                               PM PEAK HOUR

               Trip Rate: 0.48                                            Trip Rate: 0.46


                  Enter      Exit      Total                                 Enter    Exit   Total
Directional                                                Directional
                   88%       12%                                              17%     83%
Distribution                                               Distribution
 Trip Ends           9         1         10                 Trip Ends          2       7      9



               WEEKDAY                                                    SATURDAY

               Trip Rate: 3.32                                            Trip Rate: 0.54


                  Enter      Exit      Total                                 Enter    Exit   Total
Directional                                                Directional
                   50%       50%                                              50%     50%
Distribution                                               Distribution
 Trip Ends          33         33        66                 Trip Ends          5       5      10


                 Source: TRIP GENERATION, Eighth Edition
CDS150 07/09/2009                                OREGON DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION - TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT DIVISION                                                            PAGE: 1
                                                      TRANSPORTATION DATA SECTION - CRASH ANALYSIS AND REPORTING UNIT
                                                                CRASH SUMMARIES BY YEAR BY COLLISION TYPE
                                                                                      Bluff Road @ Kelso Street
                                                                             January 1, 2003 through December 31, 2007
                                              NON- PROPERTY                                                                                                                       INTER-
                                     FATAL   FATAL   DAMAGE                    TOTAL PEOPLE          PEOPLE                    DRY        WET                            INTER- SECTION OFF-
  COLLISION TYPE                   CRASHES CRASHES      ONLY                 CRASHES  KILLED         INJURED      TRUCKS       SURF       SURF        DAY      DARK     SECTION RELATED ROAD
YEAR:

 TOTAL

  FINAL TOTAL

Note: Legislative changes to DMV's vehicle crash reporting requirements, effective 01/01/2004, may result in fewer property damage only crashes being eligible for inclusion in the
Statewide Crash Data File.
