Appendix A 
 
Findings of Compliance with State and Local Plans, 
Policies and Regulations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Findings of Compliance with State and Local
Plans, Policies and Regulations
OAR 731-015-0065 COORDINATION                                      PROCEDURES                 FOR
ADOPTING FINAL FACILITY PLANS
OAR 731-015-0065 regulates the ODOT procedure for adopting facility plans. An IAMP is a
facility plan. The procedure outlined in OAR 731-015-0065 requires that ODOT coordinate with
DLCD and local government agencies during development of the plan, and provide a draft of the
facility plan to affected cities, counties, and other agencies for comment. The facility plan must
be consistent with statewide planning goals and local comprehensive plan policies, and findings
of compatibility must be presented to the Oregon Transportation Commission for facility plan
adoption.

Findings
731-015-0065 (1) The Glencoe Road IAMP was developed jointly by ODOT, the City of North
Plains and Washington County, and included coordination with DLCD primarily through project
team meetings. The final public meeting for the Glencoe Interchange was held on June 7, 2010 at
the City of North Plains City Council meeting. At that time the Memorandum of Understanding
between ODOT, the City of North Plains and Washington County was discussed and approved by
the City. The MOU served as the agreement to develop the IAMP. In addition, a series of four
public open houses were held from June 2006 to July 2008 to discuss the new Glencoe Road
interchange and the IAMP.

731-015-0065 (2) A final draft of the IAMP has been provided to all affected government and
other agencies, so that any potential conflicts with state or local plans will be jointly resolved. In
September 2010 the final Draft of the IAMP was sent out to the City of North Plains, Washington
County, DLCD and ODOT Departments including DOJ, Technical Services and Access
Management Unit, and Transportation Development Division seeking their comments and input
on any potential conflicts with state or local plans.

731-015-0065 (3) The Glencoe Road IAMP was developed jointly by ODOT, the City of North
Plains and Washington County, and included coordination with DLCD primarily through project
team meetings. At these meeting the agencies worked to resolve and eliminate conflicts with local
comprehensive plans. There are no conflicts with the local comprehensive plans.

731-015-0065 (4) Findings of compliance with statewide planning goals and local comprehensive
plans have been completed and are included here within.

731-015-0065 (5) Findings of compliance with statewide planning goals and local comprehensive
plans will be included in materials for presentation to the Oregon Transportation Commission.
Adoption of the IAMP, findings and final facility plan will take place in conformance with this
provision.

731-015-0065 (6) The Oregon Transportation Commission will adopt these findings concurrent
with adoption of the IAMP.
731-015-0065 (7) ODOT shall provide copies of the adopted IAMP and facility plan and findings
to DLCD cities and county state and federal agencies who request copies.

The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed OAR 731-015-0065 Coordination
Procedures for Adopting Final Facility Plans.




OAR 734, DIVISION 51. HIGHWAY APPROACHES, ACCESS
CONTROL, SPACING STANDARDS AND MEDIANS
OAR 734-051 governs the permitting, management, and standards of approaches to state
highways to ensure safe and efficient operation of the state highways. OAR 734-051 policies
address the following:
    · How to bring existing and future approaches into compliance with access spacing
        standards, and ensure the safe and efficient operation of the highway;
    · The purpose and components of an access management plan; and
    · Requirements regarding mitigation, modification and closure of existing approaches as
        part of project development.

Section 734-051-0125, Access Management Spacing Standards for Approaches in an Interchange
Area, establishes interchange management area access spacing standards. It also specifies
elements that are to be included in IAMPs, such as short-, medium-, and long-range actions to
improve and maintain safe and efficient roadway operations within the interchange area.

Findings
Be developed no later than the time the interchange is being developed or redeveloped-
0155(7)(a.)

   This plan was produced before and during the planning and design process for the US
   26/Glencoe Road interchange reconstruction project. It is also being adopted in advance of
   final plans and construction.

Identify opportunities to improve operations and safety in conjunction with roadway projects and
property development or redevelopment and adopt strategies and development standards to
capture those opportunities-0155(7)(b).

   The land use controls and access management elements identified in this plan, and
   incorporated into the project design or identified for implementation with future property
   redevelopment or project development activities, will constitute significant operational and
   safety improvements.

Include short and long-term actions to improve operations and safety in the interchange area -
0155(7)(c).

   Short and long-term actions to improve operations and safety in the interchange area have
   been identified. Short -term actions include that will help to prepare for the interchange
   reconstruction project. Long-term actions are designated in the City TSP for improvements to
   the local circulation network.
Consider current and future traffic volumes and flows, roadway geometry, traffic control devices,
current and planned land uses and zoning, and the location of all current and planned approaches
-0155(7)(d).

    A full analysis of existing and forecast (2030) operational, geometric, and safety conditions
    was conducted. Future land use development within the City of North Plains and the greater
    Washington County influence area was identified, as were all affected accesses. These
    elements led to the plan's transportation improvement project recommendations and detailed
    access management plan for the interchange study area.

Provide adequate assurance of the safe operation of the facility through the design traffic forecast
period, typically 20 years-0155(7)(e).

    The transportation recommendations were developed based on a long-term (2030) forecast
    traffic operations analysis. The improvement projects described in the IAMP will ensure the
    safe and efficient operation of the interchange through the planning horizon year.

Consider existing and proposed uses of all property in the interchange area consistent with its
comprehensive plan designations and zoning -155(7)(f).

    An analysis of the interchange influence area and its long-term development potential was
    included in the planning effort. This analysis resulted in recommendations for the
    interchange improvements to ensure the long-term function of the interchange area.

Be consistent with any applicable access management plan, corridor plan, or facility plan adopted
by the OTC. -155(7)(g).

    The US 26/Glencoe Road Interchange Area Management Plan is consistent with the 1999
    OHP and consistent with the applicable access management polices, principles, and
    standards.

Include polices, provisions and standards from local comprehensive plans, transportation system
plans, and land use and subdivision codes that are relied upon for consistency and that are relied
upon to implement the Interchange Area Management Plan. -155(7)(h).

    The US 26/Glencoe Road Interchange Area Management Plan contains references to, and is
    consistent with the polices, operational standards, and access management standards of the
    City of North Plains, Washington County, and ODOT.

The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed OAR 734, Division 51. Highway
Approaches, Access Control, Spacing Standards and Medians.

OAR 660 DIVISION 12 TRANSPORTATION PLANNING RULE (TPR)

The purpose of the TPR is "to implement Statewide Planning Goal 12 (Transportation) and
promote the development of safe, convenient and economic transportation systems that are
designed to reduce reliance on the automobile so that the air pollution, traffic and other livability
problems faced by urban areas in other parts of the country might be avoided." A major purpose
of the Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) is to promote more careful coordination of land use
and transportation planning, to assure that planned land uses are supported by and consistent with
planned transportation facilities and improvements. The TPR references OAR 731, Division 15
for ODOT coordination procedures for adopting facility plans and plans for Class 1 and 3
projects.

This rule identifies transportation facilities, services and improvements which may be permitted
on rural lands consistent with Goals 3, 4, 11, and 14 without a goal exception. These include
replacement of an intersection with an interchange, channelization, and medians.

In addition TPR Section ­ 0065states, (5) For transportation uses or improvements listed in
subsection (3)(d) to (g) and (o) of this rule within an exclusive farm use (EFU) or forest zone, a
jurisdiction shall, in addition to demonstrating compliance with the requirements of ORS
215.296:
           (a) Identify reasonable build design alternatives, such as alternative alignments, that
               are safe and can be constructed at a reasonable cost, not considering raw land costs,
               with available technology. The jurisdiction need not consider alternatives that are
               inconsistent with applicable standards or not approved by a registered professional
               engineer,
           (b) Assess the effects of the identified alternatives on farm and forest practices,
               considering impacts to farm and forest lands, structures and facilities, considering
               the effects on traffic on the movement of farm and forest vehicles and equipment
               and considering the effects of access to parcels created on farm and forest lands;
               and
           (c) Select from the identified alternatives, the one, or combination of identified
               alternatives that has the least impact on the lands in the immediate vicinity devoted
               to farm or forest use.

Findings
The IAMP calls for replacement of the existing interchange. A portion of the Interchange is in
the City of North Plains and a portion is in rural Washington County. The Glencoe Road
interchange IAMP was jointly developed by ODOT, North Plains and Washington County. The
IAMP mandates continued coordination between the three agencies for management of the
interchange area. Current and future land uses were considered in the design of the interchange
in order to ensure its ability to support future traffic demands and retain the rural character of
the area. The IAMP is intended to manage land uses around the interchange to avoid unplanned
growth and development that may impact the function of the facility.

The IAMP relies on the City to ensure that development within the interchange area will not
allow development that is not permitted in the adopted Comprehensive Plan and Zoning and
Development Ordinance. The city's current and future adopted land uses were considered in the
design of the interchange in order to ensure its ability to support future traffic demands of the
area.

The IAMP relies on the County's Rural/Natural Plan to ensure that development will not
adversely affect the surrounding agricultural and forest activities. This requires that plan
amendments and zone changes within the IAMP study area must not result in a significant impact
on the interchange facility.

This transportation use is authorized on rural lands without a goal exception under the TPR
section 660-012-0065, Transportation Improvements on Rural Lands. The Glencoe Road
interchange improvement is located in Washington County designated EFU Farm Use zone
which is an exclusive farm use zone, and RR-IND rural commercial zone. The preferred
alternative concept must be consistent with the requirements of ORS 215.283 and 215.296.

The coordinated planning effort and public involvement ensures that the IAMP is consistent with
the planned land use and transportation facilities in the North Plains area. Specifically, the
preferred alternative interchange concept will not interfere with the rural agricultural and forest
uses in the vicinity. The IAMP planned rural function and capacity of the interchange concept is
designed to support the rural character and will not adversely affect the surrounding agricultural
and forest activities.

The IAMP interchange concept was selected based on its ability to address the most significant
safety issue is that the existing westbound off-ramp is not long enough to safely accommodate
vehicles using the interchange thus creating backups onto US 26. This concept was selected
because it could be constructed at reasonable cost with current construction methods. Other
alternatives would require more expensive construction options to build an interchange.

The IAMP interchange concept is located on designated EFU lands. In general, farm and forest
impacts that may result from transportation projects in rural areas include parcel fragmentation,
access and equipment maneuverability changes, removal of productive farm/forest land, and
building displacement.
     · Fragmentation. The majority of the right-of-way acquisition will be a strip of land
         adjacent to the existing Glencoe Road for the purpose of adding a deceleration lane and
         paved shoulders. No parcel fragmentation will occur as a result of the proposed IAMP
         interchange concept.
     · Access and Maneuverability. The IAMP interchange concept would not change the
         existing access to fields along Glencoe Road.. The concept will allow the surrounding
         farms to continue to access their fields for county roads. This will not result in any
         equipment maneuverability issues or significant out-of-direction travel for farm
         activities in the vicinity of the interchange. The IAMP interchange concept will not
         create farm parcels that can not be economically farmed.
     · Removal of farm/forest land. The majority of the right-of-way acquisition will be a strip
         of land adjacent to the existing Glencoe Road for the purpose of adding a deceleration
         lane and paved shoulders. The equitation of the property will not significantly reduce
         the amount of farm/forest land therefore, there will be no significant change to farm
         practices or cost associated with the acquisition of the land.

As such, the US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed OAR 660 Division 12
Transportation Planning Rule (TPR).


OREGON STATEWIDE PLANNING GOALS AND GUIDELINES

Goal 1: Citizen Involvement
Requirement
Goal 1 requires the development of a citizen involvement program that is widespread, allows
two-way communication, provides for citizen involvement through all planning phases, and is
understandable, responsive, and funded.

Findings
Appendix F and G7 of the Volume 2 of US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP Technical Appendices
contains a summary of the public involvement efforts that were undertaken as part of the JTA and
IAMP project. The public involvement for the JTA project and the IAMP are based on the
pervious interchange study and public out reach program for this work.

This information is available in Appendix G7. This effort included the following:
    · A series of four public open houses were held from June 2006 to July 2008 to discuss the
        new Glencoe Road interchange and the IAMP;
    · Citizen Advisory Committee meetings held from June 2006 to July 2008 to obtain
        feedback on a variety of project deliverables, including the purpose and need, evaluation
        criteria, interchange design concepts and draft IAMP.;
    · A newsletter sent out to individuals near the proposed project to provide information and
        notification of the public open house; and
    · A project web site was available to provide project information and upcoming open
        houses.
    · A selection of a preferred interchange concept by the Citizen Advisory Committee.

Appendix F contains the information for the public involvement of the US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP
and JTA project. The IAMP and JTA project was jointly developed by the city of North Plains,
Washington County and ODOT. This includes City's Resolution No. 1561 approving the MOU
for the JTA project and the County's MOU and Supplemental with ODOT. This information
demonstrates consistency with Goal 1.

Goal 2: Land Use Planning
Requirement
This goal requires that a land use planning process and policy framework be established as a basis
for all decisions and actions relating to the use of land. All local governments and state agencies
involved in the land use action must coordinate with each other. With regard to the Glencoe Road
IAMP, ODOT is required to coordinate with City of North Plains and Washington County, which
has planning authority over the project area.

Findings
Preliminary tasks for the Glencoe Road IAMP included a thorough review and analysis of all
relevant state, regional and local planning documents in order to establish a planning process
and policy framework.
The following documents were reviewed:
    · Applicable Oregon Statewide Planning Goals;
    · Oregon Administrative Rule 731, Division 15, Department of Transportation
        Coordination Rules;
    · Oregon Transportation Plan (2006);
    · Oregon Highway Plan (1999);
    · Oregon Administrative Rule 734-051, Highway Approaches, Access Control, Spacing
        Standards and Medians;
    · Washington County Comprehensive Plan and the Rural/Natural Resource Element
        (2006) ;
    · Washington County Community Development Code; and
    · Washington County 2020 Transportation Plan (2002)
    · North Plains Comprehensive Plan Ordinance (2005)
    · North Plains Zoning and Development Ordinance (2006)
    ·   North Plains Transportation System Plan (2005)

The Glencoe Road IAMP was prepared jointly by the City of North Plains, Washington County
and ODOT and coordination between the three agencies took place routinely throughout the
process. ODOT, North Plains and Washington County will continue to coordinate on
development activity and land use actions within the interchange area. No land use actions are
required by the City of North Plains or Washington County to reach consistency with the IAMP.
An Article 7 permit will be required later into design of the interchange when greater detail in
information is available. The IAMP relies on the land uses identified in the current (2006) County
Comprehensive Plan.

No land use actions by local governments are required by this plan. This requirement is met
through the technical analysis associated with the IAMP and discussed in the analysis of the
existing conditions within the IAMP study area. The Existing Conditions of the City and County
describes the land use and zoning conditions and historic growth patterns in the vicinity of the
proposed interchange, and provides an inventory of existing transportation facilities and their
relative functionality.

Section 2 of the IAMP describes expected future (2030) land use conditions within the IAMP
study area and provides the future traffic analysis for 2008 and 2030 no-build conditions. This
section provides a detailed description of the land use scenario that was used, including future
household and employment growth and development patterns. The scenario was used for
modeling the transportation network and determining where deficiencies may occur over time.

The analysis from Section 2 determined that improvements to the Glencoe Road interchange area
were necessary in order to accommodate future traffic. No modifications to the Washington
County land use planning program, including land use overlays, are proposed as part of this
project. Appendix B includes a list of uses currently allowed in the zones within the Glencoe
Road study area. Pursuant to Washington County's adopted and acknowledged Community
Development Code, these uses will continue to be allowed on parcels near the intersection.

This information demonstrates consistency with Goal 2 for land use decisions made during the
development of the IAMP.

Goal 3: Agricultural Lands
Requirements
Goal 3 is to preserve and maintain agricultural lands. Agricultural lands shall be preserved and
maintained for farm use, consistent with existing and future needs for agricultural products, forest
and open space and with the state's agricultural land use policy expressed in ORS 215.243 and
215.700.

Findings
The IAMP sought to avoid and minimize impacts to agricultural lands in the rural areas in
Washington County. The improvements at the interchange include widening and lengthening
turn lanes on the interchange ramps, rebuilding the existing structure to accommodate added
turn lanes, add bicycle facilities, and add pedestrian facilities. An existing culvert will be
replaced with a structure. No local improvements are required by the project.
Certain transportation improvements including channelization are conditionally allowed on rural
lands under OAR 660-012-0065 without a goal exception Glencoe Road widening to the south of
the interchange is not a realignment of the existing road as per the definition of realignment
provided in 660-012-0065 2(f)that indicates the existing centerline must move outside of existing
ROW, which it does not. The Glencoe interchange rather is channelization as per the definition
provided in 660-012 0065 (2)e. In general, farm impacts that may result from transportation
projects in rural areas include parcel fragmentation, access and equipment maneuverability
changes, removal of productive farm/forest land, and building displacement. The realignment of
Glencoe Road did not result in any parcel fragmentation, new land parcels, access and
equipment maneuverability changes, removal of productive farm/forest land, or building
displacement. Washington County will adopt a Resolution and Order #10-106 supporting the
IAMP on November 23, 2010.

As such, the US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed Goal 3, Agricultural Lands.

Goal 5: Natural Resources, Scenic and Historic Areas, and Open Spaces
Requirements
Goal 4 is to protect natural resources and conserve scenic and historic areas and open spaces.
Local governments shall adopt programs that will protect natural resources and conserve scenic,
historic, and open space resources for present and future generations. These resources promote a
healthy environment and natural landscape that contributes to Oregon's livability.

Findings
The IAMP sought to avoid and minimize impacts to natural resource lands in the rural areas in
Washington County. Certain transportation improvements including channelization are
conditionally allowed on rural lands under OAR 660-012-0065 without a goal exception Glencoe
Road widening to the south of the interchange is not a realignment of the existing road as per the
definition of realignment provided in 660-012-0065 2(f) that indicates the existing centerline must
move outside of existing ROW, which it does not. The Glencoe interchange is channelization as
per the definition provided in 660-012 0065 (2)e. The improvements will not adversely affect the
natural resources, scenic and historic areas, and open spaces.

Wetlands were identified in the study area in low lying areas along an unnamed tributary to
McKay Creek to the north of US 26. No impacts to these resources are anticipated. The only
potential fishery resources in the study area would be the unnamed tributary to McKay Creek, no
impacts are anticipated but for the positive impact of removing a culvert with a structure. Review
of literature and field investigations indicate that habitat for threatened and endangered species
does exist in the area, namely for Bald Eagle and Columbia White Tailed Deer, but those species
are not likely to occur in the API. Impacts to habitat are not anticipated. Goal 5 resources were
mapped in the existing conditions portion of the plan and designs were refined to avoid Goal 5
resources.

As such, the findings have adequately addressed Goal 5.

Goal 9: Economic Development
This goal requires that local comprehensive plans and policies contribute to a stable and
healthy economy in all regions of the state.

Finding
The Glencoe Road IAMP provides a vital function in supporting local and regional economic
development goals and plans. Local traffic, including commercial vehicles, must have safe and
efficient access to the interstate. The intent of the IAMP is to protect the function of the
interchange; proposed IAMP policy language illustrates the City's role in preserving capacity
and improving operations at the interchange. The IAMP was developed jointly with ODOT, city
of North Plains and Washington County to ensure that transportation improvements will be
available to support the planned employment uses in western Washington County and the City,
consistent with the County and City's economic development goal.

US 26 in the interchange vicinity is a freight route as identified in the OHP. US 26 provides a
critical link from the Oregon Coast to the Portland Metropolitan area, as well as connecting
employment heavy lands in Washington County to the Ports, Central City and other industrial
land. The planned improvements will lessen delay on US 26 by providing storage for vehicles that
currently queue back onto the mainline of US 26 from the ramp terminals. This will not only free
up lanes that currently have queues extending into them, but also provide relief from non-
recurring congestion stemming from accidents in the interchange vicinity. Glencoe Road is
designated as a County arterial street and a countywide through-truck route in the
Transportation Plan. The facility serves important roles in rural Washington County and
planning for improvements must accommodate balanced service for the various users.

Goal 10: Housing
Requirements
Goal 10 Housing is to provide for the housing needs of citizens of the state. Buildable lands for
residential use shall be inventoried and plans shall encourage the availability of adequate numbers
of needed housing units at price ranges and rent levels which are commensurate with the financial
capabilities of Oregon households and allow for flexibility of housing location, type and density.

Findings
The IAMP traffic projections indicate the new interchange will operate at acceptable
mobility levels in projected year of 2030. Build-out will entail both infill and redevelopment
within existing city limits. Based on the acreage of land zoned residential within the city's
existing city limits and findings in the City's Comprehensive Plan, residential build-out will result
in about 250 total acres of developed residential land and 1,600 dwelling units. This is roughly a
twofold increase in developed residential land and more than a twofold increase in units over
existing conditions. The IAMP us relying on the County Comprehensive Plan and City of
North Plains Comprehensive Plan for land uses, including residential uses. No land use
actions are required to comply with this rule. The improvements identified are able to
accommodate the planned residential growth in the area and still meet ODOT mobility
standards.

This information demonstrates consistency with Goal 10, Housing.


Goal 11: Public Facilities and Services
Requirement
Cities and counties shall plan and develop a timely, orderly and efficient arrangement of public
facilities and services to serve as a framework for urban and rural development. The goal requires
that urban and rural development be "guided and supported by types and levels of urban and rural
public facilities and services appropriate for, but limited to, the needs and requirements of the
urban, urbanizable and rural areas to be served."

Findings
Transportation facilities are considered a primary type of public facility. The Glencoe Road
IAMP documents the current and future transportation needs of the urban and rural areas in the
vicinity of the Glencoe Road interchange. The IAMP will guide growth within the vicinity of the
interchange to ensure that development takes place at a rate and density that is compatible with
the capacity of the interchange. No modifications to the Washington County land use planning
program, including land use overlays, are proposed as part of this project. Appendix B includes
a list of uses currently allowed in the zones within the Glencoe Road study area. Pursuant to
Washington County's adopted and acknowledged Community Development Code, these uses will
continue to be allowed on parcels near the intersection.

In terms of other, non-transportation public facilities, the proposed improvements will not
require changes to existing land use. No impact on public facilities is expected because no
intensification of land use is created as a result of improvements recommended in the IAMP as
existing land uses as identified in the City and County comprehensive plans are adopted in this
IAMP so no change to land use will occur.

The findings demonstrate consistency with Goal 11 in developing the IAMP.


Goal 12: Transportation
Requirement
This goal requires cities, counties, metropolitan planning organizations, and ODOT to provide
and encourage a "safe, convenient and economic transportation system." This is accomplished
through development of Transportation System Plans based on inventories of local, regional and
state transportation needs. Goal 12 is implemented through OAR 660, Division 12, also known as
the Transportation Planning Rule (TPR). The TPR contains numerous requirements governing
transportation planning and project development. (See the "OAR 660, Division 12" section of this
document for findings of compliance with the TPR.)

Findings
US26 is a major east-west travel route within the State of Oregon that within the western portion
of the state provides the primary means of access between the Portland metropolitan area and the
northern Oregon coast. US 26 is classified as a Statewide Highway by the OHP and designated
as an Expressway and Statewide Freight Route. Glencoe Road runs north-south and connects the
City of Hillsboro to the US 26 corridor and the City of North Plains. Glencoe Road is a
Washington County classified Arterial that is also classified as a Through-Truck Route and
Urban/Rural Bikeway.
The primary function of the US 26/Glencoe Road interchange is to facilitate statewide inter-
urban and inter-regional travel to/from the US 26 corridor. A secondary function is to provide
north-south connectivity across US 26 for the City of North Plains and the surrounding rural
land uses. The US 26/Glencoe Road interchange is not intended to serve increased retail or
highway-oriented traveler services other than what is currently provided for by existing
Washington County and North Plains Development Codes.

No modifications to the Washington County land use planning program, including land use
overlays, are proposed as part of this project. Appendix B includes a list of uses currently
allowed in the zones within the Glencoe Road study area. Pursuant to Washington County's
adopted and acknowledged Community Development Code, these uses will continue to be
allowed on parcels near the intersection. See additional findings under OAR 660, Division 12
Transportation Planning Rule.
ODOT and Washington County found the IAMP would not require any land use actions, and that
the plan and contents are consistent with the Washington County. Washington County and
ODOT will coordinate on any potential plan amendments to the properties surrounding the
interchange and any potential reclassification of Beach Road, consistent with existing, adopted
2020 Transportation Plan policies and Statewide Planning Goals.

Washington County will incorporate Resolution and Order reference to the Glencoe Road IAMP
into the technical appendix portion of the 2020 Transportation Plan. Washington County staff
will present a proposal to this effect to the Board of County Commissioners at their Board
meeting November 23, 2010.
The City of North Plains participated in the development of the IAMP. North Plains'
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning and Development Code and Transportation System Plan were used
to develop and refine the IAMP future baseline traffic conditions analysis under a "no-build"
scenario. This scenario illustrated how the existing Glencoe interchange and supporting study
area roadways and intersections will operate upon an assumption of future local and regional
traffic growth through the year 2030 and no improvements to the transportation network beyond
those currently identified in the adopted City of North Plains Transportation System Plans.
The future deficiencies in the traffic forecast of the City TSP identified the need to replace the
interchange due to capacity, safety and operational issues present at the interchange. The city
and its UGB areas the TSP assumed the need of a new interchange to accommodate future
expansion and growth. The TSP assumed the interchange is an unfunded need.
OAR 734-051-0155 requires local jurisdictions to amend their Transportation System Plans
(TSPs) to include relevant elements of the IAMP is not necessary, because the City's TSP
assumed the interchange improvements and the policies and zoning ordinances are consistent
with the IAMP. The City of North Plains TSP proposed Classification System provides a street
system within the Interchange management area that is adequate to accommodate the IAMP.
The IAMP will be implemented per the existing adopted City Comprehensive Plan, Zoning and
Development Code and Transportation System Plan.

The findings demonstrate consistency with Goal 12 in developing the IAMP.

Goal 14: Urbanization, and OAR 660, DIVISIONS 14 AND 22
Requirement:
Goal 14, Urbanization, requires an orderly and efficient transition from rural to urban land use.
This is accomplished through the establishment of Urban Growth Boundaries (UGBs). UGBs
and unincorporated community boundaries separate urbanizable land from rural land. Land uses
permitted within the urban areas are more urban in nature and higher intensity than in rural areas,
which primarily include farm and forest uses. Goal 14 is important because it focuses
development within relatively compact boundaries of the UGB and, to a lesser degree, in
unincorporated communities. This compact development helps contain the costs of public
facilities by reducing the need to expand facilities further out from existing services and
population centers. The location, type, and intensity of future development within the
management area will impact the function and operational life of the interchange.

Additionally, ORS 197.298 establishes priorities for including land inside urban growth
boundaries. The first (highest) priority for inclusion is land that is designated "urban reserve"
land. The second priority is land adjacent to a UGB that is identified as "an exception area or non-
resource land." The third priority is land that is designated as "marginal land" pursuant to ORS
197.247. The final (lowest) priority is land that is designated for agriculture, forestry, or both.

Findings
The Glencoe Road interchange planning area does intersect with the City's Urban Growth
Boundary which is formed on the south by US 26. The Metro UGB is located approximately 5
miles to the East and does not occur in the Interchange study area.

Rural land in the vicinity of the interchange is primarily Exclusive Farm Use (EFU) land, and
therefore is the lowest priority for inclusion within a UGB. Existing residential, rural commercial
and rural industrial land in the County south of the highway is limited to the type and intensity of
development by the County zoning. County development policies and zoning code require that it
maintains the rural characteristic of the surrounding rural area. The City of North Plains has
determined that their UGB expansion will occur to the north of US 26 and not cross the Highway.
This is to encourage a more compact type development on one side of the highway and not
encourage development in the EFU land to the south.

This information demonstrates consistency with Goal 14, Urbanization.

Statewide Goals:
        Goal 4 Forest Lands
        Goal 6 Air, Water and Land Resources Quality
        Goal 7 Areas Subject to Natural Hazards
        Goal 8 Recreational Needs
        Goal 13 Energy Conservation
        Goal 15 Willamette River Greenway
        Goal 16 Estuarine Resources
        Goal 17 Coastal Shorelands
        Goal 18 Beaches and Dunes
        Goal 19 Ocean Resources

These goals were determined not to be applicable to the development of the IAMP. Goal 4 is not
applicable because there is no impact to forest lands and forest lands are not located in the project
area. Goal 6 not applicable because to changes to waste and discharge will occur from this plan,
and environmental quality will not fall below accepted state or federal standards as a result of the
plan. Flooding has occurred in the project area, however the plan for the area will have no impact
on potential natural hazards, so Goal 7 is not applicable. Goal 8 is not applicable as no
recreational facilities will be impacted and the plan results in no changes to recreation plans for
the area. Goal 13 is not applicable as no changes will occur to density of land use nor will it
encumber energy conservation efforts in the area of the plan. Goal 15 is not applicable because
the Willamette River Greenway is not in or near the project area. Goals 16, 17, 18, 19 are not
applicable because no estuarine resources, coastal shorelands, beaches or dunes or ocean
resources exist in or near the project area.

OREGON TRANSPORTATION PLAN (2006)

The Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) is the state's long-range multimodal transportation plan.
The OTP is the overarching policy document among a series of plans that together form the state
transportation system plan (TSP). This Plan supersedes the 1992 Oregon Transportation Plan.
An IAMP must be consistent with applicable OTP goals and policies. Findings of compatibility
will be part of the basis for IAMP approval.

The most pertinent OTP goals and policies for interchange planning are as follows:

Policy 1.3 ­ Relationship of Interurban and Urban Mobility
It is the policy of the State of Oregon to provide intercity mobility through and near urban areas
in a manner which minimizes adverse effects on urban land use and travel patterns and provides
for efficient long distance travel.

Findings
The Glencoe Road IAMP plans for improved safety and intercity mobility on the US 26: Sunset
Highway. There are no adverse effects on the urban land uses in the vicinity of the interchange
and the facility will operate at levels consistent with the mobility standard for the 20-year
planning horizon and beyond. The preferred concept does not require taking of any urban land
uses in the plan area. The increase of vertical clearance under Glencoe Road structure will
facilitate more efficient long distance travel.

The findings demonstrate no adverse effects with Policy 1.3 in developing the IAMP.

Policy 2.1 - Capacity and Operational Efficiency
It is the policy of the State of Oregon to manage the transportation system to improve its capacity
and operational efficiency for the long term benefit of people and goods movement.

Findings
Through the planning process, certain improvements were identified to improve the capacity of
the interchange and the operational efficiency of the interchange area. The current westbound
off-ramp is not long enough to safely accommodate vehicle queues and causes unsafe backups
onto US 26. The proposed improvements will lengthen the ramp to meet the demand and avoid
future queues on US 26. The interchange is designed to accommodate the planned traffic
volumes, from the City of North Plains and the larger regional vicinity, which includes the Cities
of Hillsboro, Cornelius, and Forest Grove. In addition, bicycle/pedestrian travel will be
accommodated on the existing two-lane Glencoe Road over-crossing. Include the long term
management strategies of the interchange.

Policy 2.2 ­ Management of Assets
It is the policy of the State of Oregon to manage transportation assets to extend their life and
reduce maintenance costs.

Findings
The stated purpose of the IAMP is to maximize the operational life of the Glencoe Road
interchange, and, consequently, protect the State's investment in the facility. Specifically, the goal
of the IAMP is to protect the function and operation of the interchange within the IAMP area.
This includes providing safe and efficient connections between local streets and state highways.

This information demonstrates consistency with Policies 2.1 and 2.2 of the Oregon
Transportation Plan.

Policy 3.1 ­ An Integrated and Efficient Freight System
It is the policy of the State of Oregon to promote an integrated, efficient and reliable freight
system involving air, barges, pipelines, rail, ships and trucks to provide Oregon a competitive
advantage by moving goods faster and more reliably to regional, national and international
markets.

Findings
The Sunset Highway (US 26) serves as a primary connection between the Portland metro area
and the Oregon Coast. The highway is designated as a Statewide Freight Route Highway in the
Oregon Highway Plan. The Glencoe Road IAMP identifies safety improvements to address safety
deficiencies in the interchange area. Lengthening of the west bound off ramp will accommodate
trucks volumes, and provide greater deceleration distance for trucks exiting US 26 at Glencoe
Rd. The plan notes the vertical clearance limitation as a problem on US 26 under Glencoe Rd
which will be addressed through the design of the overpass. The increase to vertical clearance
will open one of three vertical bottlenecks from the Portland metropolitan area to the Oregon
Coast on US 26. The result of the plan will ensure the safety and efficiency of travel along Sunset
Highway, particularly in the vicinity of the new interchange

This information demonstrates consistency with Policy 3.1.

Policy 7.4 - Environmental Justice
It is the policy of the State of Oregon to provide all Oregonians, regardless of race, culture or
income, equal access to transportation decision-making so all Oregonians may fairly share in
benefits and burdens and enjoy the same degree of protection from disproportionate adverse
impacts.

Findings
Appendix G and H provides a summary of the public involvement efforts that took place during
development of the IAMP. Various methods were used to gather public input about the
interchange project and the management plan, including four public open houses, a series of
Stakeholders Working Group meetings, web site, and a public review and comment period for the
draft IAMP. Press releases to announce the open house were sent to all local newspapers.

Data and analysis were prepared with consideration of Executive Order (EO) 12898, EO 13166
and Title 6. According to early existing conditions information the study area does not contain
disproportionate concentration of environmental justice populations, nor any notable
environmental justice populations in the general vicinity of the study area. No clusters of low-
income households exist in North Plains. Potential low income households have been identified in
the study area, but will not be impacted by the project

Input from citizens was used to evaluate alternatives. These opportunities were provided equally
to all, regardless of race, culture or income.

This information demonstrates consistency with Policy 7.4 - Environmental Justice.

OREGON HIGHWAY PLAN

The 1999 Oregon Highway Plan establishes policies and investment strategies for Oregon's state
highway system over a 20-year period and refines the goals and policies found in the OTP.
Policies in the OHP emphasize the efficient management of the highway system to increase safety
and to extend highway capacity, partnerships with other agencies and local governments, and the
use of new techniques to improve road safety and capacity. These policies also link land use and
transportation, set standards for highway performance and access management, and emphasize
the relationship between state highways and local road, bicycle, pedestrian, transit, rail, and air
systems.

The policies applicable to planning for the Glencoe Road interchange improvements are
described below.

Goal 1: System Definition, the following policies are applicable:

Policy 1A: Highway Classification. This policy defines the function of state highways to
serve different types of traffic that should be incorporated into and specified through IAMPs.

The state highway classification system includes five classifications: Interstate, Statewide,
Regional, District, and Local Interest Roads. In addition, there are four special purpose categories
that overlay the basic classifications: special land use areas, statewide freight route, scenic
byways, and lifeline routes. US 26 is a Statewide Highway and is part of the National Highway
System (NHS). The Policy 1A definition states: "Statewide Highways provide inter-urban and
inter-regional mobility and provide connections to larger urban areas, ports, and major recreation
areas that are not directly served by Interstate Highways. A secondary function is to provide
connections for inter-urban and inter-regional trips. The management objective is to provide safe
and efficient, high-speed continuous-flow operation."

Findings
US 26 is classified as a Statewide Highway by the OHP and designated as an Expressway and
Statewide Freight Route. Glencoe Road runs north-south and connects the City of Hillsboro to
the US 26 corridor and the City of North Plains. Glencoe Road is a Washington County classified
Arterial that is also classified as a Through-Truck Route and Urban/Rural Bikeway.

The proposed improvements meet mobility standards for highways of this classification and the
plan adopts provisions to ensure that the interchange can continue to function for this purpose
over the 2030 horizon planning period and complies with the design mobility standards for
interchange ramps in. The plan will ensure safe and efficient, high-speed continuous-flow
operation for US 26.

Policy 1B: Land Use and Transportation. This policy recognizes the need for coordination
between state and local jurisdiction to provide safe and efficient transportation system consistent
with adopted comprehensive plans.

Findings
ODOT has worked cooperatively the City of North Plains and Washington County to develop the
US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP through the formation of the Project Development Team (PDT) and
participation in local transportation/land use advisory groups. ODOT, North Plains, and
Washington County also worked cooperatively to model anticipated land use conditions in the
vicinity of the interchange to ensure planned improvements to the interchange support adopted
long range land use plans and that the planed interchange improvements and local network
improvements function at levels consistent with adopted Oregon Highway Plan mobility
standards for the interchange. The land use and transportation at this location are in balance.
As such, the US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed Policy 1B.
Policy 1C: State Highway Freight System. This policy recognizes the need for the efficient
movement of freight through the state. US 26 is a designated freight route.

Findings
The transportation improvement recommendations at the Glencoe Road interchange will better
facilitate the safe and efficient movement of freight at the interchange ramp terminals. In
addition, the interchange overpass will be constructed to improve vertical clearance, ensuring the
US 26 at this location can accommodate all standard freight traffic. US 26 is classified as a
Statewide Highway by the OHP and designated as an Expressway and Statewide Freight Route.
As such, the US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed Policy 1C.

Policy 1F: Highway Mobility Standards Access Management Policy. This policy
addresses state highway performance expectations, providing guidance for managing access and
traffic control systems related to interchanges.

Findings
The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP demonstrates that the interchange will meet ODOT mobility
standards through the 2030 horizon year. It also provides an access management plan that
improves access management within the interchange influence area. Expectations for
performance were discussed ad disclosed to local businesses ad interested parties that
participated in the IAMP process. As such, the US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately
addressed Policy 1F.

Policy 1G: Major Improvements. This policy requires maintaining performance and
improving safety by improving efficiency and management before adding capacity. ODOT works
with regional and local governments to address highway performance and safety.

Findings
ODOT has worked cooperatively the City of North Plains and Washington County to develop the
US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP. The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP provides measures to increase the
safety and efficiency along Glencoe Road through improvements to the local circulation network
and access management measures.

Action 1G.1lists four levels of priority: 1)protect the existing system, 2) improve efficiency and
capacity of existing highway facilities, 3) add capacity to the existing system, 4) add new facility.
The US 26Glencoe IAMP has identified a few measures under Priority 1, including purchasing
access control to the south of the interchange, and to the north to the Highland intersection. The
plan also adopts existing comprehensive plans as the base for the plan so future rezoning or
comprehensive plan amendments will not negatively impacts operations. These measures were
not sufficient to resolve the identified problems at the interchange so Priority 2 improvements
were analyzed including widening and lengthening the westbound exit ramp, replacing the
structure to accommodate additional storage, and providing better accommodations for bicycles
and pedestrians all improve efficiency and capacity of existing highway facilities. Priority 3 and
4 improvements were not needed at this location.

The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed Policy 1G.

Goal 2: System Management, the following policies are applicable:
Policy 2B: Off-System Improvements. This policy recognizes that the state may provide
financial assistance to local jurisdictions to make improvements to local transportation systems if
the improvements would provide a cost-effective means of improving the operations of the state
highway system.

Findings
As part of the US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP, ODOT has worked closely with the City of North
Plains and Washington County to identify local circulation improvements that will improve the
safety and efficiency of the US 26/Glencoe Road interchange. The primary safety issue was to
reduce the west-bound off ramp vehicle queuing into US 26. Off-system improvements would not
reduce the queuing problem on the west bound off ramp. After reviewing options for local street
connectivity, local improvements were dropped from further consideration as they would not
address the primary safety and operational deficiencies at the interchange.

The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed Policy 2B.

Policy 2D: Public Involvement. This policy ensures that there are sufficient opportunities for
citizens, businesses, and local governments to provide input into improvement projects that affect
the state highway system.

Findings
A Project Development Team (PDT) consisting of local government representatives and a
Stakeholder Working Group (SWG) consisting of local citizens and business representatives were
convened and met regularly with the project team on the development of the US 26/Glencoe Road
IAMP. Summaries of the public meetings are provided in Appendix F and Appendix H1 of the
Volume 2 of the US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP Technical Appendices.

This information is available in Appendix H1. This effort included the following:
    · A series of four public open houses were held from June 2006 to July 2008 to discuss the
        new Glencoe Road interchange and the IAMP;
    · Citizen Advisory Committee meetings held from June 2006 to July 2008 to obtain
        feedback on a variety of project deliverables, including the purpose and need, evaluation
        criteria, interchange design concepts and draft IAMP.;
    · A newsletter sent out to individuals near the proposed project to provide information and
        notification of the public open house; and
    · A project web site was available to provide project information and upcoming open
        houses.
    · A selection of a preferred interchange concept by the Citizen Advisory Committee.

Appendix G contains the information for the public involvement of the US 26/Glencoe Road
IAMP and JTA project. The IAMP and JTA project was jointly developed by the city of North
Plains, Washington County and ODOT. This includes City's Resolution No. 1561 approving the
MOU for the JTA project and the County's MOU and Supplemental with ODOT. This
information demonstrates consistency with Goal 1.

The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed Policy 2D.

Policy 2F: Traffic Safety. This policy improves the safety of the highway system.

Findings
Two safety issues are addressed by the proposed improvement program. First, the planned
improvements replace an aging and functionally deficient (geometrically and capacity)
interchange structure that compromises highway safety by causing backups on the highway
through lanes. Second, an access management plan was developed to reduce turning conflicts in
the vicinity of the interchange and allow vehicles using or accessing the highway system to do so
with fewer interruptions. The result of this plan will be safer facilities on and off US 26.

The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed Policy 2F.

Goal 3: Access Management, the following policies are applicable:
Policy 3A: (Classification and Spacing Standards) sets access spacing standards for driveways
and approaches to the state highway system.

Policy 3C: Interchange Access Management Areas. This policy addresses management of
grade-separated interchange areas to ensure safe and efficient operation between connecting
roadways. Action items include developing interchange area management plans to protect the
function of the interchange to provide safe and efficient operations between connecting roadways
and to minimize the need for major improvements of existing interchanges. The local
jurisdiction's role in access management is stated in Policy 3C as follows: "necessary supporting
improvements, such as road networks, channelization, medians and access control in the
interchange management area must be identified in the local comprehensive plan and committed
with an identified funding source, or must be in place (Action 3C.2)."

Access management standards are detailed in Policy 3C and include the distance required
between an interchange and approaches and intersections. The most stringent standards apply in
interchange areas. Table 16 contains the minimum spacing standards applicable to the proposed
US 26/Glencoe Road interchange. The spacing standards for this type of interchange are:
    · 750 feet (230 m). Distance to the first urban approach on the right (where right in/right
        out access is allowed)
    · 1,320 feet (400 m). The distance to the first major urban intersection or approach (where
        full access is allowed) or to the first rural approach on the right (where right in/right out
        access is allowed).
    · 750 feet (230 m). The distance between the last right in/right out approach road and the
        start of the taper for the on-ramp.

Findings
The IAMP's Access Management Plan establishes a framework for access to public streets and
existing and future driveways along Glencoe Road. The Access Management Plan was jointly
developed by the City of North Plains, Washington County and ODOT. The plan was developed
to address the two distinctive characteristic of Glencoe Road.

The northern section of Glencoe is within urban boundary of the City of North Plains and the
southern section is in rural Washington County. Therefore, this plan seeks to maintain the
character of the road in the urban and rural areas.

It was a joint decision of ODOT, the City and Washington County to maintain the existing street
spacing of the urban area on Glencoe Road. ODOT will acquire full access control north of the
intersections to Highland Court. Highland Court and Pacific Street would remain as public
streets with full access. Access management north of Highland Court on Glencoe Road will be
the responsibility of the City of North Plains and Washington County. They will apply access
management per their standards and seeking driveway consolidations as new development
occurs.

ODOT will acquire access control for the full 1320' to the south of the interchange. The
southwest side of the interchange will also require a deviation from the standard to 600 feet to
the first right-in/right-out access (Beach Road) in order to provide reasonable site access to an
existing business at a location with relatively low traffic volumes.

The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP was jointly developed by the City of North Plains, Washington
County and ODOT to adequately addressed Policy 3C Access Management for the community
and provides a plan for moving in the direction of improving the existing conditions for the
community.

Goal 4: Travel Alternatives, the following policies are applicable:
Policy 4A: (Efficiency of Freight Movement). This policy emphasizes the need to maintain
and improve the efficiency of freight movement on the state highway system. The Sunset
Highway is a designated Freight Route.

Findings
The transportation improvement recommendations at the Glencoe Road interchange will better
facilitate the safe and efficient movement of freight at the interchange ramp terminals. In
addition, the interchange overpass will be constructed to improve vertical clearance to enhace
freight mobility, ensuring the US 26 can accommodate freight traffic. As such, the US 26/Glencoe
Road IAMP has adequately addressed Policy 4A.

Goal 5: Environmental and Scenic Resources, the following policies are applicable:
Policy 5B (Scenic Resources) This policy applies to all state highways and commits the State to
using best management practices to protect and enhance scenic resources in all phases of highway
project planning, development, construction and maintenance.

Findings
This policy was considered as part of the IAMP project, and will be implemented largely by
complying with other state and local policies and regulations. Wetlands were identified in the
study area in low lying areas along an unnamed tributary to McKay Creek to the north of US 26.
No impacts to these resources are anticipated. The only potential fishery resources in the study
area would be the unnamed tributary to McKay Creek, no impacts are anticipated but for the
positive impact of removing a culvert with a structure. Review of literature and field
investigations indicate that habitat for threatened and endangered species does exist in the area,
namely for Bald Eagle and Columbia White Tailed Deer, but those species are not likely to occur
in the API. Impacts to habitat are not anticipated. Goal 5 resources were mapped in the existing
conditions portion of the plan and designs were refined to avoid Goal 5 resources.

LOCAL PLANS and POLICIES

City of North Plains Transportation Systems Plan
The City of North Plains Transportation Systems Plan (TSP) adopted by the City Council June 5,
2005. A twenty-year planning horizon (2000-2020) was chosen for the study to identify future
demographic conditions from which future traffic forecasts were developed.
Chapter 3 of this report outlines the development of the North Plains TSP beginning with
a review of relevant city, county, and state plans and policies. Chapter 5 discusses the
development of a new set of design standards that will guide the direction of new facility
construction (pedestrian, bicycle and auto) in the City of North Plains. Chapter 6
identifies the changes to the existing transportation facilities that need to occur in the City
of North Plains in order to accommodate for the transportation needs in the future.

Chapter 3 Review of Plans and Policies
This chapter highlights the pervious studies that documented the need of a new Glencoe
interchange. Specifically, 3.05.00 Sunset Highway Interchange Study which was completed
by DKS Associates in August 1998 discussed the need for a new interchange, and
presented three alternatives for the Glencoe Road interchange.

Findings
The City of North Plains acknowledged to need for a new interchange to replace the existing
structure and incorporated the study into their TSP.

Chapter 5 Transportation System Alternatives
       5.01.64 Glencoe Road Interchange - On April 6, 2004, the Oregon Freight Advisory
       Committee (FAC) submitted a report to the Oregon Transportation Commission with
       recommendations for high priority freight mobility projects on Oregon's highways and
       local roads. The Glencoe Road interchange at US 26 project is included in Tier 2 of the
       list of priorities from the FAC report. The City has included the original project for
       improvements at the Glencoe Road interchange under the Funding Chapter of the TSP.
       Until such a time as the funding for the new interchange becomes certain, the City will
       then modify the priority of funding projects included in Table 7-9 of Chapter 7.

Findings
The City of North Plains acknowledged the need for the new interchange and
incorporated the alternative into the TSP.


Chapter 6 Transportation System Plan
The City of North Plains Transportation System Plan incorporates the preferred future
transportation alternative and street functional classification standards. The
Transportation System Plan includes plans for long range transportation capacity and
non-capacity improvements for the arterial/collector street system.

       6.01.00 Collector/Arterial Street Plan
       The long range transportation plan for the City of North Plains collector/arterial street
       system are defined as those projects to be completed in a 20-year time frame. These
       projects encompass auto, pedestrian/bicyclist and public transportation modes. The long-
       term transportation improvements for the North Plains area collector/arterial street system
       include two categories of projects: capacity improvements and non-capacity
       improvements.

       6.01.10 Capacity Improvements
        Future roadway capacity deficiencies were identified on collector and arterial streets
        based upon traffic generated by future land development as identified in the North Plains
        Neighbor Study and subsequent task updates on the North Plains Comprehensive Plan.
        These improvements are defined in the "2020 Future Conditions Level of Service
        Summary" Table.

Findings
The City of North Plains participated in the development of the IAMP. North Plains'
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning and Development Code and Transportation System Plan were used
to develop and refine the IAMP future baseline traffic conditions analysis under a "no-build"
scenario. This scenario illustrated how the existing Glencoe interchange and supporting study
area roadways and intersections will operate upon an assumption of future local and regional
traffic growth through the year 2030 and no improvements to the transportation network beyond
those currently identified in the adopted City of North Plains Transportation System Plans.
The future deficiencies in the traffic forecast of the City TSP identified the need to replace the
interchange. The TSP assumed the need of a new interchange to accommodate future expansion
and growth. The TSP assumed the interchange is an unfunded need.

The IAMP future traffic analysis is consistent with the TSP which indicates an
operational failure of Glencoe Road intersections within the 20-year planning horizon.
This failure can be primarily attributed to an assumption of additional commercial and
residential development on vacant or underutilized properties located along the east side
of NW Glencoe Road. To improve these intersections, the TSP has included a long-term
signalization project at the intersections.

This information demonstrates IAMP consistency with the City's TSP.


6.03.00 Bicycle/Pedestrian Plan
Future bicycle and sidewalk improvements identified in conjunction with roadway
improvements are intended to provide bicyclists and pedestrians with a full accessibility
in the City of North Plains collector/arterial street system.

        6.03.10 Bicycle/Pedestrian Facilities Projects
        1. Glencoe Road: Include bicycle lanes and sidewalks on both sides of the road. This
        would provide connectivity to the existing sidewalks and future growth to the east of
        Glencoe Road.

Findings
The IAMP primary project priorities and the Transportation Improvement Plan calls for
improving pedestrian and bicycle connectivity across the new bridge structure over US
26.

This information demonstrates IAMP consistency with the City's TSP.


6.04.00 Truck Routes
Truck routes provide for the efficient movement of goods while at the same time
maintaining neighborhood livability, public safety and minimizing maintenance costs of
the roadway system. As improvements are made to the railroad trestle on Gordon Road,
the City will be in a better position to designate a truck route to keep trucks out of the
downtown area and other residential areas. Glencoe Road, West Union Road and Gordon
Road will be part of a truck route within the City of North Plains.

The main objective is to focus on a design criteria suitable for trucks, such as maintaining
12-foot travel lanes, longer access spacing, 35 foot or larger curb returns and pavement
design that accommodates a larger share of trucks.

Findings
ODOT has worked cooperatively the City of North Plains and Washington County to develop the
US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP. The IAMP acknowledged that Glencoe Road was a freight route for
the County and City. The transportation improvement recommendations at the Glencoe Road
interchange will better facilitate the safe and efficient movement of freight at the interchange
ramp terminals. In addition, the interchange overpass will be constructed to current clearance
standards, ensuring the US 26 can accommodate all standard freight traffic. As such, the US
26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed the City's truck route designation for Glencoe
Road.

6.06.00 Policies/Land Use Regulations for Implementing the Transportation System
Plan
The City of North Plains should participate with ODOT and Washington County in the
development of their transportation system plans in order to provide for a coordinated
and consistent policy and plan, especially for those transportation facilities that cross
jurisdiction lines. In addition, as land outside the City of North Plains is developed, a
coordinated transportation/land use plan will help ensure a transportation system that
serves the need for all users.

Findings
ODOT has worked cooperatively the City of North Plains and Washington County to develop the
US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP. The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP provides measures to increase the
safety and efficiency along Glencoe Road through improvements to the local circulation network. 
To account for local traffic growth in the City of North Plains through the year 2030, a
cumulative analysis was utilized. This methodology is consistent with the methodology used in the
development of the City's TSP and involves an assessment of traffic increases related to approved
(in-process) developments, assumed infill developments, and future development based on the
adopted land uses in the City of North Plains. To account for traffic growth in the larger regional
vicinity, the Washington County Regional Transportation Planning Model was used to develop
growth rates for those traffic movements that impact the Glencoe interchange and surrounding
roadway network.

The US 26/Glencoe Road IAMP has adequately addressed Policies/Land Use Regulations for
Implementing the Transportation System Plan.
North Plains Comprehensive Plan
ORD. 331 - Adopted: February 7, 2005
15.01.030 Vision Statement Introduction
The people of the City of North Plains have seen many changes in their community. They
and have decided to create this Vision Statement as the foundational document.

15.02.010 Citizen Involvement
The opportunity for the active participation of the residents and landowners of an area in
the preparation of a community's comprehensive plan is not just mandated by state law,
but is also the only realistic means of assuring that the community's planning efforts will
be worthwhile and meaningful endeavors.

Findings
As discussed in the Statewide Land Use Goals findings, the public involvement process
included two open houses for public participation. In addition, telephone contacts were
provided in meeting notices. Appendix G and H1 of the Volume 2 of US 26/Glencoe Road
IAMP Technical Appendices contains a summary of the public involvement efforts that were
undertaken as part of the JTA and IAMP project.

15.02.020 Land Use Planning
To insure an adequate supply of land for residential, commercial and industrial
development purposes as well as land for uses related that provide for a complete
community such as open space, institutional, public/private facility, community service,
historic uses, the following categories have been developed for use in the comprehensive
plan map, which will provide the basis for the City's zoning map

       15.02.025 City Objectives and Policies:
       4. Objective: The Comprehensive Plan shall be the basis for specific
       implementation measures which shall be consistent with and adequate to carry out
       the comprehensive plan.
       A. Policies:
       (1) Development proposals will be required to conform to the City's Zoning,
       Subdivision, and Design Review Ordinances.

Findings
The Glencoe Road IAMP was prepared jointly by the City of North Plains, Washington County
and ODOT and coordination between the three agencies took place routinely throughout the
process. The IAMP used the City's Comprehensive Plan and Zoning designations and
requires to develop the future 2030 no-build traffic volumes and to develop the
interchange concept.

This information demonstrates consistency of the development of the IAMP with the City's Land
Use Objective and Policy.

15.02.101 Transportation
The Sunset Highway is the major regional route connecting North Plains with the
Portland metropolitan area and suburbs. Residents utilize the private automobile almost
exclusively as a means of getting to work or shopping,

        15.02.105 CITY OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
        1. Objective: Provide a system of road and other forms of transportation which
        link each part of the community into a unified whole, and one which will safely,
        efficiently, and economically move traffic to and through the area in a manner
        that is consistent with the City's livability objectives when the City is fully
        urbanized.
        A. Policies:
        B. Street Classifications
        (1) Arterial: Design Criteria: Five-foot sidewalks, six-foot bike lanes, and two
        twelve-foot travel lanes with a twelve-foot median where applicable. In
        commercial areas sidewalks preferred from curb to property line. The following
        roads should be classified as Arterial in the City of North Plains:
            · · Glencoe Road

Findings
The Glencoe Road IAMP was prepared jointly by the City of North Plains, Washington County
and ODOT and coordination between the three agencies took place routinely throughout the
process.  City Comprehensive Plan contains the City's Objectives and Policies for Street Design
Standards will be applied to the future design of Glencoe Road. The street classification of
Glencoe Road is arterial.

This information demonstrates consistency with the City's TSP Objective and policy for street
classification.


North Plains Zoning and Development Ordinance
ORD. 347 - Adopted: February 6, 2006
The City of North Plains participated in the development of the IAMP. North Plains'
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning and Development Code and Transportation System Plan were used
to develop and refine the IAMP future baseline traffic conditions analysis under a "no-build"
scenario. This scenario illustrated how the existing Glencoe interchange and supporting study
area roadways and intersections will operate upon an assumption of future local and regional
traffic growth through the year 2030 and no improvements to the transportation network beyond
those currently identified in the adopted City of North Plains Transportation System Plans.
The future deficiencies in the traffic forecast of the City TSP and the IAMP identified the need to
replace the interchange, add turning lanes and transition from two-way stop control to all-way
stop control and installing a traffic signal or a roundabout. The city and its UGB areas the TSP
assumed the need of a new interchange to accommodate future expansion and growth. The TSP
assumed the interchange is an unfunded need.


Findings
The OAR 734-051-0155, requires local jurisdictions to amend their Transportation System Plans
(TSPs) to include relevant elements of the IAMP is not necessary, because the City's TSP
assumed the interchange improvements and the policies and zoning ordinances are consistent
with the IAMP. The City of North Plains TSP proposed Classification System (Figure 5-1)
provides a street system adequate to accommodate the IAMP.
The IAMP will be implemented per the adopted City Comprehensive Plan, Zoning and
Development Code and Transportation System Plan.




WASHINGTON COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

The Washington County Comprehensive Plan is a collection of community plans, a transportation
plan, and a rural/natural resource plan. The plans and ordinances describe the future development
of rural and urban areas in the county. Washington County applies land use designations (zoning)
throughout its jurisdiction to locate land uses where they are most appropriate for rural areas such
as the Glencoe Road IAMP study area, farm and forests zones are the dominant designation to
preserve the character of the land. The county's land use designations are enforced through the
application of its Community Development Code.

The land use policies for the Staley's Junction area are contained in the Rural/Natural Resource
element of the Washington County Comprehensive Plan. The Rural/Natural Resource element
provides the framework for guiding future use decisions in the areas outside the established urban
growth boundaries (UGB). Appendix C includes a discussion of the County's Policies for the
Rural/Natural Resource Plan.
Rural/Natural Resource Plan

The Rural/Natural Resource Plan is a set of policies that protect natural resource land, provide
rural residential land for housing, and provide rural commercial lands to support rural agricultural
and forest activities. The plan designates land in the project area as Agriculture and Forest 5 acres
minimum (AF-5), Agriculture and Forest 10 acres minimum (AF-10), Agriculture and Forest 20
acres minimum (AF-20), Rural Residential (RR-5), Rural Industrial (R-IND) and Rural
Commercial (R-COM). These designations are defined in the Washington County Community
Development Code.

The Rural/Natural Resource Plan has several policy statements for the plan designations in the
study area. The policies describe the county's mission of protecting forest and agricultural lands,
while recognizing the future needs for small-scale agricultural production and rural commercial
development. The policies are as follows:

Policy 15, Exclusive Farm Lands: It is the policy of Washington County to conserve and maintain
agricultural lands for farm uses consistent with existing and future needs for agricultural products,
forest management and open space. Exceptions to this policy may be allowed pursuant to the
provisions of LCDC Goal 2, OAR Chapter 660 Division 04, and the applicable plan amendment
criteria in Policy 1.

Policy 17, Agriculture and Forest-20 Lands: It is the policy of Washington County to designate
those lands as Agriculture and Forest-20 that were zoned AF-5 and AF-10 by the 1973
Comprehensive Framework Plan and for which a Goal 2 Exception has not been provided, and in
doing so strive to retain small scale and part-time agriculture and forest production. Exceptions to
this policy may be allowed pursuant to the provisions of LCDC Goal 2, OAR Chapter 660
Division 04, and the applicable plan amendment criteria in Policy 1. (Agriculture and Forest-20
Land includes the AF-20 zone.)

Policy 18, Rural Lands: It is the policy of Washington County to recognize existing development
and provide lands which allow rural development in areas which are developed and/or committed
to development of a rural character. (Rural lands include the AF-5, AF-10, R-IND and R-COM
zones.)

Findings
The stated purpose of the Glencoe Road IAMP is to protect the function of the new interchange
facility. Adoption of the IAMP by Washington County adopts policies that regulate land use and
development within the vicinity of the interchange in order to ensure continued safety and
efficiency at the Glencoe Road interchange. This project and the Washington County land use
planning regulations are anticipated to be compatible. The policies clearly support and strive to
retain small scale rural character to conserve and maintain agricultural activities and forest
lands consistent with the existing and future needs for agricultural development, forest
management and open space.

It is the County's policy to encourage retention of the rural character of the surrounding area.
The Rural/Natural Resource Plan Element specifically requires the County to recognize the need
for rural development to support the rural character of the area. The County will ensure that
development will not adversely affect the surrounding agricultural and forest activities.

While the surrounding land use districts permit a wide variety of potential land uses, some of
which could have higher trip generation rates, the districts of the IAMP are within a rural area
and urban uses are not allowed. Therefore, all potential land uses must support the rural
character and will not adversely affect the surrounding agricultural and forest activities.

The uses allowed in the AF-20 and EFU resource districts are based on statutorily allowed uses
on farmland (ORS 215.213 (1) and (2)) and uses permitted under Oregon Administrative Rules
for farm lands ( OAR 660, Division 33) and forest lands (OAR 660 Division 6). The statutory and
administrative rule provisions are designed to protect rural resource lands from development
that would interfere with farm and/or forest uses. The provisions provide certainty and, because
they limit potential development, help ensure that future development is consistent with the
planned function and capacity of the proposed interchange.

The County supports land uses in the vicinity of the Glencoe Road interchange consistent with the
land use assumptions in the IAMP, and consistent with the stated function of the interchange as
described in the IAMP.

Consistent with Policy 16, 17, and 18 the county supports continued land use designations in the
immediate vicinity of Glencoe Road interchange to include resource districts (AF-20 and EFU)
and exception areas (AF-200, AF-5, RR-5 and R-COM) resource uses of the land. A proposal to
change the land use designations of resource land would require an exception to the Statewide
Land Use Planning Goal 3 (Agricultural Lands) and Goal 4 (Forest Lands).

The County will provide notice to ODOT for any land use action proposed within the IAMP
management area in compliance with existing provisions that would occur within 1000 feet of an
ODOT facility.

WASHINGTON COUNTY 2020 TRANSPORTATION PLAN

The Washington County 2020 Transportation Plan establishes transportation policies, capital
improvement projects, and transportation-related programs necessary to support growth.
Attention is focused on urban commuting transportation issues as well as traffic, maintenance,
and safety issues. The Transportation Plan links land use to transportation and reflects a
commitment to efficient use of land and to a safe, cost-effective transportation system that serves
all forms of travel. The Plan represents a balance between the need to maintain existing
infrastructure and the need to keep pace with expected growth in the county. The Transportation
Plan contains the accumulation of recommended system and service improvements and programs
that will be needed to serve long-term growth to 2020.

The Washington County Transportation Plan includes five general policies and multiple, mode-
specific policies to address county transportation needs. The plan outlines the classification of
roadways in the county and identifies funding and implementation policies to define a plan for
system improvements.

The Transportation Plan does not identify specific improvements for the Glencoe Road
interchange area; however, several general principles of the policies are applicable. The Sunset
Highway is a Principal Arterials under the Washington County Functional Classification System
and also identified as existing through truck routes. Additionally, the highway is indicated as
bicycle routes in the TSP. Hence, the facility serve important roles in rural Washington County
and planning for improvements must accommodate balanced service for the various users.
Glencoe Road is designated as a County arterial street and a countywide through-truck routes in
the Transportation Plan. The facility serve important roles in rural Washington County and
planning for improvements must accommodate balanced service for the various users.

Freight Element
It is recognized that the transportation of freight is served primarily by truck traffic and that a
network of through routes must be supported to accommodate truck traffic. The TSP emphasizes
safety and cost-effectiveness of freight transportation. Specific strategies include coordinated
planning, development, and maintenance with the private sector and other public agencies, and
identification and correction of roadway design deficiencies that affect the safe and efficient
movement of freight on the through-truck route system.

The Washington County TSP emphasizes transportation planning that includes coordination with
other agencies and public involvement to achieve balanced goals, and periodic plan reviews to
ensure that the TSP is updated to reflect changes in the transportation system and priorities.

Findings
The Glencoe Road IAMP was developed in response to safety and operational efficiency issues
with the existing interchange. The existing structure lacked turn lanes and bicycle/pedestrian
accommodations on the existing two-lane Glencoe Road over-crossing. The most significant
safety issue is that the existing westbound off-ramp is not long enough to safely accommodate
vehicles using the interchange thus creating backups onto US 26.

The new interchange will rectify the problem and providing safe traffic flow for the vehicles
existing westbound off-ramp and crossing over the highway. The interchange project will result
in better mobility at the junction, thereby improving freight movement.

The Glencoe Road IAMP was prepared jointly by Washington County and ODOT, and
coordination between the two agencies took place routinely throughout the process. The IAMP
and the interchange concepts were reviewed by both to ensure that they meet the objectives of all
of the jurisdictions.


WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE

The Washington County Community Development Code (CDC) is a compilation of standards
that regulate specific aspects of development and the development process. The code regulates
land development activities in the unincorporated areas of Washington County.

As described above, Washington County's Rural/Natural Resource Plan and Community
Development Code designate the areas in the Glencoe Road IAMP study area as AF-5, AF-10,
AF-20, EFC, R-IND and RCOM. The county's descriptions of the intent and purpose of these
zones are provided below, followed by the Code's administrative review procedures for public
facility and transportation projects. The allowed uses in each zone are listed in Appendix 1.

Article III Land Use Districts
Agriculture and Forest:
The AF-5 and AF-10 Districts are intended to retain an area's rural character and conserve the
natural resources while providing for rural residential use in areas so designated by the
Comprehensive Plan. The AF-10 District is appropriate in rural lands with steep topographic
characteristics where there are limited public facilities and services. The intent of the Exclusive
Agriculture and Forest AF-20 District is to provide an exclusive farm use zone within the County
which recognizes that certain lands therein may be marginal. This AF-20 District is provided to
meet Oregon statutory and administrative rule requirements.

The purpose of the agricultural and forestry districts are to promote agricultural and forest uses on
small parcels in the rural area, while recognizing the need to retain the character and economic
viability of agricultural and forest lands, as well as recognizing that existing parcelization and
diverse ownerships and uses exist within the farm and forest area. Residents of rural residential
tracts shall recognize that they will be subject to normal and accepted farming and forestry
practices.
Exclusive Forest and Conservation District: The Exclusive Forest and Conservation District is
intended to provide for forest uses and to provide for the continued use of lands for renewable
forest resource production, retention of water resources, recreation, agriculture and other related
or compatible uses, as set forth in Statewide Planning Goal 4, OAR 660-06 and ORS 215.

The purpose of this District is to encourage forestry as the dominant use of such lands, to
conserve and manage efficiently the forest resources of the County and to prohibit uses of land
which are not compatible with the management and development of forest resources, in order to
minimize the potential for damage from fire, pollution, soil erosion and conflict caused by
development. This District is suited for application to forest land as well as associated scenic
lands, recreation land, wildlife habitat or other sensitive land forms or watershed areas.

The EFC District is provided to meet Oregon statutory requirements for forest lands. Uses
permitted by the Forest Practices Act are not subject to the requirements of this Section.

Rural Commercial:
The intent and purpose of the Rural Commercial District is to implement the rural commercial
policies of the Comprehensive Plan and to meet convenience goods and service needs of rural
residents while protecting the historic character of rural centers and the agricultural or forestry
character of the area. Rural Commercial centers shall be designed to be compatible with the
surrounding environment and generally not to exceed five (5) acres.

Rural Industrial District:
The purpose of the district is to provide for the processing and manufacture of timber and forest
related products, farm crops and produce, minerals and aggregates near the resources, and for the
repair of mechanical equipment related to farm and forest uses. Rural Industrial Districts shall be
designed to be compatible with the surrounding environment and generally not to exceed five (5)
acres.

Findings:
The IAMP will not adversely affect the County's designated Article III Land Use District. The
future land use and traffic projects for the IAMP were based on the assumed allowable uses in
the Rural/Natural Resources and the Community Development Code.

Article V: Public Facilities and Services:
Article V of the CDC addresses public facilities and services, and access management
requirements. The access management section of the article is not applicable to the construction
of the interchange itself, but is applicable to land use development, subdivisions, and partitions.
The article states that all developments have legal access to a County or public road. However, an
access permit must be obtained before access onto a County or public road is granted.

Article V lists access spacing standards for local streets, neighborhood routes, collectors, and
arterials. The article provides specific access spacing standards for each functional roadway
classification. The TSP classifies the Sunset and Nehalem highways as principal arterials.
According to Article V, principal arterials must be designed and developed as limited access
facilities. Access to a Principal Arterial is subject to approval by ODOT through the State's
Access Management Policy and its implementing measures.
Article VII Public Transportation Facilities

Article VII of the CDC addresses the County's transportation facilities. The intent of this Article
is to identify public transportation improvements that are subject to development review and
establish the standards and procedures for such review. This Article applies to project
development for the design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair and preservation of
public transportation facilities including roadways and bridges, and transit, bicycle and pedestrian
facilities authorized by the Washington County TSP. Article VII has four categories of public
transportation improvement projects, Exempt Project and Categories A-C. Article VII identifies
the replacement of an intersection with an interchange as a Category B project in the AF-5, AF-
10, and R-COM Districts outside of a UGB and a Category C project in the AF20 and EFC
Districts outside of a UGB. The replacement of an intersection with an interchange is an allowed
use in all of the zones. Washington County defines Category B and Category C projects as
follows:

Category B Projects:
Projects that involve land use criteria that are reasonably objective and generally require only
limited discretion or judgment. Category B projects are assumed to be appropriate in the District.
Decisions authorizing Category B projects are land use decisions.

Category C Projects:
Projects that involve land use criteria that require the exercise of a more significant level of
discretion and judgment. Category C projects generally have more significant impacts or involve
more complex land use issues. Decisions authorizing Category C projects are land use decisions.

Article VII specifies additional standards for the replacement of an intersection with an
interchange in the AF-20, EFU, and EFC Districts (a Category C project). The project must
identify reasonable design build alternatives that are safe and can be constructed at a reasonable
cost, must assess the effects of the identified alternatives on farm and forest practices, and must
select the identified alternative that has the least impact on farm and forest lands in the immediate
vicinity. Additionally, the project must not force a significant change in accepted farm or forest
practices or significantly increase the cost of accepted farm or forest practices on surrounding
lands. The Staley's Junction IAMP project is anticipated to comply with these standards.

Washington County reviews and processes Category B projects in the same manner as Type II
actions. Washington County requires a pre-application conference and public notice and comment
period for a Type II review. The Planning Director will issue a decision on the application.

The replacement of an intersection with an interchange may be elevated by the Director of
Community Development to a Category C project. Washington County reviews and processes
Category C projects in the same manner as Type III actions. A public notice and comment period
is also required for a Type III action. The Hearings Officer or Planning Commission will make a
final decision on a Type III action. However, if the application requires a quasi-judicial plan
amendment, the Board of Commissioners will make a decision on the application. The Board of
Commissioner's decision may be appealed. A Project Review Committee will act in a technical
advisory capacity and review all public transportation improvement applications subject to
Article VII.

Findings
The Article VI review process will be required for the construction of the interchange. The IAMP
is a policy/planning document that does not require the submittal for an Article VII review. At
the time the development of a final design of the interchange ODOT will be required to submit for
the review. At the time the development of a final design of the interchange ODOT will be
required to submit for the review.

In Washington County, proposals for the construction of transportation improvements are
reviewed as a distinct type of development proposal separate from uses in the underlying land use
district. Proposed public road improvement, such as the Staley's Junction interchange are
reviewed under Article VII of the CDC.
    · Section 701.1 states that transportation improvements are permitted in each district and
         subject only to the standards in Article VII.
    · Section 705-2 of the CDC lists different types of projects that are permitted as Category
         C projects when they are outside of the UGB. The proposed improvements are permitted
         by three project-type descriptors:
    · Section 705-2.1.A identifies "Replacement of a public road or highway" as a permitted
         use.
The ODOT will demonstrates consistency with the Article VI review process when the
interchange design is developed and submitted to the County for review.
Appendix B 
 
Existing and Future Land Use Conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM 6


US 26: Sunset Highway at Glencoe Road--
Glencoe Road Interchange and Local Improvements:
Land Use Affected Environment
PREPARED FOR:           Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT)
                        Tom Braibish/ODOT Region 1
PREPARED BY:            DJ Heffernan and Shayna Rehberg/Angelo Eaton & Associates
COPIES:                 Amy Gibbons/ODOT
PROJECT NUMBER:         341373.03.04.01
DATE:                   May 31, 2006


The purpose of this memorandum is to describe the current and potential future land uses
in the City of North Plains, in the rural area directly south of the city and the Glencoe Road
Interchange, and in other areas in the vicinity of the interchange that could affect
interchange function and performance. In particular, the descriptions focus on the
properties adjacent to Glencoe Road, from North Avenue south through town and across
the interchange with Sunset Highway to the intersection at Beach Road.
Descriptions of land uses along Pacific Street, 307th Avenue, and Highland Court east of
Glencoe Road also are provided, in the event that rerouting freight traffic in the area is
considered. This area is combined with the properties adjacent to Glencoe Road to form
what is referred to in this report as the Glencoe Road corridor. Figure 1 depicts the Glencoe
Road corridor.
Additionally, the current and potential future land uses adjacent to Sunset Highway in
North Plains between Glencoe Road and Gordon Road are described. See Figure 1 for an
illustration of the properties that are included in the Sunset Highway corridor.
Existing land uses were recorded during a field visit to the City of North Plains on March
24, 2006. Observations from the field visit have been confirmed and supplemented by land
use data from the Regional Land Information System (RLIS) developed by Metro (Metro,
2006). Zoning and Comprehensive Plan designations, the basis for discussion of potential
future land uses, were provided by both RLIS and the city's zoning map found online.

Land Use
Existing Land Use
North Plains has a full range of land uses, including industrial, residential, and commercial.
In this analysis, land uses in the city generally are described in relation to major
transportation facilities.




                                                                                             6-1
US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT



Inside the city of North Plains, Glencoe Road runs north­south through the eastern part of
the city, and it is lined predominantly by auto-oriented commercial uses. A few clusters of
single-family residential uses and some vacant land also front the roadway through town,
although development of vacant parcels and conversion of residences is supplanting these
uses.
Agricultural uses and a small number of rural industrial and commercial uses are located
adjacent to Glencoe Road south of the city across the Sunset Highway interchange. To the
north of the city, Glencoe Road becomes Shadybrook Road. Glencoe Road also serves as an
access route to the cities of Hillsboro, Cornelius, and Forest Grove. Agricultural uses are
predominant along this route south from the interchange.
The Portland & Western (P & W) rail line is an important short line that is used to transport
finished lumber products from a large mill complex in North Plains. The rail line runs east­
west through the city, and the transportation corridor mainly abuts industrial uses. To the
west of Glencoe Road, the rail line closely parallels Commercial Street and passes just north
of the downtown center. The east end of the downtown has a mix of public agency,
commercial, and residential uses, while the west end of the downtown transitions into the
city's main industrial area.1 East of Glencoe Road, Commercial Street becomes West Union
Road, which is a major county arterial road that eventually becomes an urban arterial in the
metropolitan areas east of North Plains. Along this corridor, West Union Road is lined by
industrial and agricultural land and holding zones for possible future urban development.
North Avenue coincides with the city's current northern boundary, but it abuts a large 75-
acre tract of agricultural land that is designated as a holding zone for future urban
development (FD10). This land was approved for inclusion in the North Plains urban
growth boundary (UGB) in October 2002. North Avenue itself is predominantly fronted by
residential uses and that pattern is expected to continue.
Gordon Road runs north­south and coincides with the city's western boundary. Within the
city, uses along Gordon Road are industrial or residential, and across the road on the west
side, land is outside the UGB and in agricultural production. An unnamed tributary of
McKay Creek crosses beneath Gordon Road north of Lenox Street, and wetlands associated
with the stream are found on property on both sides of Gordon Road. Gordon Road runs
north from the city limits and then curves west where it becomes Mountaindale Road.
Mountaindale Road provides access to Pumpkin Ridge Golf Club, which occasionally holds
major local and national golfing events. Gordon Road crosses Sunset Highway via an
overpass and continues along a southerly alignment to Beach Street. Land uses between the
overpass and Beach Road are either agricultural or rural residential.

Land Use Designations
Comprehensive Plan and zoning maps are shown in Figures 2 and 3. Zoning in North Plains
follows the underlying Comprehensive Plan designations. Table 1 gives a general
breakdown of land inside the city limits according to zoning districts.




1 The homes found here are nonconforming uses in the highway commercial (C2) zone.



6-2
                                                                                                         US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
                                                                 GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT


 FIGURE 1
 Lots in the Glencoe Road Corridor and Sunset Highway Corridor




Source: Metro, 2006 and City of North Plains zoning map (2005)



                                                                                                                                             6-3
                                                                                         US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
                                                 GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT




TABLE 1
Land Use Designations and Acreage for Lots in the City of North Plains
     Land Use Category                  Number of Lots               Tax Assessor Acreage            Map Area Acreage

Commercial                                        92                           37.11                          47.50

Industrial                                        60                         184.16                          155.52

Residential                                      589                         185.97                          209.06

TOTAL                                            741                         407.24                          412.08

Source: Metro, 2006, City of North Plains zoning map (2005), and field visit (3/24/06)
a
  Tax assessor acreage as reported in RLIS (Metro, 2006).
b
  Area of tax lot calculated by measuring area of the tax lot polygon in geographic information system (GIS).


Glencoe Road Corridor and Sunset Highway Corridor. The following sections describe land
uses in greater detail and their relationship to general use categories for two subareas: the
Glencoe Road corridor and the Sunset Highway corridor.

·    Glencoe Road corridor--Glencoe Road from North Avenue to Beach Road, and Pacific
     Street, 307th Avenue, and Highland Court east of Glencoe Road

·    Sunset Highway corridor--the north side of Sunset Highway from Glencoe Road to
     Gordon Road
Tables 2 and 3 provide an overview of the amount of land in different uses by zone in the
Glencoe Road corridor and the Sunset Highway corridor, respectively. These corridors are
featured in Figure 1. Detailed tables of lot-by-lot data for the Glencoe Road corridor--
including tax lot ID, building and property value, zoning, and acreage--are included in this
report as Attachment 1.

TABLE 2
Land Use Designations, Existing Land Uses, and Acreage for Lots in Glencoe Road Corridor
                                                                                    Tax Assessor              Map Area
    Land Use Category             Type of Use             Number of Lots              Acreagea                Acreageb

Inside City of North Plains

Residential                                                     43                       24.21                    24.09

                               Residential                      38                       19.18                    19.23

                               Vacant                            5                        5.03                     4.86

Commercial                                                      28                       29.58                    30.26
                                             c
                               Commercial                       14                       16.75                    17.03

                               Residential                       7                        6.02                     6.45

                               Vacant                            7                        6.81                     6.79

Industrial                     Industrial                        2                        4.50                     4.55

Subtotal                                                          73                       58.29                  58.90




                                                                                                                             6-5
US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT




TABLE 2
Land Use Designations, Existing Land Uses, and Acreage for Lots in Glencoe Road Corridor
                                                                                 Tax Assessor    Map Area
      Land Use Category            Type of Use          Number of Lots             Acreagea      Acreageb

Outside City of North Plains

Future Development                                             5                     2.39            2.22

                                Industrial/Instituti           1                     1.23            1.21
                                onal

                                Rural                          4                     1.16            1.01

Agricultural/Forestry                                          7                   136.05          138.34

                                Rural/Agricultural             4                   119.63          122.02

                                Commercial                     1                     2.93            3.01

                                Vacant                         2                    13.49           13.32

Rural Commercial                                               3                     1.01            1.11

                                Commercial                     1                     0.5             0.53

                                Vacant                         2                     0.51            0.58

Rural Industrial                Industrial                     1                    10.41           10.57

Subtotal                                                      16                   149.86          152.242

TOTAL                                                         89                   208.15          211.14

Source: Metro, 2006 and field visit (3/24/06)
a
  Tax assessor acreage as reported in RLIS (Metro, 2006).
b
  Area of tax lot calculated by measuring area of the tax lot polygon in GIS.
c
  This includes one lot that was vacant when viewed during the March 24, 2006, field visit, but was posted as
  the future site of the North Plains Center.




6-6
                                                                                                         US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
                                                                 GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT

 FIGURE 2
 City and County Comprehensive Plan Designations




Source: Metro, 2006 and City of North Plains zoning map (2005)




                                                                                                                                             6-7
                                                                                                         US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
                                                                 GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT


FIGURE 3
City Zoning




Source: Metro, 2006 and City of North Plains zoning map (2005)




                                                                                                                                             6-9
US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT




TABLE 3
Land Use Designations, Existing Land Uses, and Acreage for Lots in Sunset Highway Corridor
                                                                                 Tax Assessor           Map Area
  Land Use Category                 Type of Use            Number of Lots          Acreagea             Acreageb

INSIDE CITY OF NORTH PLAINS

Residential                                                       11                  12.91                19.26

                               Residential                         8                   9.85                16.19

                               Public                              1                   1.00                 1.00

                               Vacant                              2                   2.06                 2.07

Commercial                                                         4                   6.29                 6.36

                               Commercial                          2                   2.28                 2.30

                               Vacant                              2                   4.01                 4.06

Industrial                                                         9                  15.08                14.24

                               Industrial                          2                   3.44                 2.81

                               Commercial                          1                   1.06                 1.09

                               Vacant                              6                  10.58                10.34

Subtotal                                                          24                  34.28                39.86

OUTSIDE CITY OF NORTH PLAINSc

Agricultural/Rural                                                 1                   4.26                 4.31

Subtotal                                                           1                   4.26                 4.31

Total                                                             25                  38.54                44.17

Source: Metro, 2006 and field visit (3/24/06)
a
  Tax assessor acreage as reported in RLIS (Metro, 2006).
b
  Area of tax lot calculated by measuring area of the tax lot polygon in GIS.
c
  This refers to a single lot that is outside the city limits but adjacent to Sunset Highway and Gordon Road.


Residential Lands
Glencoe Road. According to city zoning and Comprehensive Plan designations, residential uses
in the Glencoe Road corridor are concentrated at the very northern end of Glencoe Road (north
of Commercial Street­West Union Road near the current city limits) and for the eastern half of
the block east of Glencoe Road between Pacific Street and Highland Court. Residential
development here includes a few flag lots, a subdivision on land zoned residential (R7.5) with
access to Glencoe Road via a private road, and a site on the southeast corner of Glencoe Road
and North Avenue that is platted for a subdivision that is under construction. A few blocks of
vacant and redevelopable land that is zoned for residential use are located just east of Glencoe
Road on West Union Road.
There are religious and community land uses situated within four blocks of Glencoe Road north
of Commercial Street. St. Edward Catholic Church is sited on a lot at 313th Avenue and Wascoe
Street, and a city park and community center is located at 311th and Hillcrest.



                                                                                                                   6-11
US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT



South of Commercial Street­West Union Road, Glencoe Road transitions to a highway
commercial corridor. Within this corridor there are a few nonconforming residential uses
interspersed with vacant lots and developed commercial uses on both sides of Glencoe Road.
The land adjacent to Glencoe Road between Commercial Street­West Union Road and Pacific
Street is regulated by the city's highway commercial (C2) zone. However, the area southwest of
Glencoe Road and Pacific Avenue adjacent to the interchange falls under a residential zone
(R10). There are several single-family homes, in varying conditions, that front Glencoe Road
close to the interchange. These all fall within the C2 zone and are nonconforming.
South of the interchange, one single-family residential home on county land zoned
agricultural/forestry (AF5) fronts Glencoe Road at Beach Road. Other lots zoned AF5 in this
area are either vacant or in rural residential use.

Pacific Street, 307th Avenue, and Highland Court. The eastern half of the block of land
circumscribed by Glencoe Road, 307th Avenue, Pacific Street, and Highland Court is zoned for
residential use (R2.5) and is either vacant or developed with single-family residences. There is a
small subdivision near the intersection of Pacific Street and Glencoe Road that accesses Pacific
Street via a private road (Curtis). One large vacant residential lot (2.2 acres) fronts both
Highland Court and 307th Avenue. There is also a very large residential lot (10.9 acres) located
between 307th Avenue and the eastern city boundary that appears to have only one single-
family home and the rest of the lot dedicated to orchards, a nonconforming use in the
residential zone (R2.5).
One nonconforming residential use occurs in the commercial zone (C2) on the north side of
Pacific Street, across from the small subdivision.

Sunset Highway. In the land adjacent to the north of Sunset Highway in the City of North Plains,
residential uses are interspersed with commercial and industrial uses as well as vacant and
resource land. One rural residence on farmland is located west of Gordon Road where it passes
over Sunset Highway. Most single-family residences are found in a residential zone (R2.5) along
314th Avenue. Otherwise, residential uses in this corridor are concentrated in a mobile home
park. In all, about 12 acres between five different tax lots belong to the mobile home park. One
of the tax lots that fronts Pacific Street is vacant at the street front where the unnamed tributary
to McKay Creek passes under the road.

Commercial Lands
Glencoe Road. Lots adjacent to Glencoe Road within the city limits are primarily zoned for
commercial use. Commercial uses also are concentrated in downtown North Plains, on
Commercial Street to the west of Glencoe Road. The northern end of the commercial zone on
Glencoe Road is marked by three vacant commercial lots surrounding the intersection with
Commercial Street­West Union Road. 2 The fourth corner is developed as a restaurant, the Old
Hitchin' Post.
Commercial land on the east side of Glencoe Road between Kaybern Street and Pacific Street is
a mixture of nonconforming single-family residences and small commercial uses. There is a
large vacant lot (5.8 acres) fronting the east side of Glencoe Road that is planned for a
commercial retail development called North Plains Center. This lot also has frontage in two
places on Pacific Street. There is a corner lot auto-repair and U-Haul rental shop at the

2 One of these lots, on the northeast corner, is a single 0.75-acre lot with split zoning (C2 and R10). This lot is for sale.


6-12
                                                                                               US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
                                                       GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT



intersection of Glencoe Road and Pacific Street. On the west side of Glencoe Road is a
combination of one nonconforming residential use, a bank, a small strip commercial center, a
medical clinic, and approximately 1 acre of vacant land that is being marketed for lease. 3
The block south of Pacific Street on the west side of Glencoe Road includes a large corner lot
(1.7 acres) that is vacant, a Subway sandwich shop, and a Chevron gas station, market, and
drive-through coffee kiosk. The east side of Glencoe Road on this block is a mixture of
commercial and nonconforming residential uses. There is also one large vacant commercial lot
(1.6 acres) on this block with frontage on both Glencoe Road and Highland Court.
The lots directly north of the Glencoe Road Interchange are zoned commercial and have access
onto Glencoe Road within 600 feet of the interchange.4 On the west side of Glencoe Road is a
McDonald's fast food restaurant and a vacant lot adjacent to a stream and wetland that are, in
turn, adjacent to the highway. A Union 76 gas-station and market are located on the east side;
the market shares a wall with a sheet metal shop. These uses take access directly onto Glencoe
Road but also have access along Highland Street.
An Arco gas station and market are currently the only commercial uses fronting Glencoe Road
south of the interchange. The gas station and market are allowed uses in the rural commercial
designation given to the site. The lot takes access on Glencoe Road less than 200 feet from the
US 26 eastbound on-ramp.5 Across from the gas station is a 0.5-acre lot that is being marketed
for lease; this lot also is designated for rural commercial use.

Pacific Street, 307th Avenue, and Highland Court. Pacific Street and Highland Court both have
land zoned commercial (C2) facing onto them. The commercial lot fronting Highland Court is
the site of the Union 76 gas station, market, and sheet metal shop that also take access from
Glencoe Road. Otherwise, the lots fronting Pacific Street between Glencoe Road and 307th
Avenue are all zoned commercial. Only one of these lots is currently in commercial use
(housing the auto-repair and U-Haul rental shop). The other two lots are vacant and in
nonconforming residential use. The large vacant lot (1.6 acres) that fronts Glencoe Road on this
block also has frontage on Highland Court.

Sunset Highway. There were two structures observed in this corridor associated with industrial
uses or found within the city's industrial zones (M1 and M2). Both were offices, sited in
converted houses, on lots with frontage on Gordon Road north of the Sunset Highway
overpass.

Industrial Lands
Glencoe Road. Currently, there are no industrial uses or zoning in the lots immediately adjacent
to Glencoe Road within the city limits of North Plains.6 However, Glencoe Road carries
industrial and truck traffic from industrial land in the southeast corner of the city fronting
Highland Court and 307th Avenue. Annexation of industrial land along West Union Road on
the east side of the city may increase the intensity of industrial use and truck traffic traveling to

3 This vacant commercial land is not located on its own lot; it is part of one 2.8-acre tax lot divided between three uses: the
commercial center, medical clinic, and vacant land, which is being actively marketed.
4 In terms of Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) access management standards, midway between Pacific Street and
Cottage on Glencoe Road is approximately 1,320 feet from the ramps on the north side of the interchange.
5 South of the interchange, 1,320 feet from the ramps occurs well south of the intersection of Glencoe Road and Beach Road.
6 One minor exception would be the light industrial use (a sheet metal shop) that shares a building with the Union 76 gas station
market that fronts Glencoe Road between the interchange and Highland Court.

                                                                                                                                    6-13
US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT



and from this area. Traffic from this area has a choice of accessing Sunset Highway using either
Glencoe Road or by traveling east on West Union Road to the Old Jackson School Road
interchange.
Although not within the Glencoe Road corridor, the greatest concentration of industrial uses is
located in the center and western portion of the city (led by North Plains Forest Products, Inc.).
The Glencoe Road Interchange provides the nearest access to Sunset Highway for these uses,
and so Glencoe Road carries most of the truck and other traffic associated with these businesses.
Industrial land is also found south of the interchange. A lot zoned rural industrial is located
adjacent to the eastbound off-ramp of the interchange with frontage on Glencoe Road and
Beach Road. The lot is the site of Jewett-Cameron Seed Company, a feed and grain operation
that is allowed in the underlying rural industrial zone. This seed company site surrounds a half-
acre of vacant rural commercial land that fronts Glencoe Road and is currently for lease.

Pacific Street, 307th Avenue, and Highland Court. A large industrial lot (4.0 acres) fronting
Highland Court east of Glencoe Road is the site of Valley Machine. There are more industrial
zoning and developed uses located at the end of 307th Avenue south of Highland Court.
However, these industrial uses are adjacent to residential zones, and the lots are constrained by
the unnamed tributary to McKay Creek and its associated wetlands. Residential uses line 307th
Avenue, Pacific Street, and Highland Court. These factors may prevent industrial uses in this
area from intensifying.

Sunset Highway. Industrial uses have a strong presence in the corridor north of and adjacent to
Sunset Highway in North Plains. Approximately 8 acres of land with frontage or access to
Gordon Road are owned and operated by North Plains Forest Products, Inc., the largest
industrial land use in the city. Three other lots in the industrial zones in this corridor are owned
and operated by smaller companies: Hoss Paving and two unidentified businesses. The
unidentified businesses are located on the northeast and southeast corners of Cottage Street
(unimproved) and Gordon Road, and are based in offices converted from houses. The lot on the
southeast corner is adjacent to the Gordon Road overpass and features two large cellular
telephone towers.

Resource Lands
Glencoe Road. There is no land zoned or designated for agricultural use in the City of North
Plains. Large parcels of exclusive farm use (EFU) land in agricultural production, however, are
located directly north and south of the city along Glencoe Road.7
An unnamed tributary of McKay Creek flows into the city from the west. Wetlands associated
with this stream that are part of the National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) are found in the
following places in the vicinity of Glencoe Road:

·      Adjacent to Sunset Highway between 314th Avenue and Glencoe Road

·      Adjacent to Sunset Highway east of Glencoe Road and then extending northeast under
       307th Avenue to the city's eastern boundary

Sunset Highway. The corridor north of Sunset Highway is characterized by agricultural and
water resource lands. Land west of Gordon Road is designated for agricultural uses as part of

7 To be accurate, Glencoe Road becomes Shadybrook Road north of North Avenue and outside city limits.


6-14
                                                                                             US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
                                                     GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT



the EFU zone. The unnamed tributary of McKay Creek passes under Gordon Road and into the
city north of Wascoe Street. NWI wetlands are located in the stream corridor directly east and
west of Gordon Road. The stream enters property adjacent to Sunset Highway around Main
Street. The stream and NWI wetlands are directly adjacent to Sunset Highway and the
interchange between 314th Avenue and Glencoe Road.

Future Land Use Conditions
This section of the report explores potential future land use conditions for the City of North
Plains. These projections are primarily based on land needs estimated for the city during its last
periodic review, which assumed a 20-year planning horizon that translated to the year 2021.
The 20-year horizon for planned improvements for the Glencoe Road Interchange and Glencoe
Road in North Plains roughly corresponds with the years 2025-2030. Consequently, future land
use conditions described below may underestimate conditions for 2025-2030 because they rely
on data estimated for a time approximately 5 to 10 years earlier.
North Plains expanded its UGB in 2002 to ensure a 20-year land supply for primarily residential
uses. According to the city's Comprehensive Plan, the two expansion areas--one to the north of
the city and the other to the east--are planned to accommodate the types of uses on amounts of
land specified in Table 4 below.8

TABLE 4
Planned Land Uses and Acreages in UGB Expansion Areas
                            East Expansion Area

Streets, Parks, and Housing                                   38.1 acres

Commercial                                                      3.9 acres

Institutional                                                   5.4 acres

Elementary School                                             11.1 acres

Municipal Parks                                               11.4 acres

Exception Land not in Flood Plain                               2.6 acres

Total East Expansion Area                                     72.5 acres

                            North Expansion Area

Streets, Parks, Greenways, and Housing                        52.3 acres

Commercial                                                      3.9 acres

Institutional                                                   7.1 acres

Municipal Parks                                               10.8 acres

Exception Land not in Flood Plain                               2.4 acres

Total North Expansion Area                                    76.5 acres

Total North and East Expansion Areas                         149 acres

Source: City of North Plains Comprehensive Plan, Section 15.02.144



8 Table 4 is pulled directly from Section 15.02.144 of the Comprehensive Plan, which includes parks in two sets of its planned land
uses.

                                                                                                                                 6-15
US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT



(City of North Plains, 2004)


For future conditions, it has been assumed that all of the residential land inventory in North
Plains and its UGB expansion areas will be developed by the end of the 20-year planning
horizon. The number of residentially zoned acres and dwelling units that will result is
presented in Table 5 below.
With regard to commercial land, the recent UGB expansion supported a small addition of land
for commercial uses, just over 6 acres (Table 4). These uses are expected to be largely
neighborhood-oriented commercial uses. For future conditions in the expansion areas, it is
assumed that these commercial areas would be built out. For future conditions within the
existing city limits, it is assumed that the current ratio of developed commercial area to
residential area, a ratio of roughly 1:6, would be sustained into the future. 9 At that rate, over 10
additional acres of commercial land will be developed inside the city (Table 5).
There was no need for additional industrial land found during periodic review. Due to varying
market and land value conditions, it is difficult to forecast the amount of industrial land that
may be developed over the next 20 years. However, employment projections from recent
studies can be used in estimating industrial land need for the 20-year planning horizon of this
project.10 When previous estimates of industrial land need are divided by the number of years
in their planning horizon, the result is a constant growth rate of 0.73 acres annually. At that rate,
roughly 15 acres of industrial land will be needed for development over the next 20 years. This
can be accommodated by the amount of vacant and underutilized industrial land within
existing city boundaries (Table 5).
Attachment 2 provides: (1) a review of vacant land by land use category, (2) the development
intensity allowed in land use districts by the city's Development Code, and (3) allowed uses in
each of the city's land use districts.

TABLE 5
Future Land Use Conditions
Residential

Existing Conditions

Acres of lots zoned residentiala                              City                                     185.97
                                          a
Acres of lots developed as residential                        City                                     126.37

Dwelling units                                                Cityb                                    662

Future Conditions: Build-out

Acres of lots zoned and developed as residential              City                                     185.97

                                                              UGB expansion areasc                      64.00




9 This refers to lots currently developed as commercial and residential in commercial and residential zones respectively, not lots
with nonconforming development.

10 Alpha Community Development estimated employment growth based on a population projection of 4,000 residents in North
Plains by 2021 (Comprehensive Plan, Section 15.02.160). Their determination of future industrial land needs relied on estimates
prepared by Leland Consulting Group as part of the North Plains Neighboring Cities Study (1997). Land needs estimated for this
study are based on employment projections by employment sector, a conversion factor of employees to building floor area, and then
assumption of 0.3 FAR (floor area to site area ratio) for industrial site development.

6-16
                                                                                         US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
                                                 GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT




TABLE 5
Future Land Use Conditions
                                                         Total                                    249.97

Dwelling units                                           City existing units                      662
                                                                                      d
                                                         City Infill/redevelopment                400

                                                         UGB expansion areas                      538

                                                         Total                                 1,600

Commercial

Existing conditions

Acres of lots zoned commerciala                          City                                      37.11
                                          a
Acres of lots developed as commercial                    City                                      21.00

Ratio of lots developed as commercial/residential        City                                       0.17
(21.00 acres/126.37 acres)

Future Conditions: Ratio of commercial to residential and UGB estimates
                                                             e
Acres of lots zoned and developed as commercial          City                                      31.61
                                                                                  f
                                                         UGB expansion areas                        6.25

                                                         Total                                     37.86

Industrial

Existing Conditions

Acres of lots zoned industriala                          City                             184.16
                                      a
Acres of lots developed as industrial                    City                             64.57

Future Conditions: Constant growth rate derived from economic study estimatesg

Total acres of land needed 1995­2040                                                      32.66

Number of acres needed per year (constant)                                                0.73

Total acres needed over 20-year planning horizon                                          14.52
a
    Assessor's acreage as reported in RLIS (Metro, 2006).
b
    Existing dwelling units per City of North Plains Comprehensive Plan, Section 15.02.165 (City of
    North Plains, 2004).
c
    Net residential acreage per City of North Plains Comprehensive Plan, Section 15.02.167 (summary
    table) (City of North Plains, 2004).
d
    According to Comprehensive Plan, Section 15.02.165, approximately 427 new infill and
    redevelopment units minus 28 units displaced for park land needs (City of North Plains, 2004).
e
    Total future acres zoned and developed as residential (build-out) in the city multiplied by ratio of
    existing developed commercial to residential.
f
    Net commercial acreage per City of North Plains Comprehensive Plan, Section 15.02.167
    (Summary table) (City of North Plains, 2004).
g
    Based on findings from "Estimating Industrial/Commercial Land Needs in North Plains," a technical
    appendix to the North Plains Neighboring Cities Study (1997) prepared by Leland Consulting Group
    as part of a Transportation and Growth Management (TGM) grant.


Measure 37
Measure 37 claims present a challenge in estimating future land use conditions for the area
around the Glencoe Road Interchange. Properties granted Measure 37 waivers are, in essence,

                                                                                                                            6-17
US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT



"unplanned." However, even if a Measure 37 waiver was granted, proposed development may
not automatically be approved or be free of regulation. The property owner must still go
through a development application process that requires health, safety, and site development
standards for the proposed use are met. Public facility capacity issues may limit development.
Further, the waiver is granted only to the property owner; the waiver does not apply if the
owner were to sell the land.
Claims have been filed with Washington County for four rural or agricultural lots south of the
Glencoe Road Interchange and either fronting Beach Road or Glencoe Road. A review of the
claims is included in Table 6, and the lots themselves are highlighted in Figure 4.




6-18
                                                                                                     US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
                                                             GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT


FIGURE 4
Measure 37 Claims in the Glencoe Road Interchange Vicinity




Source: Metro, 2006 and Washington County, 2006b




                                                                                                                                        6-19
                                                                                        US 26: SUNSET HIGHWAY AT GLENCOE ROAD--
                                                GLENCOE ROAD INTERCHANGE AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS: LAND USE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT



Development in this area will increase traffic and demand on Gordon Road, Beach Road,
Glencoe Road, and the Glencoe Road Interchange.

TABLE 6
Measure 37 Claims Within 1 Mile of Glencoe Road Interchange
                                                                                                                      Date
                    Plan                                          Public                                File        Submitte
    Parcel       Designation      Applicant       Request         Notice             Status           Number           d

1N3100000900          EFU        April J.       Build one       Comment        APPROVED              37CL0260       06/21/05
                                 Jossy          dwelling        closed         Director
                                                                               Decision

1N3120001900          AF5        Robert D.      Rural           Comment        PENDING               37CL0259       06/21/05
                                 Jossy          Planned         open           Board of County
                                                Develop-        Hearing        Commissioners
                                                ment for 15     scheduled      Decision
                                                lots and 15
                                                dwellings

1N3120001901          AF5        April J.       Rural           Comment        PENDING               37CL0261       06/21/05
                                 Jossy          Planned         open           Board of County
                                                Develop-        Hearing        Commissioners
                                                ment for        scheduled      Decision
                                                eight lots
                                                and eight
                                                dwellings

1N3120002500          EFU        R&R            Minimum                        HOLD                  37CL0222       6/02/05
                                 Coussens       lot size to
                                 Investments,   build
                                 Inc.           residential
                                                or
                                                commercial
                                                enterprises

Source: Washington County, 2006b


Summary
Existing Land Use Conditions
The City of North Plains has a large amount of industrial land and a fair amount of commercial
land in addition to its large base of residential development. With this range of land uses, the
city does not serve as a residential bedroom community for the Portland metropolitan area as
small communities often do when they are located close to a metropolitan area.
The Glencoe Road corridor, as defined in this analysis, includes property fronting Glencoe Road
in the City of North Plains north of Sunset Highway; property on the block east of Glencoe
Road and bordered by Pacific Street, 307th Avenue, and Highland Court; and property adjacent
to Glencoe Road up to the intersection at Beach Road south of Sunset Highway.
Land in the Glencoe Road corridor north of Sunset Highway is mostly commercially zoned, and
land uses are primarily auto-oriented commercial uses. There are residential zones and uses on
the north end of Glencoe Road near the city limits, including a subdivision on the west side of
Glencoe Road that is under construction and vacant or redevelopable residential land just east
of Glencoe Road. From this area south to the interchange, Glencoe Road is zoned commercial


                                                                                                                           6-21
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Hwy 26 EB ramps                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10127611
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                           DATE: 11/16/2005

                                 664        230                                                                                    7.8            7.0
                                                                   Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                 0     442 222                                                                                    0.0       9.0    5.4


             0          42                          0        0                [ Hwy 26 EB ramps ]             0.0       0.0                              0.0       0.0

                        1              0.81         0                                                                   0.0                              0.0

            146      103                            0       804                                               2.1       2.9                              0.0       6.0

                                 0     188 581                                                                                    0.0    8.5       6.2


                                545     769                                                                                       7.9     6.8
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                   [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                        0




                    0                                   0




                                        0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                               *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                        Glencoe Rd             Hwy 26 EB ramps             Hwy 26 EB ramps
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                      (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                  HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                         TOTAL       TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left     Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                 0     12   78                  9        17    0            0     0     2               0     0     0                         118
      6:20 AM                 0     20   52                  25       19    0            3     0     1               0     0     0                         120
      6:25 AM                 0     11   70                  14       20    0            5     0     4               0     0     0                         124
      6:30 AM                 0     11   38                  21       24    0            3     0     3               0     0     0                         100
      6:35 AM                 0     17   54                  16       38    0            4     0    13               0     0     0                         142
      6:40 AM                 0     15   59                  17       28    0            2     0     8               0     0     0                         129
      6:45 AM                 0     24   64                  26       37    0            5     0    12               0     0     0                         168
      6:50 AM                 0     10   43                  18       27    0            1     0     9               0     0     0                         108
      6:55 AM                 0     26   50                  15       25    0            5     0    10               0     0     0                         131            1405
      7:00 AM                 0     10   47                  14       27    0            3     0     2               0     0     0                         103            1427
      7:05 AM                 0     16   50                  19       27    0            2     0     3               0     0     0                         117            1453
      7:10 AM                 0     14   35                  12       35    0            4     0     7               0     0     0                         107            1467
      7:15 AM                 0     17   47                  14       35    0            6     0     4               0     0     0                         123            1472
      7:20 AM                 0     5    34                  24       39    0            3     0    10               0     0     0                         115            1467
      7:25 AM                 0     13   39                  20       41    0            3     0     6               0     0     0                         122            1465
      7:30 AM                 0     22   56                  20       47    0            1     1    12               0     0     0                         159            1524
      7:35 AM                 0     20   63                  20       39    0            5     0    12               0     0     0                         159            1541
      7:40 AM                 0     11   53                  20       63    0            4     0    16               0     0     0                         167            1579
      7:45 AM                 0     18   47                  25       32    0            6     0     6               0     0     0                         134            1545
      7:50 AM                 0     17   29                  9        36    0            1     0     7               0     0     0                         99             1536
      7:55 AM                 0     20   36                  14       30    0            3     0     8               0     0     0                         111            1516
      8:00 AM                 0     16   34                  10       25    0            2     0     6               0     0     0                         93             1506
      8:05 AM                 0     15   38                  11       33    0            1     0    10               0     0     0                         108            1497
      8:10 AM                 0     11   27                  19       26    0            3     0     7               0     0     0                         93             1483
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                        Southbound                Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left     Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                           TOTAL

 All Vehicles                0       212      688           240     596   0              40     4   160             0         0         0                          1940
 Heavy Trucks                0        4       40            12      52    0              0      0    0              0         0         0                          108
 Pedestrians                          0                              0                          0                             0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Hwy 26 WB ramps                                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10127612
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                       DATE: 11/16/2005

                                 351         310                                                                                  8.5         9.0
                                                                   Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                 44    307    0                                                                                 27.3    5.9    0.0


            70          0                          134       415           [ Hwy 26 WB ramps ]            21.4        0.0                            11.9      12.5

                        0              0.80         1                                                                 0.0                            0.0

             0          0                          280       1                                            0.0         0.0                            12.9       0.0

                              25       176    1                                                                                 12.0    6.8    0.0


                               587     202                                                                                      9.2     7.4
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                  [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                        0




                    0                                    0




                                        0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                            *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                       Glencoe Rd            Hwy 26 WB ramps            Hwy 26 WB ramps
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                     (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                   HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                     TOTAL        TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                1     15    0                    0    15     1           0     0     0              10    0    9                           51
      6:20 AM                1     14    0                    0    23     4           0     0     0              13    1    14                          70
      6:25 AM                0     14    0                    0    13     4           0     0     0              19    0    15                          65
      6:30 AM                0     15    0                    0    23    11           0     0     0              18    0    15                          82
      6:35 AM                5     8     0                    0    27    12           0     0     0              21    0    16                          89
      6:40 AM                1     20    0                    0    23     2           0     0     0              19    0    10                          75
      6:45 AM                2     24    0                    0    30     4           0     0     0              27    1    9                           97
      6:50 AM                1     10    0                    0    19     3           0     0     0              16    0    12                          61
      6:55 AM                1     20    0                    0    18     1           0     0     0              12    0    12                          64             795
      7:00 AM                0     13    0                    0    19     4           0     0     0              16    0    4                           56             805
      7:05 AM                2     9     0                    0    20     5           0     0     0              19    0    11                          66             824
      7:10 AM                6     12    0                    0    24     2           0     0     0              21    0    10                          75             851
      7:15 AM                1     20    0                    0    21     5           0     0     0              25    0    9                           81             881
      7:20 AM                1     9     0                    0    29     1           0     0     0              23    0    14                          77             888
      7:25 AM                2     10    0                    0    34     4           0     0     0              27    0    10                          87             910
      7:30 AM                2     14    1                    0    29     2           0     0     0              33    0    21                          102            930
      7:35 AM                4     21    0                    0    31     6           0     0     0              26    0    10                          98             939
      7:40 AM                3     14    0                    0    33     7           0     0     0              35    0    12                          104            968
      7:45 AM                4     14    0                    0    30     6           0     0     0              19    0    9                           82             953
      7:50 AM                3     11    0                    0    16     5           0     0     0              27    3    16                          81             973
      7:55 AM                3     15    0                    0    24     7           0     0     0              15    0    10                          74             983
      8:00 AM                3     15    0                    0    22     3           0     0     0              13    0    13                          69             996
      8:05 AM                4     9     0                    0    23     4           0     0     0              16    0    6                           62             992
      8:10 AM                4     15    0                    0    24     4           0     0     0              15    0    7                           69             986
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                       Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U                Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                            TOTAL

 All Vehicles               36        196      4              0     372   60          0      0   0              376         0      172                          1216
 Heavy Trucks               4          4       0              0     16    12          0      0   0              48          0      28                           112
 Pedestrians                           0                             0                       0                              0                                    0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                            SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Texaco Dwy                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10127613
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                      DATE: 11/16/2005

                                351         228                                                                               8.5            4.4
                                                                Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                0     351    0                                                                               0.0       8.5    0.0


             0          0                          4       4               [ Texaco Dwy ]                0.0       0.0                              25.0        25.0

                        0             0.91         0                                                               0.0                              0.0

             0          0                          0       48                                            0.0       0.0                              0.0         8.3

                                0     224    48                                                                              0.0    4.0       8.3


                               351     272                                                                                   8.5     4.8
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                               [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                       0




                    0                                  0




                                       0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                           *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd              Texaco Dwy                  Texaco Dwy
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                    HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                    TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                0     21    1                  0    16     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             38
      6:20 AM                0     2     2                  0    27     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             31
      6:25 AM                0     1     5                  0    17     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             23
      6:30 AM                0     2     2                  0    34     0           0     0     0               0     0     2                             40
      6:35 AM                0     0     2                  0    39     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             41
      6:40 AM                0     28    2                  0    25     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             55
      6:45 AM                0     28    1                  0    34     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             63
      6:50 AM                0     27    2                  0    22     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             52
      6:55 AM                0     28    6                  0    19     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             53           502
      7:00 AM                0     14    4                  0    23     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             41           511
      7:05 AM                0     15    6                  0    25     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             47           517
      7:10 AM                0     14    8                  0    26     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             49           533
      7:15 AM                0     28    5                  0    26     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             59           554
      7:20 AM                0     18    2                  0    30     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             51           574
      7:25 AM                0     23    0                  0    38     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             61           612
      7:30 AM                0     27    3                  0    31     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             61           633
      7:35 AM                0     2     4                  0    37     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             43           635
      7:40 AM                0     0     7                  0    40     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             47           627
      7:45 AM                0     2     4                  0    36     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             42           606
      7:50 AM                0     2     5                  0    21     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             28           582
      7:55 AM                0     21    4                  0    31     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             56           585
      8:00 AM                0     29    2                  0    25     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             57           601
      8:05 AM                0     14    2                  0    27     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             43           597
      8:10 AM                0     12    6                  0    28     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             46           594
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles               0       272       20           0     396   0            0       0   0              0         0         4                             692
 Heavy Trucks               0        4        4            0     32    0            0       0   0              0         0         0                             40
 Pedestrians                         0                            0                         0                            0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Highland Ct                                                                                                           QC JOB #: 10127614
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                              DATE: 11/16/2005

                                  257         205                                                                                     5.4            3.4
                                                                   Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                  16    225    16                                                                                    0.0       5.8    6.3


            92          12                           16       61               [ NW Highland Ct ]              0.0         0.0                              0.0         6.6

                        1               0.87         4                                                                    100.0                             0.0

            118      105                             41       71                                               2.5        1.9                               9.8         7.0

                               72       177    54                                                                                    0.0    4.0       5.6


                                371     303                                                                                          5.1     3.3
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                      [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                         0




                    0                                     0




                                         0                                                               NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                  *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                       Glencoe Rd                NW Highland Ct              NW Highland Ct
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                     HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                            TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U                Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                 7     12    3                    1    14     0              1     0     5               1     0     0                               44
      6:20 AM                 8     14    5                    1    15     1              1     0    13               1     0     1                               60
      6:25 AM                 8     14   10                    3     8     0              2     0    10               1     0     1                               57
      6:30 AM                 9     17    6                    6    16     3              1     0    21               3     0     4                               86
      6:35 AM                 5     12    4                    1    19     1              2     1     8               12    0     1                               66
      6:40 AM                 3     19    8                    1     9     1              1     0     8               8     0     1                               59
      6:45 AM                 5     18    6                    1    23     1              1     0    10               3     1     1                               70
      6:50 AM                 8     16    4                    2    19     1              1     0     5               2     0     1                               59
      6:55 AM                 10    14   10                    0    10     0              0     0     5               4     0     2                               55           671
      7:00 AM                 8     6     4                    1    16     0              2     0     9               3     0     0                               49           683
      7:05 AM                 5     9     6                    0    18     0              2     0    11               3     1     2                               57           697
      7:10 AM                 7     8     6                    4    17     1              0     0    11               3     1     2                               60           722
      7:15 AM                 7     20    6                    0    10     2              0     1     6               3     0     3                               58           736
      7:20 AM                 3     15    1                    2    19     4              0     0    10               6     0     2                               62           738
      7:25 AM                 6     17    0                    0    20     2              0     0     6               4     0     2                               57           738
      7:30 AM                 4     24    2                    3    24     1              3     0    10               2     0     0                               73           725
      7:35 AM                 8     18    4                    2    23     1              3     0     9               4     0     1                               73           732
      7:40 AM                 1     12    5                    1    26     3              0     0    13               4     1     0                               66           739
      7:45 AM                 9     11    7                    0    22     2              0     1     6               2     0     4                               64           733
      7:50 AM                 9     16    7                    4    12     3              4     0     7               3     0     2                               67           741
      7:55 AM                 4     16    5                    1    13     2              4     2    17               4     0     0                               68           754
      8:00 AM                 8     21    1                    4    15     1              1     0    11               3     0     2                               67           772
      8:05 AM                 1     12    3                    1    19     2              0     0    10               2     0     0                               50           765
      8:10 AM                 4     8     6                    2    14     0              0     0     7               7     0     0                               48           753
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                       Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U                Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                                 TOTAL

 All Vehicles                52        216      44            24    292   20              24        0   128          40          4         4                             848
 Heavy Trucks                0          4       0             4     12    0               0         0    4           4           0         0                             28
 Pedestrians                            0                            0                              0                            0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Gas Dwy N of Highland                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10127615
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                        DATE: 11/16/2005

                                  254         196                                                                               5.5            6.1
                                                                Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                  39    215    0                                                                              0.0        6.5    0.0


            62          16                          0       0          [ Gas Dwy N of Highland ]         6.5       6.3                                0.0       0.0

                        0               0.80        0                                                              0.0                                0.0

            35       19                             0       0                                            8.6       10.5                               0.0       0.0

                               23       180    0                                                                              17.4    6.1       0.0


                                234     203                                                                                   6.8     7.4
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                               [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                         0




                    0                                   0




                                         0                                                          NORTH




                                                                                                                                                            *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd           Gas Dwy N of Highland     Gas Dwy N of Highland
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                HOURLY
                                                                                                                                      TOTAL TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                 1     17    0                  0     0     6            0     0     2             0     0     0           26
      6:20 AM                 5     9     0                  0    15     4            0     0     2             0     0     0           35
      6:25 AM                 6     7     0                  0     6     5            1     0     0             0     0     0           25
      6:30 AM                 6     3     0                  0    26     1            0     0     2             0     0     0           38
      6:35 AM                 1     27    0                  0    18     4            5     0     1             0     0     0           56
      6:40 AM                 1     26    0                  0     3     4            3     0     0             0     0     0           37
      6:45 AM                 2     17    0                  0     0     4            2     0     1             0     0     0           26
      6:50 AM                 1     14    0                  0    23     1            2     0     2             0     0     0           43
      6:55 AM                 2     19    0                  0     9     3            2     0     2             0     0     0           37       431
      7:00 AM                 1     8     0                  0    16     3            1     0     2             0     0     0           31       421
      7:05 AM                 1     12    0                  0    17     3            1     0     2             0     0     0           36       419
      7:10 AM                 1     7     0                  0    24     0            0     0     2             0     0     0           34       424
      7:15 AM                 2     23    0                  0     9     3            3     0     0             0     0     0           40       438
      7:20 AM                 0     23    0                  0    23     4            0     0     2             0     0     0           52       455
      7:25 AM                 3     11    0                  0    22     3            0     0     3             0     0     0           42       472
      7:30 AM                 3     23    0                  0    24     6            2     0     2             0     0     0           60       494
      7:35 AM                 3     14    0                  0    23     4            0     0     1             0     0     0           45       483
      7:40 AM                 4     9     0                  0    25     5            3     0     0             0     0     0           46       492
      7:45 AM                 1     17    0                  0    24     1            2     0     1             0     0     0           46       512
      7:50 AM                 2     22    0                  0    14     6            2     0     1             0     0     0           47       516
      7:55 AM                 1     22    0                  0    13     4            2     0     1             0     0     0           43       522
      8:00 AM                 2     21    0                  0    16     4            1     0     0             0     0     0           44       535
      8:05 AM                 4     5     0                  0    18     6            0     0     1             0     0     0           34       533
      8:10 AM                 0     16    0                  0    16     1            2     0     1             0     0     0           36       535
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U           TOTAL

 All Vehicles                24        228      0           0    276   52             8      0     28          0          0          0                          616
 Heavy Trucks                4         12       0           0     8    0              0      0     0           0          0          0                          24
 Pedestrians                            0                         0                          0                            0                                      0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Pacific St                                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10127616
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                          DATE: 11/16/2005

                                 248         219                                                                                     3.6         6.4
                                                                 Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                 0     235    13                                                                                   0.0     3.8    0.0


            10          7                          34       40              [ NW Pacific St ]                30.0       14.3                            8.8         7.5

                        5              0.78        2                                                                    20.0                            0.0

            14          2                          4        18                                               14.3       0.0                             0.0         5.6

                                 8     178    0                                                                                    37.5    5.6    0.0


                               241     186                                                                                         3.7     7.0
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                     [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                        0




                    0                                   0




                                        0                                                                NORTH




                                                                                                                                                              *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                      Glencoe Rd               NW Pacific St              NW Pacific St
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                    (Southbound)               (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                      HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                        TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U               Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                0     17    0                   0     8     0             0     0     0              0    0      3                               28
      6:20 AM                0     14    0                   0    12     0             0     0     0              0    0      6                               32
      6:25 AM                0     12    0                   1     8     0             0     0     0              0    0      2                               23
      6:30 AM                0     9     0                   0    20     0             0     0     0              0    0      2                               31
      6:35 AM                1     22    0                   0    21     0             0     0     0              0    0      2                               46
      6:40 AM                0     22    0                   0    15     0             0     0     0              0    0      4                               41
      6:45 AM                0     16    0                   0    20     0             0     0     0              1    0      8                               45
      6:50 AM                0     13    0                   0    15     0             1     0     0              1    0      4                               34
      6:55 AM                1     18    0                   0    15     0             0     0     0              1    0      2                               37           398
      7:00 AM                0     8     0                   2    12     0             2     0     0              0    0      2                               26           391
      7:05 AM                1     11    0                   0    19     0             1     0     0              1    0      1                               34           399
      7:10 AM                0     8     0                   0    17     0             0     0     0              0    0      2                               27           404
      7:15 AM                2     20    0                   0    12     0             0     1     0              0    1      4                               40           416
      7:20 AM                1     22    0                   11   23     0             1     1     1              0    1      3                               64           448
      7:25 AM                2     12    0                   0    19     0             1     0     1              0    0      3                               38           463
      7:30 AM                1     23    0                   0    25     0             0     2     0              0    0      3                               54           486
      7:35 AM                0     17    0                   0    30     0             1     1     0              0    0      1                               50           490
      7:40 AM                0     10    0                   0    28     0             0     0     0              0    0      1                               39           488
      7:45 AM                0     16    0                   1    27     0             0     0     0              0    0      2                               46           489
      7:50 AM                2     20    0                   0    23     0             1     0     0              0    0      2                               48           503
      7:55 AM                2     19    0                   0    17     0             0     0     0              0    0      1                               39           505
      8:00 AM                2     20    0                   2    17     0             0     0     4              0    1      1                               47           526
      8:05 AM                1     8     0                   0    19     1             0     0     3              1    0      0                               33           525
      8:10 AM                0     14    0                   1    17     0             0     0     2              0    0      0                               34           532
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                      Southbound                 Eastbound                 Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U               Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                                 TOTAL

 All Vehicles               16       228       0            44    268   0              8        12   8              0          4          36                         624
 Heavy Trucks               4        12        0            0      4    0              0        4    0              0          0          8                          32
 Pedestrians                          0                            0                            0                              0                                      0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Cottage St                                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10127617
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                     DATE: 11/16/2005

                                230         197                                                                              5.2            6.1
                                                              Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                0     230    0                                                                              0.0       5.2    0.0


             2          1                         0       0              [ NW Cottage St ]              0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                        0             0.79        0                                                               0.0                              0.0

            17       16                           0       0                                             0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                                2     196    0                                                                              0.0    6.1       0.0


                               246     198                                                                                  4.9     6.1
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                              [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                       0




                    0                                 0




                                       0                                                          NORTH




                                                                                                                                                         *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                    Glencoe Rd              NW Cottage St              NW Cottage St
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                   HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                   TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                0     12    0                 0    21     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             34
      6:20 AM                0     11    0                 0    11     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             23
      6:25 AM                0     9     0                 0    13     0            0     0     3              0     0     0                             25
      6:30 AM                1     10    0                 0    15     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             26
      6:35 AM                0     21    0                 0    15     0            0     0     2              0     0     0                             38
      6:40 AM                0     25    0                 0    14     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             40
      6:45 AM                0     21    0                 0    20     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             42
      6:50 AM                0     19    0                 0    15     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             34
      6:55 AM                0     20    0                 0    14     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             34           368
      7:00 AM                0     8     0                 0    14     0            0     0     2              0     0     0                             24           363
      7:05 AM                0     12    0                 0    17     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             29           368
      7:10 AM                1     6     0                 0    17     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             24           373
      7:15 AM                0     21    0                 0    15     0            1     0     2              0     0     0                             39           378
      7:20 AM                0     18    0                 0    17     0            0     0     3              0     0     0                             38           393
      7:25 AM                0     18    0                 0    22     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             40           408
      7:30 AM                0     24    0                 0    21     0            0     0     6              0     0     0                             51           433
      7:35 AM                1     17    0                 0    27     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             46           441
      7:40 AM                0     12    0                 0    31     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             44           445
      7:45 AM                1     14    0                 0    18     0            0     0     2              0     0     0                             35           438
      7:50 AM                0     22    0                 0    24     0            1     0     1              0     0     0                             48           452
      7:55 AM                1     18    0                 0    17     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             36           454
      8:00 AM                1     19    0                 0    21     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             42           472
      8:05 AM                0     7     0                 0    16     0            0     0     2              0     0     0                             25           468
      8:10 AM                0     10    0                 0    16     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             27           471
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles               4       212       0           0    316   0              0        0   32           0         0         0                             564
 Heavy Trucks               0       16        0           0    16    0              0        0   0            0         0         0                             32
 Pedestrians                         0                          0                            0                          0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Commercial -W Union                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10127618
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                          DATE: 11/16/2005

                                   180          96                                                                                   3.9         10.4
                                                                    Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                 2       151     27                                                                                 0.0    4.6    0.0


            69          4                             15       62          [ NW Commercial -W Union ]         7.2        50.0                           6.7       12.9

                     12                  0.83         16                                                                 0.0                            6.3

            60       44                               31       94                                            10.0        9.1                            19.4       2.1

                               51        77     55                                                                                  7.8    9.1    3.6


                               226     183                                                                                          7.5     7.1
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                      [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                          0




                    0                                      0




                                          0                                                              NORTH




                                                                                                                                                               *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                        Glencoe Rd                    Glencoe Rd           NW Commercial -W Union
                                                                                                              NW Commercial -W Union
      PERIOD                         (Northbound)                  (Southbound)               (Eastbound)         (Westbound)               HOURLY
                                                                                                                                    TOTAL TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left      Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U    Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                2          2     5                 0    12     0             0     0     5         2   1     0           29
      6:20 AM                6          2     4                 2     7     1             0     0     3         1   0     0           26
      6:25 AM                6          2     3                 0     7     1             0     2     2         4   0     0           27
      6:30 AM                2          5     3                 1     5     0             0     1     9         1   1     0           28
      6:35 AM                13         4     4                 2     8     0             1     1     5         0   2     0           40
      6:40 AM                10         5     8                 3     4     0             0     2     4         4   0     1           41
      6:45 AM                8          3     8                 3    12     0             0     1     7         1   3     0           46
      6:50 AM                5          7     6                 1    11     0             1     0     4         0   1     0           36
      6:55 AM                7          5     8                 3     7     0             0     1     5         2   1     0           39       385
      7:00 AM                1          4     3                 2     7     0             1     0     2         6   0     4           30       387
      7:05 AM                2          9     1                 3     8     1             0     1     5         3   0     1           34       397
      7:10 AM                1          5     0                 1    13     0             1     0     2         2   0     1           26       402
      7:15 AM                4          8     6                 2    12     0             0     2     0         2   3     3           42       415
      7:20 AM                4          3     4                 1    13     0             1     2     2         2   3     1           36       425
      7:25 AM                9          9     2                 2    14     0             0     1     5         5   2     2           51       449
      7:30 AM                3          12    6                 2    19     0             0     0     3         0   1     2           48       469
      7:35 AM                6          4     5                 3    18     1             0     2     2         4   2     0           47       476
      7:40 AM                1          8     6                 4    17     0             0     2     7         4   0     1           50       485
      7:45 AM                0          6     4                 5     8     0             0     0     4         6   2     0           35       474
      7:50 AM                2          12    7                 1    12     0             0     0     5         4   1     1           45       483
      7:55 AM                7          7     5                 2     9     0             0     2     1         4   4     1           42       486
      8:00 AM                6          2     3                 0     2     3             6     7     5         1   14    0           49       505
      8:05 AM                2          3     1                 0     3     4             2     5     4         0   9     1           34       505
      8:10 AM                1          0     0                 0     4     7             0     6     2         2   7     0           29       508
  PEAK 15-MIN                         Northbound                    Southbound                 Eastbound           Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left      Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U    Left Thru Right U          TOTAL

 All Vehicles               72        100        52            28    204    4             0     12      40          36         20         16                       584
 Heavy Trucks               4          4         4             0     12     0             0     0       0           4          0          0                        28
 Pedestrians                           0                              0                         0                              0                                    0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Beach Rd                                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10127601
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                        DATE: 11/16/2005

                                  753         636                                                                               4.5            2.5
                                                                Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                 24     729    0                                                                               0.0       4.7    0.0


            41          11                          0       0               [ NW Beach Rd ]                0.0       9.1                              0.0       0.0

                        0               0.91        0                                                                0.0                              0.0

            16          5                           0       0                                              6.3       0.0                              0.0       0.0

                                 17     625    0                                                                               0.0    2.4       0.0


                                734     642                                                                                    4.6     2.3
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                         0




                    0                                   0




                                         0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                            *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd              NW Beach Rd                 NW Beach Rd
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                  HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                      TOTAL       TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 0     51    0                  0    45     1            2     0     0               0    0     0                          99
      4:05 PM                 1     50    0                  0    55     1            0     0     1               0    0     0                          108
      4:10 PM                 0     44    0                  0    61     1            0     0     0               0    0     0                          106
      4:15 PM                 1     35    0                  0    72     2            0     0     0               0    0     0                          110
      4:20 PM                 0     46    0                  0    71     6            0     0     0               0    0     0                          123
      4:25 PM                 0     43    0                  0    51     2            1     0     2               0    0     0                          99
      4:30 PM                 1     43    0                  0    46     8            1     0     0               0    0     0                          99
      4:35 PM                 0     37    0                  1    57     1            0     0     2               0    0     0                          98
      4:40 PM                 1     31    0                  0    67     0            0     0     1               0    0     0                          100
      4:45 PM                 12    41    0                  0    84     1            2     0     0               0    0     0                          140
      4:50 PM                 0     46    0                  0    66     2            0     0     1               0    0     0                          115
      4:55 PM                 1     61    0                  0    62     3            1     0     1               0    0     0                          129            1326
      5:00 PM                 0     40    0                  0    54     4            0     0     0               0    0     0                          98             1325
      5:05 PM                 1     49    0                  0    59     1            3     0     1               0    0     0                          114            1331
      5:10 PM                 0     44    0                  0    66     2            2     0     1               0    0     0                          115            1340
      5:15 PM                 1     55    0                  0    50     3            1     0     0               0    0     0                          110            1340
      5:20 PM                 0     82    0                  0    66     1            0     0     0               0    0     0                          149            1366
      5:25 PM                 1     62    0                  0    60     3            2     0     0               0    0     0                          128            1395
      5:30 PM                 1     51    0                  0    52     0            0     0     0               0    0     0                          104            1400
      5:35 PM                 0     54    0                  0    50     1            0     0     0               0    0     0                          105            1407
      5:40 PM                 0     40    0                  0    60     3            0     0     1               0    0     0                          104            1411
      5:45 PM                 1     37    0                  0    51     2            1     0     3               0    0     0                          95             1366
      5:50 PM                 0     45    0                  0    46     2            0     0     1               0    0     0                          94             1345
      5:55 PM                 0     40    0                  0    52     0            0     0     0               0    0     0                          92             1308
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                           TOTAL

 All Vehicles                8        796       0           0    704   28            12       0   0              0         0         0                          1548
 Heavy Trucks                0        24        0           0    36    0             0        0   0              0         0         0                           60
 Pedestrians                           0                          0                           0                            0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                             SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Hwy 26 EB ramps                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10127602
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                           DATE: 11/16/2005

                                 846        295                                                                                    4.7            3.7
                                                                   Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                 0     691 155                                                                                    0.0       4.9    3.9


             0          33                          0        0                [ Hwy 26 EB ramps ]             0.0       6.1                              0.0       0.0

                        1              0.87         0                                                                   0.0                              0.0

            88       54                             0       559                                               3.4       1.9                              0.0       4.3

                                 0     262 403                                                                                    0.0    3.4       4.5


                                745     665                                                                                       4.7     4.1
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                   [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                        0




                    0                                   0




                                        0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                               *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                        Glencoe Rd             Hwy 26 EB ramps             Hwy 26 EB ramps
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                      (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                  HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                         TOTAL       TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left     Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 0     23   29                  16       50    0            2     0     3               0     0     0                         123
      4:05 PM                 0     16   29                  15       39    0            6     0     4               0     0     0                         109
      4:10 PM                 0     22   23                  14       70    0            2     0     4               0     0     0                         135
      4:15 PM                 0     15   20                  18       72    0            4     0     6               0     0     0                         135
      4:20 PM                 0     20   23                  11       56    0            3     0     7               0     0     0                         120
      4:25 PM                 0     14   35                  14       57    0            3     0     2               0     0     0                         125
      4:30 PM                 0     21   31                  6        46    0            1     0     5               0     0     0                         110
      4:35 PM                 0     6    27                  14       48    0            2     0     5               0     0     0                         102
      4:40 PM                 0     18   18                  12       73    0            5     0     6               0     0     0                         132
      4:45 PM                 0     22   16                  13       70    0            3     0     9               0     0     0                         133
      4:50 PM                 0     26   31                  14       53    0            2     0     3               0     0     0                         129
      4:55 PM                 0     28   37                  13       64    0            3     0     2               0     0     0                         147            1500
      5:00 PM                 0     20   24                  13       58    0            3     0     2               0     0     0                         120            1497
      5:05 PM                 0     18   31                  8        57    0            3     0     7               0     0     0                         124            1512
      5:10 PM                 0     21   28                  10       60    0            4     0     4               0     0     0                         127            1504
      5:15 PM                 0     23   41                  15       57    0            2     0     2               0     0     0                         140            1509
      5:20 PM                 0     32   45                  11       66    0            4     0     9               0     0     0                         167            1556
      5:25 PM                 0     24   51                  19       53    0            2     0     5               0     0     0                         154            1585
      5:30 PM                 0     20   39                  13       51    0            3     0     4               0     0     0                         130            1605
      5:35 PM                 0     11   36                  7        52    0            3     1     3               0     0     0                         113            1616
      5:40 PM                 0     17   24                  19       50    0            1     0     4               0     0     0                         115            1599
      5:45 PM                 0     14   20                  6        42    0            2     0     6               0     0     0                         90             1556
      5:50 PM                 0     19   26                  11       48    0            5     0     3               0     0     0                         112            1539
      5:55 PM                 0     21   19                  14       48    0            1     0     3               0     0     0                         106            1498
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                        Southbound                Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left     Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                           TOTAL

 All Vehicles                0       316      548           180     704   0              32     0   64              0         0         0                          1844
 Heavy Trucks                0        4       20             8      28    0              0      0   0               0         0         0                           60
 Pedestrians                          0                              0                          0                             0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Hwy 26 WB ramps                                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10127603
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                        DATE: 11/16/2005

                                   379         437                                                                                 2.6         1.8
                                                                     Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                               60        319    0                                                                                 5.0    2.2    0.0


            167         0                            253       765           [ Hwy 26 WB ramps ]            3.0         0.0                           1.2       4.1

                        0                0.93         2                                                                 0.0                           0.0

             0          0                            510       0                                            0.0         0.0                           5.5       0.0

                              105        184    0                                                                                 1.9    2.7    0.0


                               829     289                                                                                        4.2     2.4
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                    [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                          0




                    0                                      0




                                          0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                            *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                      Glencoe Rd                      Glencoe Rd            Hwy 26 WB ramps            Hwy 26 WB ramps
      PERIOD                       (Northbound)                    (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                 HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                      TOTAL       TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left    Thru Right U               Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                8        16    0                   0    27     2           0     0     0              39    0    18                        110
      4:05 PM                10       15    0                   0    22     0           0     0     0              34    0    22                        103
      4:10 PM                8        13    0                   0    34     1           0     0     0              46    0    20                        122
      4:15 PM                3        21    0                   0    39     0           0     0     0              43    0    20                        126
      4:20 PM                8        12    0                   0    27     0           0     0     0              44    0    14                        105
      4:25 PM                4        10    0                   0    30     0           0     0     0              39    0    20                        103
      4:30 PM                5        12    0                   0    19     1           0     0     0              36    0    18                        91
      4:35 PM                1        9     0                   0    22     3           0     0     0              42    0    19                        96
      4:40 PM                4        15    0                   0    34     4           0     0     0              47    0    20                        124
      4:45 PM                9        20    0                   0    23     1           0     0     0              51    0    19                        123
      4:50 PM                7        20    0                   0    23     2           0     0     0              43    2    20                        117
      4:55 PM                7        20    0                   0    25     3           0     0     0              49    0    28                        132            1352
      5:00 PM                7        13    0                   0    29     4           0     0     0              43    0    12                        108            1350
      5:05 PM                8        16    0                   0    25     4           0     0     0              40    0    26                        119            1366
      5:10 PM                12       14    0                   0    24     4           0     0     0              46    0    22                        122            1366
      5:15 PM                12       12    0                   0    31     8           0     0     0              40    0    21                        124            1364
      5:20 PM                13       14    0                   0    28     7           0     0     0              51    0    22                        135            1394
      5:25 PM                10       18    0                   0    37     5           0     0     0              37    0    21                        128            1419
      5:30 PM                10       10    0                   0    22    14           0     0     0              33    0    23                        112            1440
      5:35 PM                5        15    0                   0    24     7           0     0     0              41    0    23                        115            1459
      5:40 PM                5        12    0                   0    28     1           0     0     0              36    0    16                        98             1433
      5:45 PM                2        18    0                   0    20     9           0     0     0              28    0    21                        98             1408
      5:50 PM                7        18    0                   0    17     9           0     0     0              41    0    14                        106            1397
      5:55 PM                6        14    0                   0    26     5           0     0     0              33    0    22                        106            1371
  PEAK 15-MIN                       Northbound                      Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left    Thru Right U               Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                          TOTAL

 All Vehicles               140      176         0              0     384   80          0      0   0              512         0         256                     1548
 Heavy Trucks                4        0          0              0      8    0           0      0   0              24          0          0                       36
 Pedestrians                          0                                0                       0                              0                                  0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Texaco Dwy                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10127604
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                      DATE: 11/16/2005

                                418         398                                                                               1.2            1.8
                                                                Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                0     418    0                                                                               0.0       1.2    0.0


             0          0                          1       1               [ Texaco Dwy ]                0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                        0             0.93         0                                                               0.0                              0.0

             0          0                          0       40                                            0.0       0.0                              0.0         2.5

                                0     397    40                                                                              0.0    1.8       2.5


                               418     437                                                                                   1.2     1.8
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                               [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                       0




                    0                                  0




                                       0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                          *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd              Texaco Dwy                  Texaco Dwy
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                    HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                    TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                0     31    3                  0    31     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             65
      4:05 PM                0     32    5                  0    35     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             72
      4:10 PM                0     28    5                  0    47     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             80
      4:15 PM                0     38    3                  0    43     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             84
      4:20 PM                0     22    4                  0    29     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             55
      4:25 PM                0     28    2                  0    42     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             72
      4:30 PM                0     26    4                  0    28     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             58
      4:35 PM                0     22    6                  0    30     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             58
      4:40 PM                0     32    3                  0    41     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             76
      4:45 PM                0     39    0                  0    32     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             71
      4:50 PM                0     37    3                  0    36     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             76
      4:55 PM                0     44    4                  0    28     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             76           843
      5:00 PM                0     23    2                  0    38     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             63           841
      5:05 PM                0     38    4                  0    35     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             77           846
      5:10 PM                0     29    7                  0    32     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             69           835
      5:15 PM                0     29    4                  0    43     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             76           827
      5:20 PM                0     31    5                  0    37     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             73           845
      5:25 PM                0     37    2                  0    43     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             82           855
      5:30 PM                0     29    4                  0    29     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             62           859
      5:35 PM                0     36    2                  0    36     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             74           875
      5:40 PM                0     25    3                  0    29     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             57           856
      5:45 PM                0     36    3                  0    25     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             64           849
      5:50 PM                0     31    1                  0    28     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             61           834
      5:55 PM                0     34    2                  0    30     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             66           824
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles               0       388       44           0     492   0            0       0   0              0         0         0                             924
 Heavy Trucks               0        0        0            0      4    0            0       0   0              0         0         0                              4
 Pedestrians                         0                            0                         0                            0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Highland Ct                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10127605
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                          DATE: 11/16/2005

                                    312         333                                                                                  1.0         1.8
                                                                    Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                  15      285    12                                                                                 0.0    1.1    0.0


            101         10                            20       71              [ NW Highland Ct ]              0.0        0.0                           0.0         0.0

                        4                 0.92        4                                                                   0.0                           0.0

            100      86                               47       23                                              2.0        2.3                           0.0         0.0

                                82        303    7                                                                                  0.0    2.0    0.0


                                418     392                                                                                         1.2     1.5
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                     [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                           0




                    0                                      0




                                           0                                                             NORTH




                                                                                                                                                              *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                       Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd               NW Highland Ct              NW Highland Ct
      PERIOD                        (Northbound)                   (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                        TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left    Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 8        24    1                  1    18     1             1     0     9               4     0     4                           71
      4:05 PM                 7        23    1                  0    23     3             2     0    10               2     0     4                           75
      4:10 PM                 8        19    2                  4    27     4             2     0    12               8     0     1                           87
      4:15 PM                 7        30    1                  1    24     0             0     1     9               10    0     3                           86
      4:20 PM                 3        21    0                  2    16     0             2     0     8               5     0     2                           59
      4:25 PM                 6        19    2                  4    23     1             0     0    10               9     0     2                           76
      4:30 PM                 6        22    0                  1    16     2             0     0     6               6     0     1                           60
      4:35 PM                 6        16    0                  2    21     1             1     1     7               2     0     6                           63
      4:40 PM                 5        24    1                  0    27     1             0     0     8               6     1     3                           76
      4:45 PM                 9        30    0                  0    23     1             0     0     6               3     0     0                           72
      4:50 PM                 11       24    1                  1    28     0             1     0     6               2     0     0                           74
      4:55 PM                 6        38    0                  1    20     1             1     0     6               2     0     2                           77           876
      5:00 PM                 5        20    0                  1    24     3             0     0     8               6     1     2                           70           875
      5:05 PM                 9        28    0                  1    25     1             2     1    10               0     1     2                           80           880
      5:10 PM                 7        21    1                  1    18     1             1     1     8               6     0     2                           67           860
      5:15 PM                 4        22    1                  1    24     1             0     1    12               7     0     2                           75           849
      5:20 PM                 7        26    1                  1    24     0             2     0     8               5     0     2                           76           866
      5:25 PM                 8        28    0                  3    31     1             0     1     6               6     0     2                           86           876
      5:30 PM                 4        20    3                  1    17     2             0     0     9               3     1     1                           61           877
      5:35 PM                 8        26    0                  1    27     1             1     0     5               4     1     3                           77           891
      5:40 PM                 4        20    0                  0    24     3             2     0     2               3     0     2                           60           875
      5:45 PM                 11       24    1                  0    15     1             1     0     5               5     0     1                           64           867
      5:50 PM                 6        28    0                  0    13     1             2     0    13               2     0     1                           66           859
      5:55 PM                 5        28    0                  2    22     1             2     0     8               0     1     0                           69           851
  PEAK 15-MIN                        Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left    Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                             TOTAL

 All Vehicles                76        304        8            20    316   8              8         8   104          72         0         24                         948
 Heavy Trucks                0          0         0            0      0    0              0         0    4           0          0         0                           4
 Pedestrians                            0                             0                             0                           0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Gas Dwy N of Highland                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10127606
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                      DATE: 11/16/2005

                                  292         331                                                                             1.0            5.4
                                                                Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                  28    264    0                                                                             3.6       0.8    0.0


            49          16                          0       0          [ Gas Dwy N of Highland ]         4.1       0.0                              0.0       0.0

                        0               0.91        0                                                              0.0                              0.0

            36       20                             0       0                                            0.0       0.0                              0.0       0.0

                               21       315    0                                                                             4.8    5.7       0.0


                                284     336                                                                                  0.7     5.7
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                              [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                         0




                    0                                   0




                                         0                                                          NORTH




                                                                                                                                                          *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd           Gas Dwy N of Highland     Gas Dwy N of Highland
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                HOURLY
                                                                                                                                      TOTAL TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 1     36    0                  0    15     5            2     0     0             0     0     0           59
      4:05 PM                 1     32    0                  0    22     3            2     0     1             0     0     0           61
      4:10 PM                 1     30    0                  0    29     4            2     0     2             0     0     0           68
      4:15 PM                 6     21    0                  0    23     2            2     0     0             0     0     0           54
      4:20 PM                 3     16    0                  0    12     4            0     0     2             0     0     0           37
      4:25 PM                 1     23    0                  0    23     1            1     0     4             0     0     0           53
      4:30 PM                 4     21    0                  0    17     2            2     0     0             0     0     0           46
      4:35 PM                 0     23    0                  0    22     2            1     0     0             0     0     0           48
      4:40 PM                 3     13    0                  0    25     0            1     0     3             0     0     0           45
      4:45 PM                 1     30    0                  0    21     2            1     0     1             0     0     0           56
      4:50 PM                 2     23    0                  0    25     1            2     0     3             0     0     0           56
      4:55 PM                 4     41    0                  0    19     2            3     0     1             0     0     0           70       653
      5:00 PM                 3     22    0                  0    23     3            2     0     2             0     0     0           55       649
      5:05 PM                 3     24    0                  0    24     3            2     0     0             0     0     0           56       644
      5:10 PM                 0     25    0                  0    16     2            1     0     2             0     0     0           46       622
      5:15 PM                 2     24    0                  0    23     2            0     0     1             0     0     0           52       620
      5:20 PM                 1     33    0                  0    22     2            2     0     1             0     0     0           61       644
      5:25 PM                 1     31    0                  0    27     4            0     0     4             0     0     0           67       658
      5:30 PM                 1     22    0                  0    16     2            1     0     2             0     0     0           44       656
      5:35 PM                 0     28    0                  0    25     2            1     0     2             0     0     0           58       666
      5:40 PM                 3     12    0                  0    23     3            1     0     1             0     0     0           43       664
      5:45 PM                 0     25    0                  0    13     2            1     0     1             0     0     0           42       650
      5:50 PM                 0     31    0                  0    13     0            0     0     1             0     0     0           45       639
      5:55 PM                 2     27    0                  0    23     2            0     0     0             0     0     0           54       623
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U           TOTAL

 All Vehicles                28        376      0           0    260   20            24      0     20          0         0         0                          728
 Heavy Trucks                4         28       0           0     4    0             0       0     0           0         0         0                          36
 Pedestrians                            0                         0                          0                           0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Pacific St                                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10127607
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                          DATE: 11/16/2005

                                  288         288                                                                                 1.0            1.0
                                                                 Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                  6     277    5                                                                                 0.0       1.1    0.0


            47          29                          4       11              [ NW Pacific St ]                0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                        0               0.94        1                                                                  0.0                              0.0

            33          4                           6       14                                               0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                               40       255    9                                                                                 0.0    1.2       0.0


                                287     304                                                                                      1.0     1.0
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                  [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                         0




                    0                                   0




                                         0                                                              NORTH




                                                                                                                                                              *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd               NW Pacific St                NW Pacific St
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                    HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                        TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U            Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 1     32    0                  0    28     1             0     0     0                0    0      0                             62
      4:05 PM                 2     27    0                  0    28     0             4     0     0                0    0      1                             62
      4:10 PM                 1     26    0                  0    34     0             2     0     0                0    0      2                             65
      4:15 PM                 1     21    1                  2    26     0             1     0     0                0    0      0                             52
      4:20 PM                 0     19    0                  1    15     1             1     0     0                0    0      0                             37
      4:25 PM                 2     20    0                  0    20     0             4     0     0                0    0      0                             46
      4:30 PM                 6     15    0                  0    20     0             3     0     1                1    1      2                             49
      4:35 PM                 5     14    2                  0    23     0             2     0     0                0    0      0                             46
      4:40 PM                 0     14    0                  0    22     1             3     0     0                0    0      0                             40
      4:45 PM                 3     26    0                  1    21     1             3     0     0                0    0      1                             56
      4:50 PM                 2     18    1                  0    24     0             1     0     0                3    0      0                             49
      4:55 PM                 7     31    1                  0    20     1             1     0     0                0    1      0                             62           626
      5:00 PM                 3     17    1                  0    25     0             3     0     1                0    0      0                             50           614
      5:05 PM                 3     20    0                  0    29     0             1     0     2                0    0      1                             56           608
      5:10 PM                 3     20    0                  0    21     0             4     0     1                0    0      1                             50           593
      5:15 PM                 4     22    0                  0    18     1             3     0     0                0    0      0                             48           589
      5:20 PM                 4     25    1                  0    26     1             1     0     0                0    0      0                             58           610
      5:25 PM                 3     28    1                  0    28     0             3     0     0                0    0      0                             63           627
      5:30 PM                 2     17    2                  1    18     0             2     0     0                0    0      0                             42           620
      5:35 PM                 4     20    2                  0    27     0             5     0     0                0    0      0                             58           632
      5:40 PM                 2     11    0                  3    20     2             2     0     0                3    0      1                             44           636
      5:45 PM                 3     19    1                  0    12     0             2     0     0                0    0      1                             38           618
      5:50 PM                 4     27    0                  0    10     1             3     0     0                0    0      1                             46           615
      5:55 PM                 4     25    0                  0    21     0             4     0     0                1    0      0                             55           608
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U            Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles                44       300       8           0     288   8             28        0   0              0         0         0                             676
 Heavy Trucks                0         0        0           0      0    0             0         0   0              0         0         0                              0
 Pedestrians                           0                           0                            0                            0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                               SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Cottage St                                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10127608
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                      DATE: 11/16/2005

                                 264         255                                                                              2.7            1.6
                                                               Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                 3     261    0                                                                              0.0       2.7    0.0


            17          3                          0       0              [ NW Cottage St ]              0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                        0              0.93        0                                                               0.0                              0.0

            13       10                            0       0                                             0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                              14       252    0                                                                              0.0    1.6       0.0


                               271     266                                                                                   2.6     1.5
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                               [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                        0




                    0                                  0




                                        0                                                          NORTH




                                                                                                                                                          *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd              NW Cottage St              NW Cottage St
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                   HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                    TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                1     31    0                  0    27     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             59
      4:05 PM                4     21    0                  0    26     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             51
      4:10 PM                3     14    0                  0    28     0            1     0     1              0     0     0                             47
      4:15 PM                2     25    0                  0    27     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             54
      4:20 PM                0     24    0                  0    22     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             46
      4:25 PM                2     16    0                  0    17     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             35
      4:30 PM                0     18    0                  0    18     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             37
      4:35 PM                0     17    0                  0    22     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             40
      4:40 PM                4     23    0                  0    21     1            1     0     0              0     0     0                             50
      4:45 PM                1     26    0                  0    22     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             50
      4:50 PM                0     17    0                  0    22     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             40
      4:55 PM                1     29    0                  0    16     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             46           555
      5:00 PM                0     21    0                  0    24     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             46           542
      5:05 PM                2     23    0                  0    26     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             51           542
      5:10 PM                1     21    0                  0    18     1            0     0     0              0     0     0                             41           536
      5:15 PM                0     16    0                  0    21     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             37           519
      5:20 PM                2     24    0                  0    26     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             53           526
      5:25 PM                2     23    0                  0    23     2            0     0     1              0     0     0                             51           542
      5:30 PM                2     15    0                  0    22     0            2     0     1              0     0     0                             42           547
      5:35 PM                2     23    0                  0    18     0            0     0     2              0     0     0                             45           552
      5:40 PM                1     14    0                  0    23     0            1     0     2              0     0     0                             41           543
      5:45 PM                2     17    0                  0    10     0            1     0     1              0     0     0                             31           524
      5:50 PM                0     27    0                  0     8     0            0     0     4              0     0     0                             39           523
      5:55 PM                3     24    0                  0    17     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             45           522
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles               24       248       0           0    284   8              8        0   12           0         0         0                             584
 Heavy Trucks               0         4        0           0     0    0              0        0   0            0         0         0                              4
 Pedestrians                          0                          0                            0                          0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Commercial -W Union                                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10127609
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                            DATE: 11/16/2005

                                    159         181                                                                                    1.3         0.0
                                                                      Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                  7       123    29                                                                                   0.0    1.6    0.0


            119         11                             31       132          [ NW Commercial -W Union ]         2.5        0.0                            0.0       3.8

                     19                   0.87         33                                                                  5.3                            3.0

            92       62                                68       90                                              2.2        1.6                            5.9       2.2

                                79        139    42                                                                                   2.5    0.0    2.4


                                253     260                                                                                          2.8     1.2
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                      [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                           0




                    0                                       0




                                           0                                                               NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                         Glencoe Rd                    Glencoe Rd            NW Commercial -W Union
                                                                                                                NW Commercial -W Union
      PERIOD                          (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                (Eastbound)         (Westbound)               HOURLY
                                                                                                                                      TOTAL TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left      Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U    Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 13         9     1                 1    10     1              0     6     6         9   2     2           60
      4:05 PM                 7          16    6                 2    11     1              2     4     6         3   0     0           58
      4:10 PM                 0          11    2                 2    14     0              0     1    10         4   2     2           48
      4:15 PM                 11         9     5                 2     6     0              0     1    12         9   2     2           59
      4:20 PM                 7          11    3                 4     8     1              0     1     8         4   3     2           52
      4:25 PM                 12         8     0                 2     6     1              1     1     2         8   6     2           49
      4:30 PM                 7          4     3                 1     7     0              1     0     7         5   4     2           41
      4:35 PM                 4          11    7                 3     8     0              3     1    12         2   1     2           54
      4:40 PM                 5          11    4                 0    12     0              1     0     5         5   2     4           49
      4:45 PM                 8          13    8                 2    14     0              0     1     4         5   3     1           59
      4:50 PM                 6          12    3                 4     7     1              2     1     4         8   6     1           55
      4:55 PM                 9          18    1                 0    10     1              0     2     3         3   3     4           54       638
      5:00 PM                 4          12    4                 4    15     2              0     4     3         7   5     3           63       641
      5:05 PM                 10         11    3                 1     8     1              5     3     8         6   2     2           60       643
      5:10 PM                 9          10    6                 3    10     1              1     3     7         5   1     5           61       656
      5:15 PM                 5          9     1                 2    11     1              0     2     4         5   4     2           46       643
      5:20 PM                 11         11    2                 6    13     0              1     1    10         5   4     2           66       657
      5:25 PM                 8          8     7                 2     8     0              0     1     6         8   0     4           52       660
      5:30 PM                 2          13    2                 2     7     0              0     1     7         7   3     2           46       665
      5:35 PM                 6          12    4                 3     9     0              0     0     4         4   1     2           45       656
      5:40 PM                 1          10    1                 0    11     0              2     0     2         5   1     3           36       643
      5:45 PM                 4          11    2                 4     8     1              2     2     3         2   0     2           41       625
      5:50 PM                 8          11    5                 2     2     0              0     2     2         2   6     1           41       611
      5:55 PM                 10         11    4                 2    10     0              0     3     5         2   0     1           48       605
  PEAK 15-MIN                          Northbound                    Southbound                  Eastbound           Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left      Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U    Left Thru Right U          TOTAL

 All Vehicles                92        132        52            32     132    16           24     40      72          72         32         40                      736
 Heavy Trucks                0          0         0             0       4     0            0      0       4           8          0          0                       16
 Pedestrians                            0                               0                         0                              0                                   0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Hwy 26 EB ramps                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10127611
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                           DATE: 11/16/2005

                                 664        230                                                                                    7.8            7.0
                                                                   Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                 0     442 222                                                                                    0.0       9.0    5.4


             0          42                          0        0                [ Hwy 26 EB ramps ]             0.0       0.0                              0.0       0.0

                        1              0.81         0                                                                   0.0                              0.0

            146      103                            0       804                                               2.1       2.9                              0.0       6.0

                                 0     188 581                                                                                    0.0    8.5       6.2


                                545     769                                                                                       7.9     6.8
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                   [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                        0




                    0                                   0




                                        0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                               *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                        Glencoe Rd             Hwy 26 EB ramps             Hwy 26 EB ramps
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                      (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                  HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                         TOTAL       TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left     Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                 0     12   78                  9        17    0            0     0     2               0     0     0                         118
      6:20 AM                 0     20   52                  25       19    0            3     0     1               0     0     0                         120
      6:25 AM                 0     11   70                  14       20    0            5     0     4               0     0     0                         124
      6:30 AM                 0     11   38                  21       24    0            3     0     3               0     0     0                         100
      6:35 AM                 0     17   54                  16       38    0            4     0    13               0     0     0                         142
      6:40 AM                 0     15   59                  17       28    0            2     0     8               0     0     0                         129
      6:45 AM                 0     24   64                  26       37    0            5     0    12               0     0     0                         168
      6:50 AM                 0     10   43                  18       27    0            1     0     9               0     0     0                         108
      6:55 AM                 0     26   50                  15       25    0            5     0    10               0     0     0                         131            1405
      7:00 AM                 0     10   47                  14       27    0            3     0     2               0     0     0                         103            1427
      7:05 AM                 0     16   50                  19       27    0            2     0     3               0     0     0                         117            1453
      7:10 AM                 0     14   35                  12       35    0            4     0     7               0     0     0                         107            1467
      7:15 AM                 0     17   47                  14       35    0            6     0     4               0     0     0                         123            1472
      7:20 AM                 0     5    34                  24       39    0            3     0    10               0     0     0                         115            1467
      7:25 AM                 0     13   39                  20       41    0            3     0     6               0     0     0                         122            1465
      7:30 AM                 0     22   56                  20       47    0            1     1    12               0     0     0                         159            1524
      7:35 AM                 0     20   63                  20       39    0            5     0    12               0     0     0                         159            1541
      7:40 AM                 0     11   53                  20       63    0            4     0    16               0     0     0                         167            1579
      7:45 AM                 0     18   47                  25       32    0            6     0     6               0     0     0                         134            1545
      7:50 AM                 0     17   29                  9        36    0            1     0     7               0     0     0                         99             1536
      7:55 AM                 0     20   36                  14       30    0            3     0     8               0     0     0                         111            1516
      8:00 AM                 0     16   34                  10       25    0            2     0     6               0     0     0                         93             1506
      8:05 AM                 0     15   38                  11       33    0            1     0    10               0     0     0                         108            1497
      8:10 AM                 0     11   27                  19       26    0            3     0     7               0     0     0                         93             1483
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                        Southbound                Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left     Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                           TOTAL

 All Vehicles                0       212      688           240     596   0              40     4   160             0         0         0                          1940
 Heavy Trucks                0        4       40            12      52    0              0      0    0              0         0         0                          108
 Pedestrians                          0                              0                          0                             0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Hwy 26 WB ramps                                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10127612
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                       DATE: 11/16/2005

                                 351         310                                                                                  8.5         9.0
                                                                   Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                 44    307    0                                                                                 27.3    5.9    0.0


            70          0                          134       415           [ Hwy 26 WB ramps ]            21.4        0.0                            11.9      12.5

                        0              0.80         1                                                                 0.0                            0.0

             0          0                          280       1                                            0.0         0.0                            12.9       0.0

                              25       176    1                                                                                 12.0    6.8    0.0


                               587     202                                                                                      9.2     7.4
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                  [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                        0




                    0                                    0




                                        0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                            *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                       Glencoe Rd            Hwy 26 WB ramps            Hwy 26 WB ramps
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                     (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                   HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                     TOTAL        TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                1     15    0                    0    15     1           0     0     0              10    0    9                           51
      6:20 AM                1     14    0                    0    23     4           0     0     0              13    1    14                          70
      6:25 AM                0     14    0                    0    13     4           0     0     0              19    0    15                          65
      6:30 AM                0     15    0                    0    23    11           0     0     0              18    0    15                          82
      6:35 AM                5     8     0                    0    27    12           0     0     0              21    0    16                          89
      6:40 AM                1     20    0                    0    23     2           0     0     0              19    0    10                          75
      6:45 AM                2     24    0                    0    30     4           0     0     0              27    1    9                           97
      6:50 AM                1     10    0                    0    19     3           0     0     0              16    0    12                          61
      6:55 AM                1     20    0                    0    18     1           0     0     0              12    0    12                          64             795
      7:00 AM                0     13    0                    0    19     4           0     0     0              16    0    4                           56             805
      7:05 AM                2     9     0                    0    20     5           0     0     0              19    0    11                          66             824
      7:10 AM                6     12    0                    0    24     2           0     0     0              21    0    10                          75             851
      7:15 AM                1     20    0                    0    21     5           0     0     0              25    0    9                           81             881
      7:20 AM                1     9     0                    0    29     1           0     0     0              23    0    14                          77             888
      7:25 AM                2     10    0                    0    34     4           0     0     0              27    0    10                          87             910
      7:30 AM                2     14    1                    0    29     2           0     0     0              33    0    21                          102            930
      7:35 AM                4     21    0                    0    31     6           0     0     0              26    0    10                          98             939
      7:40 AM                3     14    0                    0    33     7           0     0     0              35    0    12                          104            968
      7:45 AM                4     14    0                    0    30     6           0     0     0              19    0    9                           82             953
      7:50 AM                3     11    0                    0    16     5           0     0     0              27    3    16                          81             973
      7:55 AM                3     15    0                    0    24     7           0     0     0              15    0    10                          74             983
      8:00 AM                3     15    0                    0    22     3           0     0     0              13    0    13                          69             996
      8:05 AM                4     9     0                    0    23     4           0     0     0              16    0    6                           62             992
      8:10 AM                4     15    0                    0    24     4           0     0     0              15    0    7                           69             986
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                       Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U                Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                            TOTAL

 All Vehicles               36        196      4              0     372   60          0      0   0              376         0      172                          1216
 Heavy Trucks               4          4       0              0     16    12          0      0   0              48          0      28                           112
 Pedestrians                           0                             0                       0                              0                                    0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                            SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Texaco Dwy                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10127613
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                      DATE: 11/16/2005

                                351         228                                                                               8.5            4.4
                                                                Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                0     351    0                                                                               0.0       8.5    0.0


             0          0                          4       4               [ Texaco Dwy ]                0.0       0.0                              25.0        25.0

                        0             0.91         0                                                               0.0                              0.0

             0          0                          0       48                                            0.0       0.0                              0.0         8.3

                                0     224    48                                                                              0.0    4.0       8.3


                               351     272                                                                                   8.5     4.8
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                               [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                       0




                    0                                  0




                                       0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                           *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd              Texaco Dwy                  Texaco Dwy
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                    HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                    TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                0     21    1                  0    16     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             38
      6:20 AM                0     2     2                  0    27     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             31
      6:25 AM                0     1     5                  0    17     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             23
      6:30 AM                0     2     2                  0    34     0           0     0     0               0     0     2                             40
      6:35 AM                0     0     2                  0    39     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             41
      6:40 AM                0     28    2                  0    25     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             55
      6:45 AM                0     28    1                  0    34     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             63
      6:50 AM                0     27    2                  0    22     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             52
      6:55 AM                0     28    6                  0    19     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             53           502
      7:00 AM                0     14    4                  0    23     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             41           511
      7:05 AM                0     15    6                  0    25     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             47           517
      7:10 AM                0     14    8                  0    26     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             49           533
      7:15 AM                0     28    5                  0    26     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             59           554
      7:20 AM                0     18    2                  0    30     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             51           574
      7:25 AM                0     23    0                  0    38     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             61           612
      7:30 AM                0     27    3                  0    31     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             61           633
      7:35 AM                0     2     4                  0    37     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             43           635
      7:40 AM                0     0     7                  0    40     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             47           627
      7:45 AM                0     2     4                  0    36     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             42           606
      7:50 AM                0     2     5                  0    21     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             28           582
      7:55 AM                0     21    4                  0    31     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             56           585
      8:00 AM                0     29    2                  0    25     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             57           601
      8:05 AM                0     14    2                  0    27     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             43           597
      8:10 AM                0     12    6                  0    28     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             46           594
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles               0       272       20           0     396   0            0       0   0              0         0         4                             692
 Heavy Trucks               0        4        4            0     32    0            0       0   0              0         0         0                             40
 Pedestrians                         0                            0                         0                            0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Highland Ct                                                                                                           QC JOB #: 10127614
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                              DATE: 11/16/2005

                                  257         205                                                                                     5.4            3.4
                                                                   Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                  16    225    16                                                                                    0.0       5.8    6.3


            92          12                           16       61               [ NW Highland Ct ]              0.0         0.0                              0.0         6.6

                        1               0.87         4                                                                    100.0                             0.0

            118      105                             41       71                                               2.5        1.9                               9.8         7.0

                               72       177    54                                                                                    0.0    4.0       5.6


                                371     303                                                                                          5.1     3.3
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                      [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                         0




                    0                                     0




                                         0                                                               NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                  *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                       Glencoe Rd                NW Highland Ct              NW Highland Ct
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                     HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                            TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U                Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                 7     12    3                    1    14     0              1     0     5               1     0     0                               44
      6:20 AM                 8     14    5                    1    15     1              1     0    13               1     0     1                               60
      6:25 AM                 8     14   10                    3     8     0              2     0    10               1     0     1                               57
      6:30 AM                 9     17    6                    6    16     3              1     0    21               3     0     4                               86
      6:35 AM                 5     12    4                    1    19     1              2     1     8               12    0     1                               66
      6:40 AM                 3     19    8                    1     9     1              1     0     8               8     0     1                               59
      6:45 AM                 5     18    6                    1    23     1              1     0    10               3     1     1                               70
      6:50 AM                 8     16    4                    2    19     1              1     0     5               2     0     1                               59
      6:55 AM                 10    14   10                    0    10     0              0     0     5               4     0     2                               55           671
      7:00 AM                 8     6     4                    1    16     0              2     0     9               3     0     0                               49           683
      7:05 AM                 5     9     6                    0    18     0              2     0    11               3     1     2                               57           697
      7:10 AM                 7     8     6                    4    17     1              0     0    11               3     1     2                               60           722
      7:15 AM                 7     20    6                    0    10     2              0     1     6               3     0     3                               58           736
      7:20 AM                 3     15    1                    2    19     4              0     0    10               6     0     2                               62           738
      7:25 AM                 6     17    0                    0    20     2              0     0     6               4     0     2                               57           738
      7:30 AM                 4     24    2                    3    24     1              3     0    10               2     0     0                               73           725
      7:35 AM                 8     18    4                    2    23     1              3     0     9               4     0     1                               73           732
      7:40 AM                 1     12    5                    1    26     3              0     0    13               4     1     0                               66           739
      7:45 AM                 9     11    7                    0    22     2              0     1     6               2     0     4                               64           733
      7:50 AM                 9     16    7                    4    12     3              4     0     7               3     0     2                               67           741
      7:55 AM                 4     16    5                    1    13     2              4     2    17               4     0     0                               68           754
      8:00 AM                 8     21    1                    4    15     1              1     0    11               3     0     2                               67           772
      8:05 AM                 1     12    3                    1    19     2              0     0    10               2     0     0                               50           765
      8:10 AM                 4     8     6                    2    14     0              0     0     7               7     0     0                               48           753
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                       Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U                Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                                 TOTAL

 All Vehicles                52        216      44            24    292   20              24        0   128          40          4         4                             848
 Heavy Trucks                0          4       0             4     12    0               0         0    4           4           0         0                             28
 Pedestrians                            0                            0                              0                            0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Gas Dwy N of Highland                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10127615
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                        DATE: 11/16/2005

                                  254         196                                                                               5.5            6.1
                                                                Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                  39    215    0                                                                              0.0        6.5    0.0


            62          16                          0       0          [ Gas Dwy N of Highland ]         6.5       6.3                                0.0       0.0

                        0               0.80        0                                                              0.0                                0.0

            35       19                             0       0                                            8.6       10.5                               0.0       0.0

                               23       180    0                                                                              17.4    6.1       0.0


                                234     203                                                                                   6.8     7.4
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                               [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                         0




                    0                                   0




                                         0                                                          NORTH




                                                                                                                                                            *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd           Gas Dwy N of Highland     Gas Dwy N of Highland
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                HOURLY
                                                                                                                                      TOTAL TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                 1     17    0                  0     0     6            0     0     2             0     0     0           26
      6:20 AM                 5     9     0                  0    15     4            0     0     2             0     0     0           35
      6:25 AM                 6     7     0                  0     6     5            1     0     0             0     0     0           25
      6:30 AM                 6     3     0                  0    26     1            0     0     2             0     0     0           38
      6:35 AM                 1     27    0                  0    18     4            5     0     1             0     0     0           56
      6:40 AM                 1     26    0                  0     3     4            3     0     0             0     0     0           37
      6:45 AM                 2     17    0                  0     0     4            2     0     1             0     0     0           26
      6:50 AM                 1     14    0                  0    23     1            2     0     2             0     0     0           43
      6:55 AM                 2     19    0                  0     9     3            2     0     2             0     0     0           37       431
      7:00 AM                 1     8     0                  0    16     3            1     0     2             0     0     0           31       421
      7:05 AM                 1     12    0                  0    17     3            1     0     2             0     0     0           36       419
      7:10 AM                 1     7     0                  0    24     0            0     0     2             0     0     0           34       424
      7:15 AM                 2     23    0                  0     9     3            3     0     0             0     0     0           40       438
      7:20 AM                 0     23    0                  0    23     4            0     0     2             0     0     0           52       455
      7:25 AM                 3     11    0                  0    22     3            0     0     3             0     0     0           42       472
      7:30 AM                 3     23    0                  0    24     6            2     0     2             0     0     0           60       494
      7:35 AM                 3     14    0                  0    23     4            0     0     1             0     0     0           45       483
      7:40 AM                 4     9     0                  0    25     5            3     0     0             0     0     0           46       492
      7:45 AM                 1     17    0                  0    24     1            2     0     1             0     0     0           46       512
      7:50 AM                 2     22    0                  0    14     6            2     0     1             0     0     0           47       516
      7:55 AM                 1     22    0                  0    13     4            2     0     1             0     0     0           43       522
      8:00 AM                 2     21    0                  0    16     4            1     0     0             0     0     0           44       535
      8:05 AM                 4     5     0                  0    18     6            0     0     1             0     0     0           34       533
      8:10 AM                 0     16    0                  0    16     1            2     0     1             0     0     0           36       535
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U           TOTAL

 All Vehicles                24        228      0           0    276   52             8      0     28          0          0          0                          616
 Heavy Trucks                4         12       0           0     8    0              0      0     0           0          0          0                          24
 Pedestrians                            0                         0                          0                            0                                      0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Pacific St                                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10127616
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                          DATE: 11/16/2005

                                 248         219                                                                                     3.6         6.4
                                                                 Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                 0     235    13                                                                                   0.0     3.8    0.0


            10          7                          34       40              [ NW Pacific St ]                30.0       14.3                            8.8         7.5

                        5              0.78        2                                                                    20.0                            0.0

            14          2                          4        18                                               14.3       0.0                             0.0         5.6

                                 8     178    0                                                                                    37.5    5.6    0.0


                               241     186                                                                                         3.7     7.0
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                     [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                        0




                    0                                   0




                                        0                                                                NORTH




                                                                                                                                                              *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                      Glencoe Rd               NW Pacific St              NW Pacific St
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                    (Southbound)               (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                      HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                        TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U               Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                0     17    0                   0     8     0             0     0     0              0    0      3                               28
      6:20 AM                0     14    0                   0    12     0             0     0     0              0    0      6                               32
      6:25 AM                0     12    0                   1     8     0             0     0     0              0    0      2                               23
      6:30 AM                0     9     0                   0    20     0             0     0     0              0    0      2                               31
      6:35 AM                1     22    0                   0    21     0             0     0     0              0    0      2                               46
      6:40 AM                0     22    0                   0    15     0             0     0     0              0    0      4                               41
      6:45 AM                0     16    0                   0    20     0             0     0     0              1    0      8                               45
      6:50 AM                0     13    0                   0    15     0             1     0     0              1    0      4                               34
      6:55 AM                1     18    0                   0    15     0             0     0     0              1    0      2                               37           398
      7:00 AM                0     8     0                   2    12     0             2     0     0              0    0      2                               26           391
      7:05 AM                1     11    0                   0    19     0             1     0     0              1    0      1                               34           399
      7:10 AM                0     8     0                   0    17     0             0     0     0              0    0      2                               27           404
      7:15 AM                2     20    0                   0    12     0             0     1     0              0    1      4                               40           416
      7:20 AM                1     22    0                   11   23     0             1     1     1              0    1      3                               64           448
      7:25 AM                2     12    0                   0    19     0             1     0     1              0    0      3                               38           463
      7:30 AM                1     23    0                   0    25     0             0     2     0              0    0      3                               54           486
      7:35 AM                0     17    0                   0    30     0             1     1     0              0    0      1                               50           490
      7:40 AM                0     10    0                   0    28     0             0     0     0              0    0      1                               39           488
      7:45 AM                0     16    0                   1    27     0             0     0     0              0    0      2                               46           489
      7:50 AM                2     20    0                   0    23     0             1     0     0              0    0      2                               48           503
      7:55 AM                2     19    0                   0    17     0             0     0     0              0    0      1                               39           505
      8:00 AM                2     20    0                   2    17     0             0     0     4              0    1      1                               47           526
      8:05 AM                1     8     0                   0    19     1             0     0     3              1    0      0                               33           525
      8:10 AM                0     14    0                   1    17     0             0     0     2              0    0      0                               34           532
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                      Southbound                 Eastbound                 Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U               Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                                 TOTAL

 All Vehicles               16       228       0            44    268   0              8        12   8              0          4          36                         624
 Heavy Trucks               4        12        0            0      4    0              0        4    0              0          0          8                          32
 Pedestrians                          0                            0                            0                              0                                      0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Cottage St                                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10127617
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                     DATE: 11/16/2005

                                230         197                                                                              5.2            6.1
                                                              Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                0     230    0                                                                              0.0       5.2    0.0


             2          1                         0       0              [ NW Cottage St ]              0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                        0             0.79        0                                                               0.0                              0.0

            17       16                           0       0                                             0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                                2     196    0                                                                              0.0    6.1       0.0


                               246     198                                                                                  4.9     6.1
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                              [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                       0




                    0                                 0




                                       0                                                          NORTH




                                                                                                                                                         *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                    Glencoe Rd              NW Cottage St              NW Cottage St
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                   HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                   TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                0     12    0                 0    21     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             34
      6:20 AM                0     11    0                 0    11     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             23
      6:25 AM                0     9     0                 0    13     0            0     0     3              0     0     0                             25
      6:30 AM                1     10    0                 0    15     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             26
      6:35 AM                0     21    0                 0    15     0            0     0     2              0     0     0                             38
      6:40 AM                0     25    0                 0    14     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             40
      6:45 AM                0     21    0                 0    20     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             42
      6:50 AM                0     19    0                 0    15     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             34
      6:55 AM                0     20    0                 0    14     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             34           368
      7:00 AM                0     8     0                 0    14     0            0     0     2              0     0     0                             24           363
      7:05 AM                0     12    0                 0    17     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             29           368
      7:10 AM                1     6     0                 0    17     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             24           373
      7:15 AM                0     21    0                 0    15     0            1     0     2              0     0     0                             39           378
      7:20 AM                0     18    0                 0    17     0            0     0     3              0     0     0                             38           393
      7:25 AM                0     18    0                 0    22     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             40           408
      7:30 AM                0     24    0                 0    21     0            0     0     6              0     0     0                             51           433
      7:35 AM                1     17    0                 0    27     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             46           441
      7:40 AM                0     12    0                 0    31     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             44           445
      7:45 AM                1     14    0                 0    18     0            0     0     2              0     0     0                             35           438
      7:50 AM                0     22    0                 0    24     0            1     0     1              0     0     0                             48           452
      7:55 AM                1     18    0                 0    17     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             36           454
      8:00 AM                1     19    0                 0    21     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             42           472
      8:05 AM                0     7     0                 0    16     0            0     0     2              0     0     0                             25           468
      8:10 AM                0     10    0                 0    16     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             27           471
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles               4       212       0           0    316   0              0        0   32           0         0         0                             564
 Heavy Trucks               0       16        0           0    16    0              0        0   0            0         0         0                             32
 Pedestrians                         0                          0                            0                          0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Commercial -W Union                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10127618
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                          DATE: 11/16/2005

                                   180          96                                                                                   3.9         10.4
                                                                    Peak-Hour: 6:45 AM -- 7:45 AM
                                 2       151     27                                                                                 0.0    4.6    0.0


            69          4                             15       62          [ NW Commercial -W Union ]         7.2        50.0                           6.7       12.9

                     12                  0.83         16                                                                 0.0                            6.3

            60       44                               31       94                                            10.0        9.1                            19.4       2.1

                               51        77     55                                                                                  7.8    9.1    3.6


                               226     183                                                                                          7.5     7.1
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                      [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                          0




                    0                                      0




                                          0                                                              NORTH




                                                                                                                                                               *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                        Glencoe Rd                    Glencoe Rd           NW Commercial -W Union
                                                                                                              NW Commercial -W Union
      PERIOD                         (Northbound)                  (Southbound)               (Eastbound)         (Westbound)               HOURLY
                                                                                                                                    TOTAL TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left      Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U    Left Thru Right U
      6:15 AM                2          2     5                 0    12     0             0     0     5         2   1     0           29
      6:20 AM                6          2     4                 2     7     1             0     0     3         1   0     0           26
      6:25 AM                6          2     3                 0     7     1             0     2     2         4   0     0           27
      6:30 AM                2          5     3                 1     5     0             0     1     9         1   1     0           28
      6:35 AM                13         4     4                 2     8     0             1     1     5         0   2     0           40
      6:40 AM                10         5     8                 3     4     0             0     2     4         4   0     1           41
      6:45 AM                8          3     8                 3    12     0             0     1     7         1   3     0           46
      6:50 AM                5          7     6                 1    11     0             1     0     4         0   1     0           36
      6:55 AM                7          5     8                 3     7     0             0     1     5         2   1     0           39       385
      7:00 AM                1          4     3                 2     7     0             1     0     2         6   0     4           30       387
      7:05 AM                2          9     1                 3     8     1             0     1     5         3   0     1           34       397
      7:10 AM                1          5     0                 1    13     0             1     0     2         2   0     1           26       402
      7:15 AM                4          8     6                 2    12     0             0     2     0         2   3     3           42       415
      7:20 AM                4          3     4                 1    13     0             1     2     2         2   3     1           36       425
      7:25 AM                9          9     2                 2    14     0             0     1     5         5   2     2           51       449
      7:30 AM                3          12    6                 2    19     0             0     0     3         0   1     2           48       469
      7:35 AM                6          4     5                 3    18     1             0     2     2         4   2     0           47       476
      7:40 AM                1          8     6                 4    17     0             0     2     7         4   0     1           50       485
      7:45 AM                0          6     4                 5     8     0             0     0     4         6   2     0           35       474
      7:50 AM                2          12    7                 1    12     0             0     0     5         4   1     1           45       483
      7:55 AM                7          7     5                 2     9     0             0     2     1         4   4     1           42       486
      8:00 AM                6          2     3                 0     2     3             6     7     5         1   14    0           49       505
      8:05 AM                2          3     1                 0     3     4             2     5     4         0   9     1           34       505
      8:10 AM                1          0     0                 0     4     7             0     6     2         2   7     0           29       508
  PEAK 15-MIN                         Northbound                    Southbound                 Eastbound           Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left      Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U    Left Thru Right U          TOTAL

 All Vehicles               72        100        52            28    204    4             0     12      40          36         20         16                       584
 Heavy Trucks               4          4         4             0     12     0             0     0       0           4          0          0                        28
 Pedestrians                           0                              0                         0                              0                                    0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Beach Rd                                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10127601
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                        DATE: 11/16/2005

                                  753         636                                                                               4.5            2.5
                                                                Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                 24     729    0                                                                               0.0       4.7    0.0


            41          11                          0       0               [ NW Beach Rd ]                0.0       9.1                              0.0       0.0

                        0               0.91        0                                                                0.0                              0.0

            16          5                           0       0                                              6.3       0.0                              0.0       0.0

                                 17     625    0                                                                               0.0    2.4       0.0


                                734     642                                                                                    4.6     2.3
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                         0




                    0                                   0




                                         0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                            *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd              NW Beach Rd                 NW Beach Rd
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                  HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                      TOTAL       TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 0     51    0                  0    45     1            2     0     0               0    0     0                          99
      4:05 PM                 1     50    0                  0    55     1            0     0     1               0    0     0                          108
      4:10 PM                 0     44    0                  0    61     1            0     0     0               0    0     0                          106
      4:15 PM                 1     35    0                  0    72     2            0     0     0               0    0     0                          110
      4:20 PM                 0     46    0                  0    71     6            0     0     0               0    0     0                          123
      4:25 PM                 0     43    0                  0    51     2            1     0     2               0    0     0                          99
      4:30 PM                 1     43    0                  0    46     8            1     0     0               0    0     0                          99
      4:35 PM                 0     37    0                  1    57     1            0     0     2               0    0     0                          98
      4:40 PM                 1     31    0                  0    67     0            0     0     1               0    0     0                          100
      4:45 PM                 12    41    0                  0    84     1            2     0     0               0    0     0                          140
      4:50 PM                 0     46    0                  0    66     2            0     0     1               0    0     0                          115
      4:55 PM                 1     61    0                  0    62     3            1     0     1               0    0     0                          129            1326
      5:00 PM                 0     40    0                  0    54     4            0     0     0               0    0     0                          98             1325
      5:05 PM                 1     49    0                  0    59     1            3     0     1               0    0     0                          114            1331
      5:10 PM                 0     44    0                  0    66     2            2     0     1               0    0     0                          115            1340
      5:15 PM                 1     55    0                  0    50     3            1     0     0               0    0     0                          110            1340
      5:20 PM                 0     82    0                  0    66     1            0     0     0               0    0     0                          149            1366
      5:25 PM                 1     62    0                  0    60     3            2     0     0               0    0     0                          128            1395
      5:30 PM                 1     51    0                  0    52     0            0     0     0               0    0     0                          104            1400
      5:35 PM                 0     54    0                  0    50     1            0     0     0               0    0     0                          105            1407
      5:40 PM                 0     40    0                  0    60     3            0     0     1               0    0     0                          104            1411
      5:45 PM                 1     37    0                  0    51     2            1     0     3               0    0     0                          95             1366
      5:50 PM                 0     45    0                  0    46     2            0     0     1               0    0     0                          94             1345
      5:55 PM                 0     40    0                  0    52     0            0     0     0               0    0     0                          92             1308
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                           TOTAL

 All Vehicles                8        796       0           0    704   28            12       0   0              0         0         0                          1548
 Heavy Trucks                0        24        0           0    36    0             0        0   0              0         0         0                           60
 Pedestrians                           0                          0                           0                            0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                             SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Hwy 26 EB ramps                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10127602
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                           DATE: 11/16/2005

                                 846        295                                                                                    4.7            3.7
                                                                   Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                 0     691 155                                                                                    0.0       4.9    3.9


             0          33                          0        0                [ Hwy 26 EB ramps ]             0.0       6.1                              0.0       0.0

                        1              0.87         0                                                                   0.0                              0.0

            88       54                             0       559                                               3.4       1.9                              0.0       4.3

                                 0     262 403                                                                                    0.0    3.4       4.5


                                745     665                                                                                       4.7     4.1
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                   [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                        0




                    0                                   0




                                        0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                               *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                        Glencoe Rd             Hwy 26 EB ramps             Hwy 26 EB ramps
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                      (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                  HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                         TOTAL       TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left     Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 0     23   29                  16       50    0            2     0     3               0     0     0                         123
      4:05 PM                 0     16   29                  15       39    0            6     0     4               0     0     0                         109
      4:10 PM                 0     22   23                  14       70    0            2     0     4               0     0     0                         135
      4:15 PM                 0     15   20                  18       72    0            4     0     6               0     0     0                         135
      4:20 PM                 0     20   23                  11       56    0            3     0     7               0     0     0                         120
      4:25 PM                 0     14   35                  14       57    0            3     0     2               0     0     0                         125
      4:30 PM                 0     21   31                  6        46    0            1     0     5               0     0     0                         110
      4:35 PM                 0     6    27                  14       48    0            2     0     5               0     0     0                         102
      4:40 PM                 0     18   18                  12       73    0            5     0     6               0     0     0                         132
      4:45 PM                 0     22   16                  13       70    0            3     0     9               0     0     0                         133
      4:50 PM                 0     26   31                  14       53    0            2     0     3               0     0     0                         129
      4:55 PM                 0     28   37                  13       64    0            3     0     2               0     0     0                         147            1500
      5:00 PM                 0     20   24                  13       58    0            3     0     2               0     0     0                         120            1497
      5:05 PM                 0     18   31                  8        57    0            3     0     7               0     0     0                         124            1512
      5:10 PM                 0     21   28                  10       60    0            4     0     4               0     0     0                         127            1504
      5:15 PM                 0     23   41                  15       57    0            2     0     2               0     0     0                         140            1509
      5:20 PM                 0     32   45                  11       66    0            4     0     9               0     0     0                         167            1556
      5:25 PM                 0     24   51                  19       53    0            2     0     5               0     0     0                         154            1585
      5:30 PM                 0     20   39                  13       51    0            3     0     4               0     0     0                         130            1605
      5:35 PM                 0     11   36                  7        52    0            3     1     3               0     0     0                         113            1616
      5:40 PM                 0     17   24                  19       50    0            1     0     4               0     0     0                         115            1599
      5:45 PM                 0     14   20                  6        42    0            2     0     6               0     0     0                         90             1556
      5:50 PM                 0     19   26                  11       48    0            5     0     3               0     0     0                         112            1539
      5:55 PM                 0     21   19                  14       48    0            1     0     3               0     0     0                         106            1498
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                        Southbound                Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left     Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                           TOTAL

 All Vehicles                0       316      548           180     704   0              32     0   64              0         0         0                          1844
 Heavy Trucks                0        4       20             8      28    0              0      0   0               0         0         0                           60
 Pedestrians                          0                              0                          0                             0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Hwy 26 WB ramps                                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10127603
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                        DATE: 11/16/2005

                                   379         437                                                                                 2.6         1.8
                                                                     Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                               60        319    0                                                                                 5.0    2.2    0.0


            167         0                            253       765           [ Hwy 26 WB ramps ]            3.0         0.0                           1.2       4.1

                        0                0.93         2                                                                 0.0                           0.0

             0          0                            510       0                                            0.0         0.0                           5.5       0.0

                              105        184    0                                                                                 1.9    2.7    0.0


                               829     289                                                                                        4.2     2.4
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                    [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                          0




                    0                                      0




                                          0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                            *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                      Glencoe Rd                      Glencoe Rd            Hwy 26 WB ramps            Hwy 26 WB ramps
      PERIOD                       (Northbound)                    (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                 HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                      TOTAL       TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left    Thru Right U               Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                8        16    0                   0    27     2           0     0     0              39    0    18                        110
      4:05 PM                10       15    0                   0    22     0           0     0     0              34    0    22                        103
      4:10 PM                8        13    0                   0    34     1           0     0     0              46    0    20                        122
      4:15 PM                3        21    0                   0    39     0           0     0     0              43    0    20                        126
      4:20 PM                8        12    0                   0    27     0           0     0     0              44    0    14                        105
      4:25 PM                4        10    0                   0    30     0           0     0     0              39    0    20                        103
      4:30 PM                5        12    0                   0    19     1           0     0     0              36    0    18                        91
      4:35 PM                1        9     0                   0    22     3           0     0     0              42    0    19                        96
      4:40 PM                4        15    0                   0    34     4           0     0     0              47    0    20                        124
      4:45 PM                9        20    0                   0    23     1           0     0     0              51    0    19                        123
      4:50 PM                7        20    0                   0    23     2           0     0     0              43    2    20                        117
      4:55 PM                7        20    0                   0    25     3           0     0     0              49    0    28                        132            1352
      5:00 PM                7        13    0                   0    29     4           0     0     0              43    0    12                        108            1350
      5:05 PM                8        16    0                   0    25     4           0     0     0              40    0    26                        119            1366
      5:10 PM                12       14    0                   0    24     4           0     0     0              46    0    22                        122            1366
      5:15 PM                12       12    0                   0    31     8           0     0     0              40    0    21                        124            1364
      5:20 PM                13       14    0                   0    28     7           0     0     0              51    0    22                        135            1394
      5:25 PM                10       18    0                   0    37     5           0     0     0              37    0    21                        128            1419
      5:30 PM                10       10    0                   0    22    14           0     0     0              33    0    23                        112            1440
      5:35 PM                5        15    0                   0    24     7           0     0     0              41    0    23                        115            1459
      5:40 PM                5        12    0                   0    28     1           0     0     0              36    0    16                        98             1433
      5:45 PM                2        18    0                   0    20     9           0     0     0              28    0    21                        98             1408
      5:50 PM                7        18    0                   0    17     9           0     0     0              41    0    14                        106            1397
      5:55 PM                6        14    0                   0    26     5           0     0     0              33    0    22                        106            1371
  PEAK 15-MIN                       Northbound                      Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left    Thru Right U               Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                          TOTAL

 All Vehicles               140      176         0              0     384   80          0      0   0              512         0         256                     1548
 Heavy Trucks                4        0          0              0      8    0           0      0   0              24          0          0                       36
 Pedestrians                          0                                0                       0                              0                                  0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Texaco Dwy                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10127604
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                      DATE: 11/16/2005

                                418         398                                                                               1.2            1.8
                                                                Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                0     418    0                                                                               0.0       1.2    0.0


             0          0                          1       1               [ Texaco Dwy ]                0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                        0             0.93         0                                                               0.0                              0.0

             0          0                          0       40                                            0.0       0.0                              0.0         2.5

                                0     397    40                                                                              0.0    1.8       2.5


                               418     437                                                                                   1.2     1.8
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                               [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                       0




                    0                                  0




                                       0                                                            NORTH




                                                                                                                                                          *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd              Texaco Dwy                  Texaco Dwy
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                    HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                    TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                0     31    3                  0    31     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             65
      4:05 PM                0     32    5                  0    35     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             72
      4:10 PM                0     28    5                  0    47     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             80
      4:15 PM                0     38    3                  0    43     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             84
      4:20 PM                0     22    4                  0    29     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             55
      4:25 PM                0     28    2                  0    42     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             72
      4:30 PM                0     26    4                  0    28     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             58
      4:35 PM                0     22    6                  0    30     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             58
      4:40 PM                0     32    3                  0    41     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             76
      4:45 PM                0     39    0                  0    32     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             71
      4:50 PM                0     37    3                  0    36     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             76
      4:55 PM                0     44    4                  0    28     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             76           843
      5:00 PM                0     23    2                  0    38     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             63           841
      5:05 PM                0     38    4                  0    35     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             77           846
      5:10 PM                0     29    7                  0    32     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             69           835
      5:15 PM                0     29    4                  0    43     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             76           827
      5:20 PM                0     31    5                  0    37     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             73           845
      5:25 PM                0     37    2                  0    43     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             82           855
      5:30 PM                0     29    4                  0    29     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             62           859
      5:35 PM                0     36    2                  0    36     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             74           875
      5:40 PM                0     25    3                  0    29     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             57           856
      5:45 PM                0     36    3                  0    25     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             64           849
      5:50 PM                0     31    1                  0    28     0           0     0     0               0     0     1                             61           834
      5:55 PM                0     34    2                  0    30     0           0     0     0               0     0     0                             66           824
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles               0       388       44           0     492   0            0       0   0              0         0         0                             924
 Heavy Trucks               0        0        0            0      4    0            0       0   0              0         0         0                              4
 Pedestrians                         0                            0                         0                            0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Highland Ct                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10127605
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                          DATE: 11/16/2005

                                    312         333                                                                                  1.0         1.8
                                                                    Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                  15      285    12                                                                                 0.0    1.1    0.0


            101         10                            20       71              [ NW Highland Ct ]              0.0        0.0                           0.0         0.0

                        4                 0.92        4                                                                   0.0                           0.0

            100      86                               47       23                                              2.0        2.3                           0.0         0.0

                                82        303    7                                                                                  0.0    2.0    0.0


                                418     392                                                                                         1.2     1.5
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                     [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                           0




                    0                                      0




                                           0                                                             NORTH




                                                                                                                                                              *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                       Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd               NW Highland Ct              NW Highland Ct
      PERIOD                        (Northbound)                   (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                        TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left    Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 8        24    1                  1    18     1             1     0     9               4     0     4                           71
      4:05 PM                 7        23    1                  0    23     3             2     0    10               2     0     4                           75
      4:10 PM                 8        19    2                  4    27     4             2     0    12               8     0     1                           87
      4:15 PM                 7        30    1                  1    24     0             0     1     9               10    0     3                           86
      4:20 PM                 3        21    0                  2    16     0             2     0     8               5     0     2                           59
      4:25 PM                 6        19    2                  4    23     1             0     0    10               9     0     2                           76
      4:30 PM                 6        22    0                  1    16     2             0     0     6               6     0     1                           60
      4:35 PM                 6        16    0                  2    21     1             1     1     7               2     0     6                           63
      4:40 PM                 5        24    1                  0    27     1             0     0     8               6     1     3                           76
      4:45 PM                 9        30    0                  0    23     1             0     0     6               3     0     0                           72
      4:50 PM                 11       24    1                  1    28     0             1     0     6               2     0     0                           74
      4:55 PM                 6        38    0                  1    20     1             1     0     6               2     0     2                           77           876
      5:00 PM                 5        20    0                  1    24     3             0     0     8               6     1     2                           70           875
      5:05 PM                 9        28    0                  1    25     1             2     1    10               0     1     2                           80           880
      5:10 PM                 7        21    1                  1    18     1             1     1     8               6     0     2                           67           860
      5:15 PM                 4        22    1                  1    24     1             0     1    12               7     0     2                           75           849
      5:20 PM                 7        26    1                  1    24     0             2     0     8               5     0     2                           76           866
      5:25 PM                 8        28    0                  3    31     1             0     1     6               6     0     2                           86           876
      5:30 PM                 4        20    3                  1    17     2             0     0     9               3     1     1                           61           877
      5:35 PM                 8        26    0                  1    27     1             1     0     5               4     1     3                           77           891
      5:40 PM                 4        20    0                  0    24     3             2     0     2               3     0     2                           60           875
      5:45 PM                 11       24    1                  0    15     1             1     0     5               5     0     1                           64           867
      5:50 PM                 6        28    0                  0    13     1             2     0    13               2     0     1                           66           859
      5:55 PM                 5        28    0                  2    22     1             2     0     8               0     1     0                           69           851
  PEAK 15-MIN                        Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left    Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U           Left Thru Right U                             TOTAL

 All Vehicles                76        304        8            20    316   8              8         8   104          72         0         24                         948
 Heavy Trucks                0          0         0            0      0    0              0         0    4           0          0         0                           4
 Pedestrians                            0                             0                             0                           0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--Gas Dwy N of Highland                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10127606
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                      DATE: 11/16/2005

                                  292         331                                                                             1.0            5.4
                                                                Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                  28    264    0                                                                             3.6       0.8    0.0


            49          16                          0       0          [ Gas Dwy N of Highland ]         4.1       0.0                              0.0       0.0

                        0               0.91        0                                                              0.0                              0.0

            36       20                             0       0                                            0.0       0.0                              0.0       0.0

                               21       315    0                                                                             4.8    5.7       0.0


                                284     336                                                                                  0.7     5.7
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                              [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                         0




                    0                                   0




                                         0                                                          NORTH




                                                                                                                                                          *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd           Gas Dwy N of Highland     Gas Dwy N of Highland
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                HOURLY
                                                                                                                                      TOTAL TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 1     36    0                  0    15     5            2     0     0             0     0     0           59
      4:05 PM                 1     32    0                  0    22     3            2     0     1             0     0     0           61
      4:10 PM                 1     30    0                  0    29     4            2     0     2             0     0     0           68
      4:15 PM                 6     21    0                  0    23     2            2     0     0             0     0     0           54
      4:20 PM                 3     16    0                  0    12     4            0     0     2             0     0     0           37
      4:25 PM                 1     23    0                  0    23     1            1     0     4             0     0     0           53
      4:30 PM                 4     21    0                  0    17     2            2     0     0             0     0     0           46
      4:35 PM                 0     23    0                  0    22     2            1     0     0             0     0     0           48
      4:40 PM                 3     13    0                  0    25     0            1     0     3             0     0     0           45
      4:45 PM                 1     30    0                  0    21     2            1     0     1             0     0     0           56
      4:50 PM                 2     23    0                  0    25     1            2     0     3             0     0     0           56
      4:55 PM                 4     41    0                  0    19     2            3     0     1             0     0     0           70       653
      5:00 PM                 3     22    0                  0    23     3            2     0     2             0     0     0           55       649
      5:05 PM                 3     24    0                  0    24     3            2     0     0             0     0     0           56       644
      5:10 PM                 0     25    0                  0    16     2            1     0     2             0     0     0           46       622
      5:15 PM                 2     24    0                  0    23     2            0     0     1             0     0     0           52       620
      5:20 PM                 1     33    0                  0    22     2            2     0     1             0     0     0           61       644
      5:25 PM                 1     31    0                  0    27     4            0     0     4             0     0     0           67       658
      5:30 PM                 1     22    0                  0    16     2            1     0     2             0     0     0           44       656
      5:35 PM                 0     28    0                  0    25     2            1     0     2             0     0     0           58       666
      5:40 PM                 3     12    0                  0    23     3            1     0     1             0     0     0           43       664
      5:45 PM                 0     25    0                  0    13     2            1     0     1             0     0     0           42       650
      5:50 PM                 0     31    0                  0    13     0            0     0     1             0     0     0           45       639
      5:55 PM                 2     27    0                  0    23     2            0     0     0             0     0     0           54       623
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U           TOTAL

 All Vehicles                28        376      0           0    260   20            24      0     20          0         0         0                          728
 Heavy Trucks                4         28       0           0     4    0             0       0     0           0         0         0                          36
 Pedestrians                            0                         0                          0                           0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Pacific St                                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10127607
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                          DATE: 11/16/2005

                                  288         288                                                                                 1.0            1.0
                                                                 Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                  6     277    5                                                                                 0.0       1.1    0.0


            47          29                          4       11              [ NW Pacific St ]                0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                        0               0.94        1                                                                  0.0                              0.0

            33          4                           6       14                                               0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                               40       255    9                                                                                 0.0    1.2       0.0


                                287     304                                                                                      1.0     1.0
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                  [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                         0




                    0                                   0




                                         0                                                              NORTH




                                                                                                                                                              *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                    Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd               NW Pacific St                NW Pacific St
      PERIOD                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                    HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                        TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U            Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 1     32    0                  0    28     1             0     0     0                0    0      0                             62
      4:05 PM                 2     27    0                  0    28     0             4     0     0                0    0      1                             62
      4:10 PM                 1     26    0                  0    34     0             2     0     0                0    0      2                             65
      4:15 PM                 1     21    1                  2    26     0             1     0     0                0    0      0                             52
      4:20 PM                 0     19    0                  1    15     1             1     0     0                0    0      0                             37
      4:25 PM                 2     20    0                  0    20     0             4     0     0                0    0      0                             46
      4:30 PM                 6     15    0                  0    20     0             3     0     1                1    1      2                             49
      4:35 PM                 5     14    2                  0    23     0             2     0     0                0    0      0                             46
      4:40 PM                 0     14    0                  0    22     1             3     0     0                0    0      0                             40
      4:45 PM                 3     26    0                  1    21     1             3     0     0                0    0      1                             56
      4:50 PM                 2     18    1                  0    24     0             1     0     0                3    0      0                             49
      4:55 PM                 7     31    1                  0    20     1             1     0     0                0    1      0                             62           626
      5:00 PM                 3     17    1                  0    25     0             3     0     1                0    0      0                             50           614
      5:05 PM                 3     20    0                  0    29     0             1     0     2                0    0      1                             56           608
      5:10 PM                 3     20    0                  0    21     0             4     0     1                0    0      1                             50           593
      5:15 PM                 4     22    0                  0    18     1             3     0     0                0    0      0                             48           589
      5:20 PM                 4     25    1                  0    26     1             1     0     0                0    0      0                             58           610
      5:25 PM                 3     28    1                  0    28     0             3     0     0                0    0      0                             63           627
      5:30 PM                 2     17    2                  1    18     0             2     0     0                0    0      0                             42           620
      5:35 PM                 4     20    2                  0    27     0             5     0     0                0    0      0                             58           632
      5:40 PM                 2     11    0                  3    20     2             2     0     0                3    0      1                             44           636
      5:45 PM                 3     19    1                  0    12     0             2     0     0                0    0      1                             38           618
      5:50 PM                 4     27    0                  0    10     1             3     0     0                0    0      1                             46           615
      5:55 PM                 4     25    0                  0    21     0             4     0     0                1    0      0                             55           608
  PEAK 15-MIN                     Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U         Left Thru Right U            Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles                44       300       8           0     288   8             28        0   0              0         0         0                             676
 Heavy Trucks                0         0        0           0      0    0             0         0   0              0         0         0                              0
 Pedestrians                           0                           0                            0                            0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                               SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Cottage St                                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10127608
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                      DATE: 11/16/2005

                                 264         255                                                                              2.7            1.6
                                                               Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                 3     261    0                                                                              0.0       2.7    0.0


            17          3                          0       0              [ NW Cottage St ]              0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                        0              0.93        0                                                               0.0                              0.0

            13       10                            0       0                                             0.0       0.0                              0.0         0.0

                              14       252    0                                                                              0.0    1.6       0.0


                               271     266                                                                                   2.6     1.5
                            [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                               [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                        0




                    0                                  0




                                        0                                                          NORTH




                                                                                                                                                          *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Glencoe Rd                     Glencoe Rd              NW Cottage St              NW Cottage St
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                   HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                    TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                1     31    0                  0    27     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             59
      4:05 PM                4     21    0                  0    26     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             51
      4:10 PM                3     14    0                  0    28     0            1     0     1              0     0     0                             47
      4:15 PM                2     25    0                  0    27     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             54
      4:20 PM                0     24    0                  0    22     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             46
      4:25 PM                2     16    0                  0    17     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             35
      4:30 PM                0     18    0                  0    18     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             37
      4:35 PM                0     17    0                  0    22     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             40
      4:40 PM                4     23    0                  0    21     1            1     0     0              0     0     0                             50
      4:45 PM                1     26    0                  0    22     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             50
      4:50 PM                0     17    0                  0    22     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             40
      4:55 PM                1     29    0                  0    16     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             46           555
      5:00 PM                0     21    0                  0    24     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             46           542
      5:05 PM                2     23    0                  0    26     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             51           542
      5:10 PM                1     21    0                  0    18     1            0     0     0              0     0     0                             41           536
      5:15 PM                0     16    0                  0    21     0            0     0     0              0     0     0                             37           519
      5:20 PM                2     24    0                  0    26     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             53           526
      5:25 PM                2     23    0                  0    23     2            0     0     1              0     0     0                             51           542
      5:30 PM                2     15    0                  0    22     0            2     0     1              0     0     0                             42           547
      5:35 PM                2     23    0                  0    18     0            0     0     2              0     0     0                             45           552
      5:40 PM                1     14    0                  0    23     0            1     0     2              0     0     0                             41           543
      5:45 PM                2     17    0                  0    10     0            1     0     1              0     0     0                             31           524
      5:50 PM                0     27    0                  0     8     0            0     0     4              0     0     0                             39           523
      5:55 PM                3     24    0                  0    17     0            0     0     1              0     0     0                             45           522
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                  Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U              Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles               24       248       0           0    284   8              8        0   12           0         0         0                             584
 Heavy Trucks               0         4        0           0     0    0              0        0   0            0         0         0                              4
 Pedestrians                          0                          0                            0                          0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Glencoe Rd--NW Commercial -W Union                                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10127609
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                            DATE: 11/16/2005

                                    159         181                                                                                    1.3         0.0
                                                                      Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                  7       123    29                                                                                   0.0    1.6    0.0


            119         11                             31       132          [ NW Commercial -W Union ]         2.5        0.0                            0.0       3.8

                     19                   0.87         33                                                                  5.3                            3.0

            92       62                                68       90                                              2.2        1.6                            5.9       2.2

                                79        139    42                                                                                   2.5    0.0    2.4


                                253     260                                                                                          2.8     1.2
                             [ Glencoe Rd ]                                                                                      [ Glencoe Rd ]

                                           0




                    0                                       0




                                           0                                                               NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                         Glencoe Rd                    Glencoe Rd            NW Commercial -W Union
                                                                                                                NW Commercial -W Union
      PERIOD                          (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                (Eastbound)         (Westbound)               HOURLY
                                                                                                                                      TOTAL TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT               Left      Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U    Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                 13         9     1                 1    10     1              0     6     6         9   2     2           60
      4:05 PM                 7          16    6                 2    11     1              2     4     6         3   0     0           58
      4:10 PM                 0          11    2                 2    14     0              0     1    10         4   2     2           48
      4:15 PM                 11         9     5                 2     6     0              0     1    12         9   2     2           59
      4:20 PM                 7          11    3                 4     8     1              0     1     8         4   3     2           52
      4:25 PM                 12         8     0                 2     6     1              1     1     2         8   6     2           49
      4:30 PM                 7          4     3                 1     7     0              1     0     7         5   4     2           41
      4:35 PM                 4          11    7                 3     8     0              3     1    12         2   1     2           54
      4:40 PM                 5          11    4                 0    12     0              1     0     5         5   2     4           49
      4:45 PM                 8          13    8                 2    14     0              0     1     4         5   3     1           59
      4:50 PM                 6          12    3                 4     7     1              2     1     4         8   6     1           55
      4:55 PM                 9          18    1                 0    10     1              0     2     3         3   3     4           54       638
      5:00 PM                 4          12    4                 4    15     2              0     4     3         7   5     3           63       641
      5:05 PM                 10         11    3                 1     8     1              5     3     8         6   2     2           60       643
      5:10 PM                 9          10    6                 3    10     1              1     3     7         5   1     5           61       656
      5:15 PM                 5          9     1                 2    11     1              0     2     4         5   4     2           46       643
      5:20 PM                 11         11    2                 6    13     0              1     1    10         5   4     2           66       657
      5:25 PM                 8          8     7                 2     8     0              0     1     6         8   0     4           52       660
      5:30 PM                 2          13    2                 2     7     0              0     1     7         7   3     2           46       665
      5:35 PM                 6          12    4                 3     9     0              0     0     4         4   1     2           45       656
      5:40 PM                 1          10    1                 0    11     0              2     0     2         5   1     3           36       643
      5:45 PM                 4          11    2                 4     8     1              2     2     3         2   0     2           41       625
      5:50 PM                 8          11    5                 2     2     0              0     2     2         2   6     1           41       611
      5:55 PM                 10         11    4                 2    10     0              0     3     5         2   0     1           48       605
  PEAK 15-MIN                          Northbound                    Southbound                  Eastbound           Westbound
  FLOW RATES                 Left      Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U    Left Thru Right U          TOTAL

 All Vehicles                92        132        52            32     132    16           24     40      72          72         32         40                      736
 Heavy Trucks                0          0         0             0       4     0            0      0       4           8          0          0                       16
 Pedestrians                            0                               0                         0                              0                                   0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 2/17/2006                                                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
