                                    DOROHORIDN Pe                ®



                               A~mWka!~~




DATE:           1-30-13

REQUEST:       35 lot preliminary plat application

ZONING:        MDRL and MDRH, City of Sherwood

SIZE:          6.13 acres

PROPERTY OWNER:              Columbia State Bank

DEVLOPER:        DR Horton

CIVIL ENGINEER & SURVEYOR:                 Harper, Houf, Peterson, Righellis

LEGAL DESCRIPTION: Tax Lots 300 and 500, Tax Map 2S1-30CC



INTRODUCTION

This application is a request to develop a 35 lot subdivision with an average lot size of 5000
square feet and a minimum lot width of 50 feet. The main access is off Copper Terrace directly
across from the elementary school access.            DR Horton is the developer and builder. They
plan to build houses on all of the lots rather than selling the lots. The subdivision is planned to
accommodate future development of vacant property to the north and south and therefore,
qualifies to b reviewed by the Sherwood Hearings Officer.            No variances or adjustments to the
code are requested with this application. A 65 lot subdivision was approved for this property in
2008 which also included Tax Lots 700, 400 and 600 to the south.                These Tax lots are not
included in this new subdivision application. The previous approved year 2008 subdivision plan
is shown by Exhibit "D". The following are the list of exhibits included with this application.




                                                     1
                          4386 SW Macadam Avenue o Suite 102 o Portland, OR 97239
                                         Phone: (503) 222-4151
                                           www.drhorton.com
LIST OF EXHIBITS



A - Preliminary Plat Plans, Sheets 1 to 8

8 - Sherwood Zoning Map

C - Tax Maps

D - Previous approved Daybreak Subdivision Plat (City Case File SUB-07-02)

E - ALTA Survey

F - Washington County Arterial Street Standards
G - Sherwood Parks Master Plan (Potential Future Acquisition Map)

H - Pre-Application Meeting notes 11-13-12

I - Neighborhood Meeting Notes and Notice

J - Tualatin Valley Fire District Requirements

K - Wetland Delineation Report by Martin Schott

L - Clean Water Services (SPL) Service Provider Letter

M - Arborist Report by Gaston Porterie

N - Traffic Report by Kittleson and Associates

0 - Drainage Report by Harper, Houf, Peterson, Righellis (HHPR)

P - Geotechnical soils Report by Northwest GEO Consultants




16.12.010.- Purpose and Density Requirements
       C.      Medium Density Residential (MDRL)
              The MDRL zoning district provides for single-family and two-family housing,
              manufactured housing and other related uses with a density of 5.6 to 8 dwelling units
              per acre. Minor land partitions shall be exempt from the minimum density
              requirements.

       D.     Medium Density Residential High (MDRH)




                                                 2
              The MDRH zoning district provides for a variety of medium density housing, including
              single-family, two-family housing, manufactured housing multi-family housing, and
              other related uses with a density of 5.5 to 11 dwelling units per acre. Minor land
              partitions shall be exempt from the minimum density requirement.


COMMENT: The subject property contains 2 different residential zones : MDRL and MDRH .
The net area of the MDRL portion is 2.68 acres. The minimum density is 15 units at 5.6 units
per acre and the maximum density is 21 units at 8 units per acre. The net area of the MDRH
portion is 1.51 acres. The minimum density is 8 units at 5.5 units per acre and the maximum
density is 16 units at 11 units per acre.    The total combined minimum density is 23 units and
the maximum combined density is 37 units. A total of 35 units are proposed which falls within
these density limits. Density is defined in the Definitions section of the Sherwood code as the
number of dwelling units per Net Buildable Acre. Net Buildable Acre is defined as 43,560 sf
after excluding right-of-way, public use and environmentally constrained areas.

16.58.010- Clear Vision Areas
       A.     A clear vision area shall be maintained on the corners of all property at the
              intersection of two (2) streets, intersection of a street with a railroad, or intersection of
              a street with an alley or private driveway.

       B.     A clear vision area shall consist of a triangular area, two (2) sides of which are lot
              lines measured from the corner intersection of the street lot lines for a distance
              specified in this regulation; or, where the lot lines have rounded corners, the lot lines
              extended in a straight line to a point of intersection, and so measured, and the third
              side of which is a line across the corner of the lot joining the non-intersecting ends of
              the other two (2) sides.

       C.     A clear vision area shall contain no planting, sight obscuring fence, wall, structure, or
              temporary or permanent obstruction exceeding two and one-half (2~) feet in height,
              measured from the top of the curb, or where no curb exists, from the established
              street center line grade, except that trees exceeding this height may be located in
              this area, provided all branches and foliage are removed to the height of seven (7)
              feet above the ground on the sidewalk side and ten (10) feet on the street side.


       The following requirements shall govern clear vision areas:
               1.      In all zones, the minimum distance shall be twenty (20) feet.
               2.      In all zones, the minimum distance from corner curb to any driveway shall be
                      twenty-five (25) feet.
              3.      Where no setbacks are required, buildings may be constructed within the
                      clear vision area


                                                   3
                3.     Where no setbacks are required, buildings may be constructed within the
                       clear vision area.



COMMENT:               This subdivision complies with all of the above vision clearance
standards. The minimum lot width is 50 feet and the driveway will be 16 to 18 feet in width and
located 6 to 7 feet from the property line leaving 26 feet of clearance on the street facing side
yard.   The house front yard setback is 20 feet and the street side yard is 15 feet.            These
setbacks will automatically protect the required vision clearance area.



16.60.020 - Corner Lots
        On a corner lot, or a reversed corner lot of a block oblong in shape, the short street side may
        be used as the front of the lot provided:

               A       The front yard setback shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet; except
                       where otherwise allowed by the applicable zoning district and subject to
                       vision clearance requirements.

               B.      The side yard requirements on the long street side shall conform to the front
                       yard requirement of the zone in which the building is located.


COMMENT:       The code allows a 20 foot front yard setback and all buildings will be out of the
required vision clearance area.



 16.94.020- Off-Street Parking Standards
        A      Single family homes - 1 parking space per dwelling .



COMMENT:       All of the houses will have 2 car garages with 2 parking spaces in front of the
garage which exceeds the requirement of one parking space per unit.



16.106.010- Transportation Facilities
        A.     Creation
               Public streets shall be created in accordance with provisions of this Chapter. Except
               as otherwise provided, all street improvements and rights-of-way shall conform to
               standards for the City's functional street classification, as shown on the TSP Map and

                                                   4
                   in Figure 1, of Chapter 6 of the Community Development Plan, and other applicable
                 City standards. The following table depicts the guidelines for the street
                 characteristics.

Type of Street       Right Number Minimum On Street         Bike  Sidewalk       Landscape     Median
                     of Way of Lanes Lane  Parking          Lane Width           Strip         Width
                     Width           Width Width            Width                (exclusive of
                                                                                 Curb)
Principal Arterial 122'       4-6     12'       Prohibited 6'       6'           5'           14'
(99W)
Arterial             60-      2-5     12'       Limited     6 feet 6-8'          5'           14' if
                     102'                                                                     required
Collector            58-92' 2-3       11 °      8' optional 6'      6-8'         5'           14'
                                                                                              median
                                                                                              turn lane
40' Commercial/      64'      2       20'       8'          none    6'           5'           none
Industrial Not
Exceeding 3000
vehicles per day
50' Commercial/      64'      2       12'       8'          5'      6'           5'           none
Industrial
Exceeding 3000
vehicles per day
Neighborhood         64'      2       18'       8'          None    8'           5' with 1'   none
1,000 vehicles                                                                   buffer
per day
Local                52'      2       14'       8' on one   None    6'           5' with 1'   none
                                                side only                        buffer
Alley                16-25'   1-2     10-12'    One side if none    none         none         none
                                                20'
Downtown Street 60'           2       11 °      7'          none    12'        4'             none
Standard                                                            pedestrian (included in
                                                                    zone       pedestrian
                                                                               zone)




16.1 06.030 - Location
           A.    The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in their relation to
                 existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, and proposed land uses. The
                 proposed street system shall provide adequate, convenient and safe traffic and
                 pedestrian circulation, and intersection angles, grades, tangents, and curves shall be
                 adequate for expected traffic volumes. Street alignments shall be consistent with
                 solar access requirements as per Chapter 16.156, and topographical considerations.



                                                     5
B.              Street Connectivity and Future Street Systems


                1.       Future Street Systems. The arrangement of public streets shall provide for the
                         continuation and establishment of future street systems as shown on the Local
                         Street Connectivity Map contained in the adopted Transportation System Plan
                         (Figure 8-8).
     DKS Associatcs
     .,   .   -'''-   .... "'




                                                                                       "-"-'-J--'=-'--I..on:   ~~~~~~M
                                                                                                               :::::.'::...~·,::;";:~
                                                                                                               -'\1+1-0001 ..............


                                                                                                                                  Flgunt 8-8
                                                                                                   LOCALSTREETCONNEcnvnY




                2.              Connectivity Map Required. New residential, commercial, and mixed use
                                development involving the construction of new streets shall be submitted with
                                a site plan that implements, responds to and expands on the Local Street
                                Connectivity map contained in the TSP.


                                a.     A project is deemed to be consistent with the Local Street
                                       Connectivity map when it provides a street connection in the general
                                       vicinity of the connection(s) shown on the map, or where such
                                       connection is not practicable due to topography or other physical
                                       constraints; it shall provide an alternate connection approved by the
                                       decision-maker.


                                b.     Where a developer does not control all of the land that is necessary
                                       to complete a planned street connection, the development shall



                                                          6
                 provide for as much of the designated connection as practicable and
                 not prevent the street from continuing in the future.


         c.      Where a development is disproportionately impacted by a required
                 street connection, or it provides more than its proportionate share of
                 street improvements along property line (i.e., by building more than
                 3/4 width street), the developer shall be entitled to System
                 Development charge credits, as determined by the City Engineer.


2.   Block Length. For new streets except arterials, block length shall not exceed 530
     feet. The length of blocks adjacent to arterials shall not exceed 1,800 feet.


3. Where streets must cross water features identified in Title 3 of the Urban Growth
     Management Functional Plan (UGMFP), provide crossings at an average
     spacing of 800 to 1,200 feet, unless habitat quality or length of crossing prevents
     a full street connection.


4. Where full street connections over water features identified in Title 3 of the
     UGMFP cannot be constructed in centers, main streets and station communities
     (including direct connections from adjacent neighborhoods), or spacing of full
     street crossings exceeds 1,200 feet, provide bicycle and pedestrian crossings at
     an average spacing of 530 feet, unless exceptional habitat quality or length of
     crossing prevents a connection.


6.   Pedestrian and Bicycle Connectivity. Paved bike and pedestrian accessways
     consistent with cross section standards in Figure 8-6 of the TSP shall be
     provided on public easements or right- of-way when full street connections are
     not possible, with spacing between connections of no more than 300 feet. Multi-
     use paths shall be built according to the Pedestrian and Bike Master Plans in the
     adopted TSP.


7.   Exceptions. Streets, bike, and pedestrian connections need not be constructed
     when any of the following conditions exists:


         a.      Physical or topographic conditions make a street or accessway
                 connection impracticable. Such conditions include but are not limited
                 to freeways, railroads, steep slopes, wetlands or other bodies of
                 water where a connection could not reasonably be provided.




                                    7
                        b.     Buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands physically
                               preclude a connection now or in the future considering the potential
                               for redevelopment; or

                        c.     Where streets or accessways would violate provisions of leases,
                               easements, covenants, restrictions or other agreements existing as of
                               May 1, 1995, which preclude a required street or accessway
                               connection.
           D.   Additional Setbacks
                Generally additional setbacks apply when the width of a street right-of-way abutting a
                development is less than the standard width under the functional classifications in
                Section VI of the Community Development Plan. Additional setbacks are intended to
                provide unobstructed area for future street right-of-way dedication and
                improvements, in conformance with Section VI. Additional setbacks shall be
                measured at right angles from the centerline of the street.

   Classification                                     Additional Setback
1. Principle Arterial (99W)                           61 feet
2. Arterial                                           37 feet
3. Collector                                          32 feet
4. Neighborhood Route                                 32 feet
5. Local                                              26 feet


COMMENT:            17 of the 35 lots are oriented in a north/south direction to take advantage of
solar heat and light. As many lots as possible are oriented in this direction in compliance with
Chapter 16.156.        Because of existing development in the area, property lines and other
constraints, additional solar lots are not possible without losing lots or changing to a less
efficient street pattern. All the lots and streets are laid out in compliance with Sherwood code
requirements. This subdivision complies with the above Figure 8.8. Street stubs are provided
to the north and south and to Copper Terrace directly across from the Edy Ridge Elementary
school entrance. The Kittleson traffic report indicates access to Copper Terrace will operate at
"D" level of service. Two other interceptions were also studied. The Edy Road and Copper
Terrace intersection will operate with a "C" level of service and the Handley Street and Copper
Terrace intersection will operate with an "A" level of service. The traffic engineer did not
recommend mitigation improvements. When property to the south and north develop, addition
connections to Copper Terrace will occur.

The block length along Copper Terrace will not exceed 530           feet in length. A master plan
showing development of surrounding property is attached by          Sheet 7 of the preliminary plat
plans. The distance between the proposed "8" Street and             Cereghino Lane entrances on
Copper Terrace to about 590 feet. One additional access can         be provided between these two

                                                  8
accesses when property to the south is developed if determined to be necessary by the City of
Sherwood. Sheet 7 also shows potential development to the north with 2 accesses on Copper
Terrace; one at Nursery Way and the other half way between proposed Street "B" and Nursery
Way. The distance between Nursery Way and the proposed "B" Street is about 1040 feet.

Sidewalks along Copper Terrace will be 8 feet in width to provide adequate pedestrian access.
A pedestrian and emergency access tract is provided between lots 20 and 21 along Elwert
Road.    This pedestrian access will be extended from the sidewalk on the east side of Elwert
Road to a proposed pedestrian path in the 50 foot wetland buffer next to lot 18. In the future,
this pathway will extend along the full length of the wetland buffer to Edy Road.

No additional setbacks are required in accordance with Subsection "D" above because full right-
of-way dedication will occur with this subdivision application.



16.106.040- Design
       Standard cross sections showing street design and pavement dimensions are located in the
       City of Sherwood Transportation System Plan, and City of Sherwood's Engineering Design
       Manual.

              A. Reserve Strips
                  Reserve strips or street plugs controlling access or extensions to streets are not
                  allowed unless necessary for the protection of the public welfare or of substantial
                  property rights. All reserve strips shall be dedicated to the appropriate jurisdiction
                  that maintains the street.

              B. Alignment
                  All proposed streets shall, as far as practicable, be in alignment with existing
                  streets. In no case shall the staggering of streets create a "T" intersection or a
                  dangerous condition. Street offsets of less than one hundred (1 00) feet are not
                  allowed.

              C. Future Extension
                  Where necessary to access or permit future subdivision or development of
                  adjoining land, streets shall extend to the boundary of the proposed development
                  and provide the required roadway width.

              D. Intersection Angles
                  Streets shall intersect as near to ninety (90) degree angles as practical, except
                  where topography requires a lesser angle. In all cases, the applicant shall comply
                  with the Engineering Design Manual.

                                                  9
F.   Grades and Curves Grades shall be evaluated by the City Engineer and comply
     with the Engineering Design Manual


H. Buffering of Major Streets
     Where a development abuts Highway 99W, or an existing or proposed principal
     arterial, arterial or collector street, or neighborhood route, adequate protection for
     residential properties shall be provided and through and local traffic shall be
     separated and traffic conflicts minimized. In addition, visual corridors pursuant to
     Section 16.142.030, and all applicable access provisions of Chapter 16.96, shall
     be met. Buffering may be achieved by: parallel access streets, lots of extra depth
     abutting the major street with frontage along another street, or other treatment
     suitable to meet the objectives of this Code.


K. Traffic Controls
         1.
                 An application for a proposed residential development that will
                 generate more than an estimated 200 average daily vehicle trips
                 (ADT) must include a traffic impact analysis to determine the number
                 and types of traffic controls necessary to accommodate anticipated
                 traffic flow.
         2.
                 For all other proposed developments including commercial, industrial
                 or institutional uses with over an estimated 400 ADT, or as otherwise
                 required by the City Engineer, the application must include a traffic
                 impact analysis to determine the number and types of traffic controls
                 necessary to accommodate anticipated traffic flow.



M.
        Vehicular Access Management
                 All developments shall have legal access to a public road. Access
        onto public streets shall be permitted upon demonstration of compliance with
        the provisions of adopted street standards in the Engineering Design Manual.

        1.
                 Measurement: See the following access diagram where R/W = Right-
                 of-Way; and P.l. =Point-of-Intersection where P.l. shall be located
                 based upon a 90 degree angle of intersection between ultimate right-
                 of-way lines.



                                    10
                                         a.         Minimum right-of-way radius at intersections shall conform to
                                                    city standards.
                                          b.        All minimum distances stated in the following sections shall
                                                    be governed by sight distance requirements according to the
                                                    Engineering Design Manual.
                                         c.         All minimum distances stated in the following sections shall
                                                    be measured to the nearest easement line of the access or
                                                    edge of travel lane of the access on both sides of the road.
                                         d.         All minimum distances between accesses shall be measured
                                                    from existing or approved accesses on both sides of the road.
                                         e.         Minimum spacing between driveways shall be measured from
                                                    Point "C" to Point "C" as shown below:

       A/W LINE                                       Ill   w                                   w
                                                       zlw
                                                   wlz -':::i                              wlz Zlz    WILl            R/W LINE
                                                   z~

                                                     ,
                                                   ~.J
                                                   ...
                                                   .,>
                                                       ....
                                                   zw u:l~
                                                            ~z




                                                            >w
                                                                                           zc
                                                                                           ~--~

                                                                                           ~~w1
                                                                                           w~
                                                                                               ~
                                                                                               ........
                                                                                                      '"'I..
                                                                                                      UIZ
                                                                                                      >w
            ;.;.;A
                 ;,.
P-..C"-0-- 'R         1
                   -,.,
                                    RADIUS
                       .....,.,_-<'>'P....,.OINT
                                                   :I,~
                                                   ..,cr:   :,~                            ~~«        ~12
                                                                                                      a:w
                                                   e ...    ... 0                          :    ...   t-eo
                                                   ~~CD
                                                   WCD
                                                      Ill
                                                            *I·
                                                            eow
                                                            Ul
                                                                                           Cl0
                                                                                           wO)
                                                                                             w
                                                                                                      *I~
                                                                                                      eow
                                                                                                      lit

                                                                                                      ~I
                                                      (,)   (,)                                 (,)

                                                            ~L- MJNPAUM
                                                     I~
                                                     I
                                                                  I DAIVEWA. y   SPACING       II~
                                                                          R/W LINE
  -4>P.
POtNT ·A·


                           2.            Roadway Access
                                               No use will be permitted to have direct access to a street or
                                         road except as specified below. Access spacing shall be measured
                                         from existing or approved accesses on either side of a street or road.
                                         The lowest functional classification street available to the legal lot,
                                         including alleys within a public easement, shall take precedence for
                                         new access points.


                                         a. Local Streets:
                                                                  Minimum right-of-way radius is fifteen (15) feet.
                                                    Access will not be permitted within ten (10) feet of Point "B," if
                                                    no radius exists, access will not be permitted within twenty-
                                                    five (25) feet of Point "A." Access points near an intersection
                                                    with a Neighborhood Route, Collector or Arterial shall be
                                                    located beyond the influence of standing queues of the
                                                    intersection in accordance with AASHTO standards. This

                                                                    11
                                      requirement may result in access spacing greater than ten
                                      (10) feet.

                               b. Neighborhood Routes:
                                              Minimum spacing between driveways (Point "C" to
                                      Point "C") shall be fifty (50) feet with the exception of single
                                      family residential lots in a recorded subdivision. Such lots
                                      shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement
                                      between driveways (Point "C" to Point "C"). In all instances,
                                      access points near an intersection with a Neighborhood
                                      Route, Collector or Arterial shall be located beyond the
                                      influence of standing queues of the intersection in accordance
                                      with AASHTO standards. This requirement may result in
                                      access spacing greater than fifty (50) feet.




COMMENT:          No reserve strips are proposed.     All of the streets are properly aligned.   The
centerline off-set for "A" Street north of the Copper Terrace access (Street "B") is 126 feet with a
curb offset of 98 feet. The centerline off-set for Street "C" south of the Cooper Terrace access
is 120 feet with a curb offset of 92 feet.   This meets the 100 foot spacing requirement in the
code. The Sherwood code does not indicate where the 100 foot spacing is measured.                The
centerline of the streets is generally used in most of the codes.    No dangerous situation will be
created and spacing conflicts were not identified by the traffic engineer. If the city believes the
location of "B" Street is an unsafe situation in relation to Street "A" and "C", the Copper Terrace
access could be moved to the south property line adjacent to Lot 1. This would provide a center
line off-set of 160 feet from the street to the north and a curb offset of 132 feet.    Lining up the
Copper Terrace access directly across the two east/west Streets "A" and "C" in this subdivision
would not be possible because it would conflict with the school entrance.



The street curb radius is 15 feet and all of the house driveways will comply with the above
spacing standards.    No lots front on Cooper Terrace, a Neighborhood Route.           Therefore, the
minimum 50 foot driveway spacing is not necessary.



Stub streets are provided to the north and south to accommodate future development of
adjacent property as shown by the Sheet 7 of the preliminary plat plans.           The traffic report

                                                 12
indicates no adverse traffic impact will occur from this development and no improvement or
traffic mitigation measures are recommended.



16.106.060 - Sidewalks
        A.      Required Improvements

                1.       Except as otherwise provided, sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of a
                         public street and in any special pedestrian way within new development.

               2.        For Highway 99W, arterials, or in special industrial districts, the City Manager
                         or designee may approve a development without sidewalks if alternative
                         pedestrian routes are available.

        B.     Design Standards

                1. Arterial and Collector Streets
                         Arterial and collector streets shall have minimum eight (8) foot wide
                         sidewalks/multi- use path, located as required by this Code.

               2. Local Streets
                         Local streets shall have minimum five (5) foot wide sidewalks, located as
                         required by this Code.

               3.     Handicapped Ramps
                         Sidewalk handicapped ramps shall be provided at all intersections.

       C.      Pedestrian and Bicycle Paths
               Provide bike and pedestrian connections on public easements or right-of-way when
               full street connections are not possible, with spacing between connections of no
               more than 330 feet except where prevented by topography, barriers such as
               railroads or highways, or environmental constraints such as rivers and streams.

COMMENT:             The city requires an 8 foot sidewalks along both Elwert Road and Cooper
Terrace.     However, Washington County only requires a 5 foot sidewalk along Elwert Road.
All interior streets will have 5 foot sidewalks on both side of the road.    Pedestrian access is less
than 330 feet on both Elwert Road and Copper Terrace. When properties to the south and
north develop, additional pedestrian access will be provided to these two streets.




                                                    13
16.110.010 - Required Improvements
               Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve all new developments and shall connect to
       existing sanitary sewer mains.

16.112.010- Required Improvements
                Water lines and fire hydrants conforming to City and Fire District standards shall be
       installed to serve all building sites in a proposed development. All waterlines shall be
       connected to existing water mains or shall construct new mains appropriately sized and
       located in accordance with the Water System Master Plan.

16.114.010- Required Improvements
               Storm water facilities, including appropriate source control and conveyance facilities,
       shall be installed in new developments and shall connect to the existing downstream
       drainage systems consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of the
       Clean Water Services water quality regulations contained in their Design and Construction
       Standards R&O 04-9, or its replacement.

COMMENT:            Sanitary sewer, storm drainage and water line facilities will be extended from
Copper Terrace.       The sanitary sewer line is 15" in diameter, the water line is 16" in diameter
and the storm sewer line is 18" in diameter.     The storm water outfalls into a large water quality
facility located to the north which serves the Daybreak Subdivision and other property on both
sides of Copper Terrace.      As a result, a separate water quality facility is not required on the
subject property.



 16.116.010- Required Improvements
                When land is developed so that any commercial or industrial structure is further than
       two hundred and fifty (250) feet or any residential structure is further than five hundred (500)
       feet from an adequate water supply for fire protection, as determined by the Fire District, the
       developer shall provide fire protection facilities necessary to provide adequate water supply
       and fire safety.

COMMENT:             Adequate fire hydrants will be provided in accordance with fire department
requirements.




                                                  14
16.118.010- Purpose
              Public telecommunication conduits as well as conduits for franchise utilities including,
      but not limited to, electric power, telephone, natural gas, lighting, and cable television shall
     be installed to serve all newly created lots and developments in Sherwood .

COMMENT:       All dry utilities will be provided .



16.120.010- Purpose
              Subdivision regulations are intended to promote the public health, safety and general
     welfare; lessen traffic congestion; provide adequate light and air; prevent overcrowding of
     land; and facilitate adequate water supply, sewage and drainage.



16.120.020- General Subdivision Provisions
     A.       Approval of a subdivision occurs through a two-step process: the preliminary plat and
              the final plat.


              1. The preliminary plat shall be approved by the Approval Authority before the final
                  plat can be submitted for approval consideration; and


              2. The final plat shall reflect all conditions of approval of the preliminary plat.


     B.       All subdivision proposals shall conform to all state regulations set forth in ORS
              Chapter 92, Subdivisions and Partitions.


     C.       Future re-division
              When subdividing tracts into large lots, the Approval Authority shall require that the
              lots be of such size and shape as to facilitate future re-division in accordance with
              the requirements of the zoning district and this Division.

     D.       Future Partitioning
              When subdividing tracts into large lots which may be resubdivided, the City shall
              require that the lots be of a size and shape, and apply additional building site
              restrictions, to allow for the subsequent division of any parcel into lots of smaller size
              and the creation and extension of future streets.

     E.       Lot averaging
              Lot size may be averaged to allow lots less than the minimum lot size allowed in the
              underlying zoning district subject to the following regulations:

                                                      15
               1. The average lot area for all lots is not less than allowed by the underlying zoning
                     district.

               2.    No lot created under this provision shall be less than 90 % of the minimum lot
                     size allowed in the underlying zoning district.

               3. The maximum lot size cannot be greater than 10 % of the minimum lot size.

       F.      Required Setbacks
               All required building setback lines as established by this Code, shall be shown in the
               preliminary subdivision plat.

       G.      Property Sales
               No property shall be disposed of, transferred, or sold until required subdivision
               approvals are obtained, pursuant to this Code.



COMMENT:             This preliminary plat complies with ORS 92.             No future resubdivision is
anticipated.   The smallest lot is 4500 square feet, which is 90% of the minimum lot size of
5,000 square feet.     Lots are allowed to be reduced to 4500 square feet in area.          The average
lot size for the Daybreak Subdivision is 5,203 square feet.



16.120.030- Approval Procedure-Preliminary Plat
       A.      Approval Authority

               1. The approving authority for preliminary and final plats of subdivisions shall be in
                  accordance with Section 16.72.010 of this Code.


                         a. A subdivision application for 4-10 lots will follow a Type II review process.

                         b. A subdivision application for 11-50 lots will follow a Type Ill review
                                 process.

                         c. A subdivision application for over 50 lots will follow a Type IV review
                                 process.


COMMENT:              The subdivision is between 11 and 50 lots and can be reviewed by the
Hearings Officer.


                                                    16
16.120.040- Approval Criteria: Preliminary Plat
              No preliminary plat shall be approved unless:

              A. Streets and roads conform to plats approved for adjoining properties as to
                   widths, alignments, grades, and other standards, unless the City determines that
                   the public interest is served by modifying streets or road patterns.


              B. Streets and roads held for private use are clearly indicated on the plat and all
                   reservations or restrictions relating to such private roads and streets are set forth
                   thereon.


              C. The plat complies with applicable zoning district standards and design standards
                   in Division II, and all provisions of Divisions IV, VI, VIII and IX. The subdivision
                   complies with Chapter 16.128 (Land Division Design Standards).


              D. Adequate water, sanitary sewer, and other public facilities exist to support the
                   use of land proposed in the plat.


              E. Development of additional, contiguous property under the same ownership can
                   be accomplished in accordance with this Code.


              F.       Adjoining land can either be developed independently or is provided access
              that will allow development in accordance with this Code.


              G.       Tree and woodland inventories have been submitted and approved as per
              Section 16.142.060


              H.       The plat clearly shows the proposed lot numbers, setbacks, dedications and
              easements.


              I.       A minimum offive percent (5%) open space has been provided per§
                       16.44.8.8 (Townhome- Standards) or §16.142.020 (Parks, Open Spaces and
                      Trees-Single-Family Residential Subdivisions), if applicable.


COMMENT:       Street and utility systems are designed to comply with city standards.            The plat
complies with all zoning ordinance requirements.          The land is under one ownership.            The
master plan shows adjacent property can developed independently and proper access to those
sites have been provided.     A tree inventory has been submitted by a certified arborist with a


                                                   17
recommendation that all the trees on the site should be removed.           The tree location map
shows that most of the trees are located in proposed right-of-ways or within the building
envelopes.     Mitigation will occur for the trees removed.         The lot numbers, setbacks,
dedications and easements are shown on the preliminary plat.      The net buildable area is about
185,080 square feet. The open space is required to be 5% of the net buildable which equals
9,254 square feet. The open space provided is slightly larger at 10,120 square feet in area.



16.128.010 - Blocks
       A.     Connectivity

              1. Block Size
                      The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be designed to provide adequate
                      building sites for the uses proposed, and for convenient access, circulation,
                      traffic control and safety.

              2. Block Length
                      Block length standards shall be in accordance with Section 16.108.040.
                      Generally, blocks shall not exceed five-hundred thirty (530) feet in length,
                      except blocks adjacent to principal arterial, which shall not exceed one
                      thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet. The extension of streets and the
                      formation of blocks shall conform to the Local Street Network map contained
                      in the Transportation System Plan.

              3. Pedestrian and Bicycle Connectivity.
                    Paved bike and pedestrian accessways shall be provided on public
                    easements or right-of-way consistent with Figure 7.401.



                                   Figure 7.401- Block Connectivity




                                               18
B.   Utilities Easements for sewers, drainage, water mains, electric lines, or other utilities
     shall be dedicated or provided for by deed. Easements shall be a minimum of ten
     (1 0) feet in width and centered on rear or side lot lines; except for tie-back
     easements, which shall be six (6) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long on side lot lines
     at the change of direction.


C.   Drainages
     Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or street,
     drainage easements or rights-of-way shall be provided conforming substantially to
     the alignment and size of the drainage.


                                         19
COMMENT:         The block length along Copper Terrace will not exceed 530 feet in length. A
master plan showing development of surrounding property is attached by Sheet 7 of the
preliminary plat plans. The distance between the proposed "B" Street entrances on Copper
Terrace to Cereghino Lane is about 590 feet. One additional access can be provided between
these two accesses when property to the south develops if determined to be necessary by the
City of Sherwood. Sheet 7 also shows potential development to the north with 2 accesses on
Copper Terrace; one at Nursery Way and the other half way between proposed Street "B" and
Nursery Way. The distance between Nursery Way and the proposed "B" Street is about 1040
feet. The interior perimeter block length in the Daybreak subdivision is 1,080 feet.

A 20 foot wide access easement crosses the south portion of Lots 1 and 35. This easement is
intended to be vacated before the final plat is recorded. Both of the lots are wider to properly
accommodate houses in the event these easements cannot be vacated.            A 15 foot sanitary
sewer easement is proposed along the north side of Lot 9. The drainage channel buffer is
contained in Tract "8". The emergency and pedestrian access is contained in Tract "C" with the
property turning radius for fire trucks. All pedestrian access will be paved with concrete or
asphalt.



16.128.020 - Pedestrian and Bicycle Ways
               Pedestrian or bicycle ways may be required to connect cui-de-sacs, divide through
               an unusually long or oddly shaped block, or to otherwise provide adequate
               circulation.

COMMENT:           No odd shaped blocks or cui-de-sacs are proposed with the Daybreak
subdivision.   However, a cul-de-sac will probably be developed to the north as shown on Sheet
7 of the subdivision plans. The location of the drainage way and wetland buffer prevents proper
street access to the north which necessitates a short cul-de-sac.           The cul-de-sac will be
connected to the future wetland buffer pathway and the Elwert Road sidewalk to provide bicycle
and pedestrian access to the Daybreak subdivision.



16.128.030- Lots
       A.      Size and Shape
               Lot size, width , shape, and orientation shall be appropriate for the location and
               topography of the subdivision or partition, and shall comply with applicable zoning
               district requirements, with the following exception:




                                                 20
               1. Lots in areas not served by public sewer or water supply shall conform to any
                  special County Health Department standards.

       B.      Access
               All lots in a subdivision shall abut a public street, except as allowed for infill
               development under Chapter 16.68.

       C.      Double Frontage
               Double frontage and reversed frontage lots are prohibited except where essential to
               provide separation of residential development from railroads, traffic arteries, adjacent
               nonresidential uses, or to overcome specific topographical or orientation problems. A
               five (5) foot wide or greater easement for planting and screening may be required.

       D.      Side Lot Lines Side lot lines shall, as far as practicable, run at right angles to the
               street upon which the lots face, except that on curved streets side lot lines shall be
               radial to the curve of the street.

       E.      Grading
               Grading of building sites shall conform to the following standards, except when
               topography of physical conditions warrants special exceptions:

               1. Cut slopes shall not exceed one ( 1) and one-half ( 1 1/2) feet horizontally to one
                  ( 1) foot vertically.

               2. Fill slopes shall not exceed two (2) feet horizontally to one (1) foot vertically.


COMMENT:           The lots are designed to follow the contours of the land. Development of the
lots will not create excessive grading. Cuts and fills will not exceed the requirements of Section
16.128.030.E. This property is relatively flat and suitable for 5,000 sq. ft. lots. All lots have 25
feet of frontage on a public street. Lots 1 to 9 are double frontage lots because of the 50 foot
spacing requirement between driveways on Copper Terrace, a Neighborhood Route.                  This
spacing would require 70 foot wide lots. Because of anticipated traffic from the schools, DR
Horton believes it is better for the future home owners of Lots 1 to 9 to back up to rather than
front on Cooper Terrace. This will eliminate cars backing up into school traffic. This will be a
better situation for both the owners of Lots 1 to 9 and the patrons of the schools. The Copper
Terrace street section on sheet 4 of the plans shows an 8 foot sidewalk and a 5 foot planter for
street trees. The spacing of these trees can be closer to provide a buffer as identified in Section
16.128.030.C above. A screening fence will be provided along the full length of the Copper
Terrace frontage to separate the street from the rear yards of the lots.



16.142.030- Single-Family or Duplex Residential Subdivisions



                                                   21
A.   A minimum of five percent (5%) of the net buildable site (after exclusion of public
     right-of-way and environmentally constrained areas) shall be maintained as "open
     space". Open space must include usable areas such as public parks, swimming and
     wading pools, grass areas for picnics and recreational play, walking paths, and other
     like space. The following may not be used to calculate open space:


     1.       Required yards or setbacks.


     2.       Required visual corridors.


     3.       Required sensitive areas and buffers.


     4.       Any area required to meet a standard found elsewhere in this code.


B.   Enhanced streetscapes such as "boulevard treatments" in excess of the minimum
     public street requirements may count toward a maximum of 10,000 square feet of the
     open space requirement.


     1. Example: if a 52-foot-wide right-of-way [ROW] is required for a 1,000 foot-long
          street and a 62-foot wide ROW with 5-foot additional plantings/meandering
          pathway is provided on each side of the street, the additional 10-foot-wide area x
          1,000 linear feet, or 10,000 square feet, counts toward the open space
          requirement.


C.   The open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:


     1. By dedication to the City as public open space (if acceptable to the City). Open
          space proposed for dedication to the City must be acceptable to the City
          Manager or the Manager's designee with regard to the size, shape, location,
          improvement, environmental condition, and budgetary and maintenance abilities;


     2. By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation,
          homeowners' association or other legal entity, with the City retaining the
          development rights to the open space. The terms of such lease or other
          instrument of conveyance must include provisions (e.g., maintenance, property
          tax payment, etc.) suitable to the City.


D.   The density of a single-family residential subdivision shall be calculated based on the
     net buildable site prior to exclusion of open space per this Section.




                                           22
               1. Example: a 40,000 square foot net buildable site would be required to maintain
                  2,000 square feet (5%) of open space but would calculate density based on
                  40,000 square feet.

        E.     If a proposed residential subdivision contains or is adjacent to a site identified as
               "parks" on the Acquisition Map of the Parks Master Plan (2006) or has been
               identified for acquisition by the Sherwood Parks and Recreation Board,
               establishment of open space shall occur in the designated areas if the subdivision
               contains the park site, or immediately adjacent to the parks site if the subdivision is
               adjacent to it.

        F.     If the proposed residential subdivision does not contain or is not adjacent to a site
               identified on the Parks Master Plan map or otherwise identified for acquisition by the
               Parks and Recreation Board, the applicant may elect to convey off-site park/open
               space.

        G.     This standard does not apply to a residential partition provided that a development
               may not use phasing or series partitions to avoid the minimum open space
               requirement. A partition of land that was part of an approved partition within the
               previous five (5) years shall be required to provide the minimum five percent (5%)
               open space in accordance with subsection (A) above.

        H.     The value of the open space conveyed under Subsection (A) above may be eligible
               for Parks System Development Charges (SDCs) credits based on the methodology
               identified in the most current Parks and Recreation System Development Charges
               Methodology Report.


COMMENT:        A minimum of 5% of the net developable area is designated Open Space (Tract
"A").   The total net develable area in lots is 182,108 sq. ft. and Tract "A" is 10,037 sq. ft. for a
total of 192,145 sq. ft.   5% of this area is 9,607 sq. ft.   Tract "A" will be developed as a park.
The development master plan on Sheet 7 of the preliminary plans shows additional land can
be added to Tract "A" to make it larger and more functional park when Street "C" is extended in
the future.   DR Horton is exploring options of paying a fee for a public park to the north in lieu
of developing Tract "A" as a park.         If this alternative is successful, then Tract "A" will be
reserved for 3 additional subdivision lots when property to the south develops.


Since the city requires 50 foot wide lots and an average lot size of 5000 sf, no opportunity to
capture the 5% loss of density is available unless a Planned Development is proposed. The
square footage of Tract "A" was excluded from the density calculation on Sheet 3 of the

                                                  23
 preliminary plans.     If Tact "A" is included in the density calculation, the minimum density
 would increase from 23 to 24 units and the maximum density would increase from 37 to 39
 units.


 The subject property does not contain land designated as a "park" on the Potential Future
 Acquisition Map of the Parks Master Plan.             However, property to the north and property
 around the 2 school sites are identified on the Parks Master Plan for future acquisition.             A
 copy of the Parks Master Plan is included in this application.




16.142.040 - Visual Corridors
          A.   Corridors Required
               New developments located outside of the Old Town Overlay with frontage on
               Highway 99W, or arterial or collector streets designated on Figure 8-1 of the
               Transportation System Plan shall be required to establish a landscaped visual
               corridor according to the following standards:



   Category                                            Width
1. Highway 99W                                         25 feet
2. Arterial                                            15 feet
3. Collector                                           10 feet




               In residential developments where fences are typically desired adjoining the above
               described major street the corridor may be placed in the road right-of-way between
               the property line and the sidewalk. In all other developments, the visual corridor shall
               be on private property adjacent to the right-of-way.


          B.   Landscape Materials
               The required visual corridor areas shall be planted as specified by the review
               authority to provide a continuous visual and/or acoustical buffer between major
               streets and developed uses. Except as provided for above, fences and walls shall not
               be substituted for landscaping within the visual corridor. Uniformly planted, drought
               resistant street trees and ground cover, as specified in Section 16.142.060, shall be
               planted in the corridor by the developer. The improvements shall be included in the



                                                  24
                compliance agreement. In no case shall trees be removed from the required visual
                corridor.

       C.       Establishment and Maintenance
                Designated visual corridors shall be established as a portion of landscaping
                requirements pursuant to Chapter 16.92. To assure continuous maintenance of the
                visual corridors, the review authority may require that the development rights to the
                corridor areas be dedicated to the City or that restrictive covenants be recorded prior
                to the issuance of a building permit.

       D.       Required Yard
                Visual corridors may be established in required yards, except that where the required
                visual corridor width exceeds the required yard width, the visual corridor requirement
                shall take precedence. In no case shall buildings be sited within the required visual
                corridor, with the exception of front porches on townhomes, as permitted in Section
                16.44.01 O(E )( 4)(c).



COMMENT:          The landscaped visual corridor along Elwert Road will include a 4 foot planter
and a 10.5 foot landscape area between the sidewalk and the property lines of Lots 18 to 22. A
screening fence will be constructed along the street r-of-w. Street trees will be planted along
with other landscaping which will be determined at a later date.           The plant material will be
drought resistant in accordance with Section 16.142.060.          The minimum visual corridor is 15
feet. In this case, the landscaped visual corridor is 19.5 feet if the 5 foot sidewalk is included
which exceeds the 15 foot requirement.       All of the visual corridor is in public right-of-way.



The original Washington County street standard for Elwert Road was A-8.              This standard has
been replaced by County standard A-4. A copy of this standard is included in this report.



16.142.050- Park Reservation
               Areas designated on the Natural Resources and Recreation Plan Map, in Chapter 5
       of the Community Development Plan, which have not been dedicated pursuant to Section
       16.142.030 or 16.134.020, may be required to be reserved upon the recommendation of the
       City Parks Board, for purchase by the City within a period of time not to exceed three (3)
       years.

COMMENT:        The Tract "B" can be dedicated to the city if requested by the city.



                                                  25
16.142.060 - Street Trees
      A.    Installation of Street Trees on New or Redeveloped Property.
            Trees are required to be planted to the following specifications along public streets
            abutting or within any new development or re-development. Planting of such trees
            shall be a condition of development approval. The City shall be subject to the same
            standards for any developments involving City-owned property, or when constructing
            or reconstructing City streets. After installing street trees, the property owner shall be
            responsible for maintaining the street trees on the owner's property or within the
            right-of-way adjacent to the owner's property.


            1. Location: Trees shall be planted within the planter strip along a newly created or
                 improved streets. In the event that a planter strip is not required or available, the
                 trees shall be planted on private property within the front yard setback area or
                 within public street right-of-way between front property lines and street curb lines
                 or as required by the City.


            2. Size: Trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two (2) caliper inches, which
                 is measured six inches above the soil line, and a minimum height of six (6) feet
                 when planted.


            3. Types: Developments shall include a variety of street trees. The trees planted
                 shall be chosen from those listed in 16.142.080 of this Code.


            4.   Required Street Trees and Spacing:


                     a.   The minimum spacing is based on the maximum canopy spread
                          identified in the recommended street tree list in section 16.142.080 with
                          the intent of providing a continuous canopy without openings between the
                          trees. For example, if a tree has a canopy of forty (40) feet, the spacing
                          between trees is forty (40) feet. If the tree is not on the list, the mature
                          canopy width must be provided to the planning department by a certified
                          arborist.


                     b. All new developments shall provide adequate tree planting along all
                          public streets. The number and spacing of trees shall be determined
                          based on the type of tree and the spacing standards described in a.
                          above and considering driveways, street light locations and utility


                                                  26
                          connections. Unless exempt per c. below, trees shall not be spaced more
                          than forty (40) feet apart in any development.


                     c.   A new development may exceed the forty-foot spacing requirement under
                          section b. above, under the following circumstances:


                              (1) Installing the tree would interfere with existing utility lines and no
                                  substitute tree is appropriate for the site; or


                              (2) There is not adequate space in which to plant a street tree due to
                                  driveway or street light locations, vision clearance or utility
                                  connections, provided the driveways, street light or utilities could
                                  not be reasonably located elsewhere so as to accommodate
                                  adequate room for street trees; and


                             (3) The street trees are spaced as close as possible given the site
                                  limitations in (1) and (2) above.


                             (4) The location of street trees in an ODOT or Washington County
                                  right-of-way may require approval, respectively, by ODOT or
                                  Washington County and are subject to the relevant state or
                                  county standards.


                             (5) For arterial and collector streets, the City may require planted
                                  medians in lieu of paved twelve-foot wide center turning lanes,
                                  planted with trees to the specifications of this subsection.



COMMENT: Street trees will be provided in accordance with the above standards.




16.142.070- Trees on Property Subject to Certain Land Use Applications
      A.     Generally
             The purpose of this Section is to establish processes and standards which will
             minimize cutting or destruction of trees and woodlands within the City. This Section is
             intended to help protect the scenic beauty of the City; to retain a livable environment
             through the beneficial effect of trees on air pollution, heat and glare, sound, water
             quality, and surface water and erosion control; to encourage the retention and
             planting of tree species native to the Willamette Valley and Western Oregon; to

                                                 27
     provide an attractive visual contrast to the urban environment, and to sustain a wide
     variety and distribution of viable trees and woodlands in the community over time.

B.   Applicability
     All applications including a Type II- IV land use review, shall be required to preserve
     trees or woodlands, as defined by this Section to the maximum extent feasible within
     the context of the proposed land use plan and relative to other codes, policies, and
     standards of the City Comprehensive Plan .

C.   Inventory


     1. To assist the City in making its determinations on the retention of trees and
          woodlands, land use applications including Type II - IV development shall include
          a tree and woodland inventory and report. The report shall be prepared by a
          qualified professional and must contain the following information:


              a. Tree size (in DBH and canopy area)


              b. Tree species


              c.    The condition of the tree with notes as applicable explaining the
                    assessment


              d. The location of the tree on the site


              e. The location of the tree relative to the planned improvements


              f.    Assessment of whether the tree must be removed to accommodate the
                    development


              g.    Recommendations on measures that must be taken to preserve trees
                    during the construction that are not proposed to be removed.


     2. In addition to the general requirements of this Section, the tree and woodland
        inventory's mapping and report shall also include, but is not limited to, the
          specific information outlined in the appropriate land use application materials
          packet.


     3.   Definitions for the inventory purposes of this Section




                                          28
              a.   A tree is a living woody plant having a trunk diameter as specified below
                   at Diameter at Breast Height (DBH). Trees planted for commercial
                   agricultural purposes, and/or those subject to farm forest deferral, such
                   as nut and fruit orchards and Christmas tree farms, are excluded from
                   this definition and from regulation under this Section, as are any living
                   woody plants under six (6) inches at DBH. All trees six (6) inches or
                   greater shall be inventoried.


              b.   A woodland is a biological community dominated by trees covering a land
                   area of 20,000 square feet or greater at a density of at least fifty (50)
                   trees per every 20,000 square feet with at least fifty percent (50%) of
                   those trees of any species having a six (6) inches or greater at DBH.
                   Woodlands planted for commercial agricultural purposes and/or subject
                   to farm forest deferral, such as nut and fruit orchards and Christmas tree
                   farms, are excluded from this definition, and from regulation under this
                   Section.


              c.   A large stature tree is over 20 feet tall and wide with a minimum trunk
                   diameter of 30 inches at DBH .


D.   Retention requirements


     1. Trees may be considered for removal to accommodate the development
          including buildings, parking, walkways, grading etc., provided the development
          satisfies of D.2 or D.3, below.


     2.   Required Tree Canopy- Residential Developments (Single Family Attached,
          Single Family Detached and Two- Family)
          Each net development site shall provide a variety of trees to achieve a minimum
          total tree canopy of 40 percent. The canopy percentage is based on the expected
          mature canopy of each tree by using the equation TT,-2 to calculate the expected
          square footage of canopy for each tree. The expected mature canopy is counted
          for each tree regardless of an overlap of multiple tree canopies.
          The canopy requirement can be achieved by retaining existing trees or planting
          new trees. Required street trees can be used toward the total on site canopy
          required to meet this standard. The expected mature canopy spread of the new
          trees will be counted toward the needed canopy cover. A certified arborist or
          other qualified professional shall provide the estimated tree canopy of the
          proposed trees to the planning department for review.




                                            29
                                      Residential (single   Old Town & lnfill     Commercial,
                                      family & two family   developments          Industrial,
                                      developments)                               Institutional Public
                                                                                  and Multi-family
Canopy Requirement                    40%                   N/A                   30%
Counted Toward the Canopy Requirement
Street trees included in canopy       Yes                   N/A                   No
requirement
Landscaping requirements included     N/A                   N/A                   Yes
in canopy requirement
Existing trees onsite                 Yes                   N/A                   Yes
                                      x2                                          x2
Planting new trees onsite             Yes                   N/A                   Yes
                                                             1
Mature Canopy in Square Feet Equation nr or (3.14159~radius ) (This is the calculation to measure the
                                            1

square footage of a circle.
The Mature Canopy is given in diameter. In gardening and horticulture reference books, therefore to
get the radius you must divide the diameter in half.
Canopy Calculation Example: Pin Oak
Mature canopy = 35'
(3.14159* 17.52 ) = 962 square feet




                                                  30
                                                         LEGEND


                                          -
                                          ·
                                                     30' MATURE CANOPY
                                                     (707 SQUARE fliT

                                                     40' MATURE CANOPY
                                                                        ~   CAHCFt)


                                                     (1.257 SQUARE fliT~ CAHCPY)


                                                     60' MATURE CANOPY
                                                     (2.827 SQUARE fliT ~ CAHCPY)



             EXAMPi£ A                                  EXAMPi£ B




           1 ACRE AT 30X                            1   A~ AT~
               (31.3~                                    (40.7J)




4.   The City may determine that, regardless of 0.1 through 0.3, that certain trees
     or woodlands may be required to be retained . The basis for such a decision
     shall include; specific findings that retention of said trees or woodlands
     furthers the purposes and goals of this Section, is feasible and practical both
     within the context of the proposed land use plan and relative to other policies
     and standards of the City Comprehensive Plan, and are:


     a. Within a Significant Natural Area, 100-year floodplain, City greenway,
        jurisdictional wetland or other existing or future public park or natural area
        designated by the City Comprehensive Plan , or


     b. A landscape or natural feature as per applicable policies of the City
        Comprehensive Plan , or are necessary to keep other identified trees or

                                31
                           woodlands on or near the site from being damaged or destroyed due to
                           windfall, erosion, disease or other natural processes, or

                      c.   Necessary for soil stability and the control of erosion, for managing and
                           preserving surface or groundwater quantities or quality, or for the
                           maintenance of a natural drainageway, as per Clean Water Services
                           stormwater management plans and standards of the City Comprehensive
                           Plan, or

                      d. Necessary in required buffers between otherwise incompatible land uses,
                         or from natural areas, wetlands and greenways, or


                      e.   Otherwise merit retention because of unusual size, size of the tree stand ,
                           historic association or species type, habitat or wildlife preservation
                           considerations, or some combination thereof, as determined by the City.

               5.     Tree retention requirements for properties located within the Old Town
                      Overlay or projects subject to the infill standards of Chapter 16.68 are only
                      subject to retention requirements identified in 0.4. above.

               6.     The Notice of Decision issued for the land use applications subject to this
                      Section shall indicate which trees and woodlands will be retained as per
                      subsection D of this Section, which may be removed or shall be retained as
                      per subsection D of this Section and any limitations or conditions attached
                      thereto.

               7.     All trees, woodlands, and vegetation located on any private property
                      accepted for dedication to the City for public parks and open space,
                      greenways, Significant Natural Areas, wetlands, floodplains, or for storm
                      water management or for other purposes, as a condition of a land use
                      approval , shall be retained outright, irrespective of size, species, condition or
                      other factors. Removal of any such trees, woodlands, and vegetation prior to
                      actual dedication of the property to the City shall be cause for reconsideration
                      of the land use plan approval.


COMMENT:       The required 40% tree canopy requirement will be provided by future trees in the
park, in lot front yard parkways of the lots and along Copper Terrace and Elwert Road.          None of
the existing trees on the site can be saved as identified in the first paragraph on page 2 of the
attached arborist report prepared by Gaston Porterie.       The existing trees fall in the "D" Street



                                                 32
right-of-way and in the building envelopes of the lots.           Most of the trees are located at the
southeast corner of the site.




16.144.010- Generally
               Unless otherwise permitted, residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional uses
       in the City shall comply with the following wetland, habitat and natural area standards if
       applicable to the site as identified on the City's Wetland Inventory, the Comprehensive Plan
       Natural Resource Inventory, the Regionally Significant Fish and Wildlife Habitat Area map
       adopted by Metro, and by reference into this Code and the Comprehensive Plan. Where the
       applicability of a standard overlaps, the more stringent regulation shall apply.

16.144.020- Standards
       A       The applicant shall identify and describe the significance and functional value of
               wetlands on the site and protect those wetlands from adverse effects of the
               development. A facility complies with this standard if it complies with the criteria of
               subsections A.1.a and A.1.b, below:


               1. The facility will not reduce the area of wetlands on the site, and development will
                    be separated from such wetlands by an area determined by the Clean Water
                    Services Design and Construction Standards R&O 00-7 or its replacement
                    provided Section 16.140.090 does not require more than the requested setback.


                        a. A natural condition such as topography, soil, vegetation or other feature
                             isolates the area of development from the wetland.


                        b.   Impact mitigation measures will be designed, implemented, and
                             monitored to provide effective protection against harm to the wetland
                             from sedimentation, erosion, loss of surface or ground water supply, or
                             physical trespass.


                        c.   A lesser setback complies with federal and state permits, or standards
                             that will apply to state and federal permits, if required.


               2.   If existing wetlands are proposed to be eliminated by the facility, the applicant
                    shall demonstrate that the project can, and will develop or enhance an area of
                    wetland on the site or in the same drainage basin that is at least equal to the
                    area and functional value of wetlands eliminated.


                                                     33
       B.       The applicant shall provide appropriate plans and text that identify and describe the
       significance and functional value of natural features on the site (if identified in the Community
       Development Plan, Part 2) and protect those features from impacts of the development or
       mitigate adverse effects that will occur. A facility complies with this standard if:

               1. The site does not contain an endangered or threatened plant or animal species
                  or a critical habitat for such species identified by Federal or State government
                     (and does not contain significant natural features identified in the Community
                      Development Plan, Part 2, Natural Resources and Recreation Plan).

               2. The facility will comply with applicable requirements of the zone.


               3. The applicant will excavate and store topsoil separate from subsurface soil , and
                  shall replace the topsoil over disturbed areas of the site not covered by buildings
                  or pavement or provide other appropriate medium for re-vegetation of those
                  areas, such as yard debris compost.


               4. The applicant will retain significant vegetation in areas that will not be covered by
                  buildings or pavement or disturbed by excavation for the facility; will replant areas
                  disturbed by the development and not covered by buildings or pavement with
                  native species vegetation unless other vegetation is needed to buffer the facility;
                  will protect disturbed areas and adjoining habitat from potential erosion until
                     replanted vegetation is established; and will provide a plan or plans identifying
                     each area and its proposed use.


               5.    Development associated with the facility will be set back from the edge of a
                     significant natural area by an area determined by the Clean Water Services
                     Design and Construction standards R&O 00-7 or its replacement, provided
                     Section 16.140.090A does not require more than the requested setback. Lack of
                     adverse effect can be demonstrated by showing the same sort of evidence as in
                     subsection A.1 above.




COMMENT:            Martin Schott, wetland consultant, prepared the attached wetland report which
indicates that no wetlands exist on the site.      This determination is located on pages 2 and 3 of
the attached wetland report.       One perennial drainage swale enters the site at the northwest
corner from a culvert under Elwert Road and flows in a northeast direction. This stream channel
is an unnamed tributary of Chicken Creek.          A previous wetland was identified in 2007 at the
northeast corner of the site around Lots 7 to 9, but this wetland is no longer exists.

                                                    34
16.156.010- Purpose
               This Chapter and applicable portions of Chapter 5 of the Community Development
       Plan provide for natural heating and cooling opportunities in new development. The
       requirements of this Chapter shall not result in development exceeding allowable densities or
       lot coverage, or the destruction of existing trees.



16.156.020- Standards
       A.      Building Orientation -The maximum number of buildings feasible shall receive
               sunlight sufficient for using solar energy systems for space, water or industrial
               process heating or cooling. Buildings and vegetation shall be sited with respect to
               each other and the topography of the site so that unobstructed sunlight reaches the
               south wall of the greatest possible number of buildings between the hours of 9:00 AM
               and 3:00PM, Pacific Standard Time on December 21st.


       B.     Wind- The cooling effects of prevailing summer breezes and shading vegetation
               shall be accounted for in site design. The extent solar access to adjacent sites is not
               impaired vegetation shall be used to moderate prevailing winter wind on the site.


16.156.030 - Variance to Permit Solar Access
              Variances from zoning district standards relating to height, setback and yard
       requirements approved as per Chapter 16.84 may be granted by the Commission where
       necessary for the proper functioning of solar energy systems, or to otherwise preserve solar
       access on a site or to an adjacent site.

COMMENT: As many lots as possible are oriented in a north south direction without losing lots
or making the street pattern non-functional. No variances are requested to provide proper
functioning of solar systems.




                                                  35
                                                                                        Case No. _ _ __
                                                                                              Fee _ _ __
                                                                                        Receipt#_ _ __
                                                                                           Date _ _ __
                                                                                            TYPE._ _ __

                                                                City of Sherwood
                                                Application for Land Use Action
 Type of Land Use Action Requested: (cheek all that apply)
0Annexation                                             Oconditional Use
0Plan Amendment (Proposed Zone                                        0 Partition(# of lots-=----'
0Variance(list standard(s) to be varied in description                ~!)Subdivision(# oflots _,3"-5---'
0Site Plan (Sq. footage of building and parldng area)                 00ther; - - - - - - -
0Planned Unit Development

   By submitting this form the Owner, or Owner's authorized agent/ representative, acknowledges
      and agrees that City ofSherwood employees, and appointed or elected City Officials, have
... fl!lllwri1)'1o.ellter..thepr.ojectsite.atall.reas.onahle...times.for.thepur.poseofinspectingp1'oject. ·I    ...
            site conditions and gathering information related specifically to the project site.


 Note: See City of Sherwood current Fee Schedule, which includes the "Publication/Distribution of
        Notice" fee, at www.sherwoodoregon.gov. Click on Departments/Planning/Fee Schedule.

Owner/Applicant Information:
Applicant: D,R. Horton.lnc.-Por1fand (Ryan O'Brien\                       Phone: 503-222-4151 ext 1115
Applicant Address: 4380 SWMacadam Ave, Ste 100 Portland, OR 97239         Email: RMObrien@dmorton.com
Owner: Columbia State Bank                                                Phone: 360-823-4530
Owner Address: 17800 SE Mill Plain Boulevard, Ste 100 Vancouver, WA 98683 E m a i l : - - - - - - - -
Contact for Additional I n f o r m a t i o n : - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Property Information:
Street Location: 21130 SW Elwert Rd and 21500 SW Elwert Rd ShlliWOod, OR 97140
Tax Lot and Map No: 2S1-30CC Tax Lois 300 and 500
Existing Structures/Use: 1 Single Family Residential House
Existing Plan/Zone Designation: .!!M,D,RL:c&"-"'M~DR"'H-'------------------
Size ofProperty(ies) .,6,.38,_,A""c"'res"----------------------

Proposed Action:
Putpose and Description of Proposed Action: 351ot subdivision with an average lot size of 5,000 sq. ft. and a
minimum lot width of 50 ft.




Proposed Use: Single family detached houses

Proposed No. of Phases (one year each): __,on,_,e,___ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __



Continued on Reverse
Updated November 20 l 0
                                  LAND USE APPLICATION FORM


  Authorizing Signatures:

  I am the owner/authorized agent of the owner empowered to submit this application and affirm
  that the information submitted with this application is correct to the best of my knowledge.

 I further acknowledge that I have read the applicable standards for review of the land use action I
                and understand that I must demonstrate to the City review authorities compliance
                dards prior    pproval of my requ t.

 -~~~~...L:__t;;-~~~ OIL-(-.tv~rtJ I ·-3=-13
 Appli~PWWP'                     D1e
             J~~"Pv~.t.-.+        tL~/1-;                              1     '
                                                                      Date


 The following materials must be submitted with your application or it will not
 be accepted at the counter. Once taken at the counter, the City has up to 30 days
 to review the materials submitted to determine if we have everything we need to
 complete the review.

 [) 3 * copies of Application Form completely filled out and signed by the property owner (or
 person with authority to make decisions on the property.

 [) Copy of Deed to verifY ownership, easements, etc.

 IKJ At least 3 * folded sets of plans
[) At least 3 * sets of narrative addressing application criteria

IKJ Fee (along with calculations utilized to determine fee if applicable)
[)Neighborhood Meeting Verification including affidavit, sign-in sheet and meeting summary
        (required for Type III, Nand V projects)

[] Signed checklist verifYing submittal includes specific materials necessary for the application
        process

* Note that the required numbers of copies identified on the checklist are required for
completeness; however, upon initial submittal applicants are encouraged to submit only 3 copies
for completeness review. Prior to completeness, the required number of copies identified on the
checklist and one full electronic copy will be required to be submitted.




Land Use Application Form
Updated November 201 0
LIST OF EXHIBITS



A - Preliminary Plat Plans, Sheets 1 to 8 & Overall Concept Plan to the North and South

B - Sherwood Zoning Map
C - Minimum and Maximum Density Calculations and Tax Maps

D - Previous approved Daybreak Subdivision Plat (City Case File SUB-07-02)

E - Title Report

F - Washington County Arterial Street Standards

G - Sherwood Parks Master Plan (Potential Future Acquisition Map)

H - Pre-Application Meeting notes 11-13-12

I - Neighborhood Meeting Notes and Notice

J - Tualatin Valley Fire District Requirements

K - Wetland Delineation Report by Martin Schott
L - Clean Water Services (SPL) Service Provider Letter and Sensitive Lands Report

M - Arborist Report by Gaston Porterie

N - Traffic Report by Kittleson and Associates

0 - Drainage Report by Harper, Houf, Peterson, Righellis (HHPR)

P - Geotechnical soils Report by Northwest GEO Consultants
Q- Request to CWS to Pay a Fee in Lieu for the Elwert Road Half Street Improvement
~
                                                                                                                                DAYBREAK SUBDIVISION
                                                                                     ·
                                                                                     fl:) . I
                                  -        -        1,   ....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           z
    ~3                   17           16        151
                                                         l:l II
                                                         ~
                                                         (/)        IH       13                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                   .__         --' ~ .:0
               18
                         ...:::                     I    1"-
                                                                    '~-                                                                                          SHERWOOD, OREGON                                                                                                          en       z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
    II
              19
                    (f'
                                  ."
                                                        "A" STREET
                                                                                                    ~ ·HI                                                                                                                                                                          1-      >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   w 0 0:::: w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (9

              20    \             r             -                        --                                       7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   w al
        L                                                                                       I             _6 _ I _                                                                                                                                                             :r:       0
    I                                      25                                                               I
                                  I                                                                         l        ,
        :'ri!ACT "A~ '

              21    I    i
                         (/)
                                  I        24
                                                         26         27   28          29   30
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                            ·a· STREET 1
                                                                                                                                SHEET INDEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (f) :;::)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0::::   en0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                I ....                                                                                                                                                                             w       ~ 0
              22    I    "'       I
                                  L
                                           2J
                                           -
                                                               31
                                                                         I           JZ         I, l:l
                                                                                                   ~
                                                                                                          ' I
                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                       -, '.;   SHEET          DRAWING TITLE                                                                                                                       >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0       l1i  s:
                                                                                                    (/)
                                                                                                            I            I                                                                                                                                                         (_)              0::::
                                                                                                    p                    I,     1              COVER SHEET                                                                                                                                 0::: w
                                                                                          JJ
                                                                                                :           I     4             2              EXISTING CONDITIONS / DEMOLITION PLAN                                                                                                       al       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cf)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~
                                                                              J5                                                3              PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT
                                                                                                            I           I
                                                                                         - -I                                   4              TYPICAL STREET SECTIONS
                                                                                          J4                      3
                                                                         ~
                                                                                                            I           L       5              GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN                                                                                                            0
                                                                                  "C" STREET                                    5.1            ELWERT ROAD CULVERT PLAN
                                                                                                            I     2
                                                                                                                        I
                                                                          _ --
                                                                         --
                                                                              -      J6
                                                                                           _ ]_
                                                                                               j l_ r_ - 1  j. . . r    1
                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                               COMPOSITE UTILITY PLAN
                                                                                                                                               CIRCULATION PLAN
                                                                                                                                               SURROUNDING LAND USE PLAN
    - --- - -
                                                           SITE MAP                                                             PROJECT TEAM                                PROPERTY DESCRIPTION                                                            VICINITY MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NOT TO SCAlf
                                                               SCALE: J"~JOO'
                                                                                                                                                                            ADDRESS: 21500 AND 21730 SW ELI\£RT ROAD
                                                                                                                                DEVELOPER /APPLICANT                                 SHERWOOO, OREGON
                                                                                                                                DR HORTON, INC. - PORTLAND
                                                                                                                                ATTN: ANDY TIEMANN
                                                                                                                                                                            TAX LOT 300 AND 500
                                                                                                                                4380 SW MACADAM AVENUE, /100
                                                                                                                                                                            MAP T2S R1 W JOCC
                                                                                                                                PORTLAND, OR 97239
                                                                                                                                                                            WASHINGTON COUNTY OREGON
                                                                                                                                503-752-0843 (PHONE)
                                                                                                                                BOO 831-9624 (FAX}
                                                                                                                                                                            BENCHMARK        I BASIS OF BEARINGS
                                                                                                                                CIVIL ENGINEER
                                                                                                                                HARPER HOUF PUERSON RIGHELLIS INC           WASHINGTON COUNTY BENCHMARK NO. 101
                                                                                                                                                                            WASHINGTON COUNTY BRASS DISK SET IN CONCRETE AT THE SOUTHEAST
                                                                                                                                ATTN: KIM SHERA, PE / JANELLE BRANNEN, PE
                                                                                                                                                                            CORNER OF THE INTERSECTION OF ELWERT ROAD AND EDY ROAD
                                                                                                                                205 SE SPOKANE ST. SUITE 200
                                                                                                                                PORTLAND, OR 97202                          (NORTHERLY APPROXIMATELY 1293.0 FEET FROM THE "N[/ NORTHWEST CORNER
                                                                                                                                (503) 221-1131 (PHONE)                      OF PARCEL A)
                                                                                                                                                                            ELEVATION ~ 158.238
                                                                                                                                (503) 221-1171 (FAX)

                                                                                                                                PROPERTY OWNER
                                                                                                                                COLUMBIA STATE BANK
                                                                                                                                                                            UTILITY STATEMENT
                                                                                                                                ATTN: GREG WEAKLEY                          THE UNDERGROUND UTILITIES SHOWN HAVE BEEN LOCATED FROM FIElD SURVEY
                                                                                                                                17800 SE Mill PLAIN BOULEVARD, SUITE 100    INFORMATION AND EXISTING ORA 1\!NGS. THE SURVEYOR MAKES NO GUARANTEES
                                                                                                                                VANCOUVER, WA 98683                         THAT THE UNDERGROUND UTILITIES SHOWN COMPRISE All SUCH UTILITIES IN THE
                                                                                                                                (360) 823-4530 (PHONE)                      AREA, EITHER IN SERVICE OR ABANDONED. THE SURVEYOR FURTHER DOES NOT
                                                                                                                                (360) 823-4181 (FAX)                        WARRANT THAT THE UNDERGROUND UTILITIES SHOWN ARE IN THE EXACT
                                                                                                                                                                            LOCATION INDICA TED ALTHOUGH HE DOES CERTIFY THAT THEY ARE LOCATED AS
                                                                                                                                                                            ACCURATELY AS POSSIBLE FROM INFORMATION AVAILABLE. THE SURVEYOR HAS
                                                                                                                                                                            NOT PHYSICALLY LOCATED THE UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                g


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I='
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SHEET NO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LANDUSE SUBMITTAL      JOB NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DRH-64
                                                                                                              I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    z
                                                                                                          I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _J
                                                                                                      I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   z


                             t
                                                                                                     f
                                                                                                    I  ---- CHICKEN                                                                                                                                     REMOVE EXISTING CATCH BASIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :z
                                                                                                  , ____
                                                                                                            EXISTING IRIBUTARY TO
                                                                                                                     CREEK CENTERUNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  _J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0             en                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                >                         (9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w
                     20            40              80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0                         a::
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0             (()
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                     SCALE:        I"~      40'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /'                                                      z             =>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (f)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                en 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /                                                                   z             ~ 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /                                                                                     w s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0             <(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /                                                                           I-              a::
                           LEGEND                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0:::
                           FOUND 5/8" IRON ROD WITH YELLOW PLASTIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  z             (()                       :r:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (f)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    REMOVE EXISTING DITCH INLET                   0
                           CAP INSCRIBED "wt:STLAKE CON SLUT ANTS, INC -
                           EXCEPT AS NOTED                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \.                                                                           u
                0          SET WOODEN STAKE AT APPROX PROP COR                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \                                                                        (9            0
              0            DECIDUOUS TREE


                           CONIFEROUS TREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \\       __                                                          z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (f)
                           BRUSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  X
                       I   ASPHALT PAVED AREA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w
       ~==::::::;-~ GRAVEL AREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .· .... -
       _ _ , _ _ FENCE
                           <GN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r:ll                     !f.::.u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        >·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~~

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~:J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o,.;
                                                                                                                                                                                                       \                         .,        '·                                                                                                                           ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ::y::;.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :l.'    ~;-:-
     - - ; --              GAS LINE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \\             '' \      ~,                                                                                                                      +-'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ......
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r:ll       z ;~
               ~           ELECTRICAL UTILITY VAULT
                                                                                                                                                                                                           \\                            ·,'         ' ______ __
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ......_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1-4~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (!)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \                                                                                                                                                                           ~/;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UNDEVELOPED RELD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (!)~
                           ELECTRICAL POWER LINE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (!)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \, __                                  '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~0 fn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (\._ ()
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '--
                           TELEPHONE PEDESTAL                                                                                                                                                                   \                                                                                                                                                                                ,,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     jf
              ®
                           TELEPHONE LINE

                           SANITARY SEWER MANHOlE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I REMOVE EXIS17NG DITCH INLET              ==                    ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :~:;


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :J;..:;,:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 z               !;;;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 oo:::


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <i>
                           SANITARY SEWER LINE

           ali!,>)         CLEAN OUT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             " j~
                           FIELD STORM DRAIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i~
                           STORM DRAIN MANHOtE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -< ~§    ~-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~.g.
      _ _ , _ _ STORM DRAIN LINE

          12" RCP          STORM DRAIN CULVERT NOTE                                       FOUND 5/8" IRON ROD
          INV=205 98       RCP=REINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE
                           INV=INYERT
                                                                                          WITH YELLOW PLASTIC CAP                                        REMOVE EXIS17NG
                                                                                          INSCRIBED "J. PETERSON        DAYBREAK SUBDIVISION           BASKETBALL COURT
               N           WATER VALVE
                                                                                          PLS 1856"                          PROPERTY UMITS
              ~            FIRE HYDRANT

       - - - - WATER LINE
                                                                                    POINT OF BEGINNING                                                  EXIS17NG IREE TO BE
               @           WATER 'hHL                                               FOR PARCEL A                                                              REMOVED (TYP)

             X             REMOVE EXISTING TREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EXIS17NG 6" SANITARY Sfii'E"R SERVICE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TO BE ABANDONED AT R. 0. W. UNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             </)
                                                                                                                                                       REMOVE EXIS17NG HOUSE,
                                                                                                                                                          DECK AND DRIVEWAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :r:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :r:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               QJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "'            !                        '"'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :r:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :;;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        j§

                                                                                    EX. PGf UNDERGROUND DISIRIBU170N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~                                        ~
                                                                           I       UNE EASEMENT SHO'MI ON WfS1lAKE
                                                                                 SURVEY (2007) PER DOC. NO 91-06976                                                             -o....   z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    REMOVE EXIS17NG BUILDING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      REMOVE EXIS17NG Dl TCH INLET                                                                   </)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      z

                                                                           I               -------                                --------             ~~~~~ -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0



                                                                               !'--
                                                                               ~      ___
                                                                                      _ __
                                                                                         ____
                                                                                            _____±__ L_~::_A~::::-~.J--''...---1.,. . - "'-<=-
                                                                                                                            60'                                                          -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     </)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     >

                                                                                POit T OF BEGINNING                                                    FOUND 3/4" IRON PIPE _ _ /
                                                                                FOR EASEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                             REMOVE EXIS17NG GRAVEL ACCESS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POINT OF BEGINNING                                                                                                                      i'!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ;'i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FOR EXCEPTION


                                                                                                                         TOGETHER WITH AN EASEMENT                                                                     SUBJECT TO AN EASEMENT                                                                                                                 SHEET NO
                                                                                                                           FOR ACCESS AND UTIUTIES                                                                  FOR ACCESS AND UTIUTIES PER
                                                                                                                       PER DEED DOCUMENT NO. 78-2035                                                                 DEED DOCUMENT NO 78-2035
EXISTING CONDITIONS PLAN BASED ON
SURVEY BY CMT SURVEYING AND                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
CONSULTING DATED 12/26/2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LANDUSE SUBMITTAL                                                                         JOB NO.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DRH-64
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                  I
                                                                                  I
                                                                                              I
                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I

                    4~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           f-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :z:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ::i
                    (                                                                         I
                                                                                              I                                                                                                                                                                           MDRH ZONE                            I.IDRL ZONE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0... 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     z            en        z
                                                                                                                                                   VEGETATED CORRIDOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                      0
      0      20      ~0             60
                                                                                                  1\                                        1
                                                                                                                                               L   OPEN SPACE ZONE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  638.19'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cf)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  >         <.9
                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9099 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                      50.00'                         50.00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I                                50.00'                      50.00'                                               5320'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     > 0
                                                                                                                                  92.oo'                               50.oo·
                                                                                  I                                                                     ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               co    0::::
             SCALE: I" =      40'
                                                                                       I
                                                                                                       1--"1 ".
                                                                                                             '"'       lRACT " 8"
                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                        ··                                                                                     I         .    ~                     1                                                                                                                                                                      I.                                                                        0        0
                                                                                         45 f---j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I~                                                                        ro ::::> 0
                                                                         p:::1~~~ :~:::~ .                                                                                                                                                               ~~                    J
                                                                                                                   JB.es' 3,319 sr ,.._.,...                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LOT 9

     SITE INFORMATION
                                                                                                             11;
                                                                                                           'f--'"""'""-----,~)4·
                                                                                                                                                       ,.,QO'
                                                                                                                                                    . ·-:,           LOT 17            =
                                                                                                                                                                                      =·                                           I                                                             I        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6,783 Sf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =>           en
                                                                                                                                                    1f,    ~         4,505 Sf         ::i ::i        LOT 16               ~ LOl 15 ~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          " ·.986 ~ 1---
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -     ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IVi              ~~   I ·..,6 f~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LOT   ~<e.       ~-     LOT 13          ~ ~_           LOT 12        ~ ~-           LOT 11          ~~     ~.Uo 1s~                                               I               V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cf)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                             sr                                                                             sr _          _      s.ooo sr        . _                    sr    _                     sr
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ·.·20                                                                                                                                      5,000                       4,937

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v 1:f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PROPOSED CURB (TYP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     >-           <(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  w 5:
           ARtAS:
     SUE                                                                EXIS nH       ROW )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6556'

                                                                                              I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0::::
                                                                                                                             LOT 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ti.:~                                                         .
     PROPOSED PUBLIC R.O. W = 71,026 SF (1.63 AC)                         CfNT RUJ/E          I                              s,l69 sr
     AREA IN LOTS = 180,500 SF (4.14 AC)                                                                                                                         "'~4>.                                           .                           I         ~                           I                                          ..,        .                                                                    ~         ~·                                            t- 6~' -IIPROPOSED R.O.W. (TYP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0::::
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0:::: Iw
     LOT 31 "PARK" = 10,316 SF (0.24 AC)
     TRACT "A" EMERGENCY ACCESS/PUBLIC UTILITY EA SEMENT= 1,896 SF (0.04 AC)                                                 81.24'
                                                                                                                                                                  ~
                                                                                                                                                                 ~<
                                                                                                                                                                        -- -             ..,._
                                                                                                                                                                              ~-:IS.OO' I "l -..rL·7.7«
                                                                                                                                                                                        ~I
                                                                                                                                                                                                        .... 71
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ru··-            '""7:t.,.s-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~ ·~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l=l 2.5·              £t:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        liJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               l_P··I?.$9'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t- -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            / !l.?T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          f-- -           - 1 - I- - - -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S<lOO'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :~.---:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L=71
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L-21-·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :J:o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S<loo'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ..._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t..,~r       29.<9'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~~<;          LOT 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~o.1o2 sr                                                                                          ~            co        Cf)
     TRACT "B" VEGETATED coRRIDOR = 3,319 SF (0.08 AC)
     AVERAGE LOT SIZE = 180,500 / 35 LOTS= 5,157 SF
                                                                                  I
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                              LOT 19
                                                                                                                                                    ~... "
                                                                                                                                                       ~~ ~;:- RADIUS= 36'
                                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RADIUS= ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        'L                              _l                                      !:< I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                J                                                                                   ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ....J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w            ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~
     TOTAL SITE AREA = 267,057 SF (6, 13 AC)                                                                                  .11,502 Sf                                                                                                                          (TYP)    j            J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -      298.00'                                _I                                                                                                                                                                                        0::::        0
                                                                                  I                                                                (.!,
                                                                                                                                                       ~

                                                                                                                                                                 (        !3\J~t                  /               RADIUS - J6'                ..~STREET                                 I   N88' 28' 15.44"W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~~

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 j'        II                                                                                                                                                                                        0...
                                                                                                                                                   I                  ~'?.~<~>~~'t>.~t.<i                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~I                                   I~
     BU/!DING SE7!1ACKS;
                                                                                                                              11&.511'




                                                                                                                             ::'$-'2 :1 /' f -,%,;,._ -; -·~ - +""- ---- ~ r- - --·:.,
     FRONT YARD = 20'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LOT 7
     SIDE YARD = 5'
                                                                                                                              -                     ~                 T~                                                                                                                                                         ~                                                                                      '1/        ·.796    sr             ~~
     CORNER LOT SIDE YARD = 15'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /  :--l-8..21'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,..-1             94.41'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _l
     REAR YARD = 20'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ___153' -      W       EXISTING R.o.w.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      94.41'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~ 8' P.U.E.                          I               . . . . . . _ r-.1
                                                                                                                            ~~ e. s·. .A"j~                                                                                                                               ~- '~·                                                                             ~ '§
     1/DRL ZQNJNG- 119 2511 Sf f27+ ACR£l·                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -                         (TYP)
                          =              =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "I                                      ;;                                    EXISTING R.O,W. CENTERLINE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I(
     1./INII./UI.I DENSITY 56 UNIT/AC   15 UNITS
                                                                                                                                                                                            ;;I                                                                                                                                 S S LOT                                                                             ;                LOT 6                 lo;
     1./AXII./UM DENSITY= 8 UNIT/ AC = 22 UNITS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      §8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I l ~,::: ~·~~
                                                                                                                                           " A"                                                                                                         LOT 26                          LOT 27                  LOT 28                   29                  ..             LOT 30
                                                                                                                                                           ~                  :3:::                                    :::                                                ~                            :!                           ~.900 Sf                       ~                     I~
                                                                                  I                                           l,esl& Sf

                                                                                                                                                       1z,              .~                       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5,000 Sf               --       5,000 Sf                4, 900 Sf       a)    to                                    4,776 Sf

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I~
     11DRH ZC/tiiN!i - 67 2511Sf Q 47 ACR£l·                                         EMERwkY      ~    V                      B6.oo·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I
     MINIMUM DENSITY= 5,5 UNIT/AC = 8 UNITS                                                                                                                             ~ i!i               8.1                                                !                          I
     1./AXII.IUM DENSITY = II UNIT/AC = 15 UNITS

     COI.IBINED 11/NIIIUII DENSITY · 2J UNITS
     COI.IBINED IIAXIIIUII DENSITY · J7 UNITS
                                                                               ACCm /I'UBi.JC
                                                                                un[iry EASM~T
                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                              LOT 21
                                                                                                                              4,692 Sf



                                                                                                                           =" . ----n
                                                                                                            r------.,~"'·.'oo::-
                                                                                                                                  9<.00'
                                                                                                                                                       l~
                                                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                                           ·g_
                                                                                                                                                                        ::l ~

                                                                                                                                                                       ~~
                                                                                                                                                                              Vi
                                                                                                                                                                                          :;:       ~~25~
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                             "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~
                                                                                                                                                                                      1--L~l_==s~·--2~~---f-~S<l~- o  '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -fJl-~S<l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~. ~ oo~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ·         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -~r-~S<l~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 oo~·--~--~ ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S<l.~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~--~-~~~oo~·~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l:g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8        STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     28' 15.44"E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     152.52' -=---~t--.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0:::
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tf       "'c-
                                                                                                                                    l                                                         I      116.oir                 7'ARK"                             IZO.ocr   ll'l                                                                                                                                                                                              ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (..)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~I                                                              ~
                                                                                              I                               LOT 22
                                                                                                                                                       Is
                                                                                                                                                        5j
                                                                                                                                                                       -~
                                                                                                                                                                        (/)
                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                           !1
                                                                                                                                                                                           ~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LOT 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~003 S(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S·:; ~               /                   LOI 31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IO,ll& Sf                ~ ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12<t00'                          I        ~                 6...--            79 0··            ~l                  :; : ;            I
                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                              4,700 SF
                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19' ~'?                                                                   ,~       !::::             l;ll·l2.5ol'                  l,o\1.79'1.     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11 \ 1  (/)
                                                                                                                                                                       ~                         I                                                             I                                                                                  LOT 32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3        ~                                                                 I \_I RA
                                                                                              j·- -                                                                                                                    fl!i,OD'                                               II JJ1'                                                             U <1 Sf                                                                            LOT 5                  !l'                      S    a   20' (TYP)
                                                                                                                                  94.00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                       35.5.12'                                               I                                                 ie                                                                       I        p                 ~I               5,1 7 7 SF            I~           l
                                                                                              ,V                                                                                                                                                                                                                :!       t».M'                                    136.88'

                                                                                                                     PROPOSED CENTERLINE (TYP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S<l.~                                    ll6e8'                                            nl                9. .3'             J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I.IORIIlONf.                     AIDRLZOf/.E                                                                                                                                                   9<6$

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~~                 LOT 33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4,605 Sf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ~I               LOT 4                 I~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           so
                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5,011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                g       LOT .l5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~.lCO   sr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  66..86'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  86.68'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I               94.70'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                              I




                                                                                              I
                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ~


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ""
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ::::;


                                                                                              I
                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~                  ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    en


~
~
                                                                                              I
                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    z

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0


l                                                                                             ~ ---- ----- ---- - -- -- ----------- -- -- - --- -- -- -------- --                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -

i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (/)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -
r
                                                                                              1
                                                                                              r-----------------------------------------------------                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                >


I
"'                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    w


t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~ "'
f
!?
                                                                                              I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SHEET NO
~
a:
~
j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
~
""'
~L_______________________________________________________________________________________~
                                                                                                         JOB NO
                                                                                         " --------------~----~ DRH-64
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LAND USE SUBMITTAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :z
                                                                                                                                            ·lt------~------~1.4:-. ._-_R_.O_.W_,:,I--~D-TH- ----~-------fR.O.;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (f)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      z 0
                                                                                                                                       ':                                                              - - -
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                           '-'-
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4-'                                                                      0 en z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      w 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  >          <.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w
                                                                                                                                  !-
                                                                                                                                  I p U.E. I                               TRAVF:L                         TRAVF:L                      ~        p U E -j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I                           (f)                     0:::
                                         4" A.C. PAVF:MENT, LEVF:L 2, 1/2" ROCK MIX
                                                2" CRUSHED ROCKBASE, ~· (MINUS)
                                                                                                                                        ~~
                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                      6'l-:r                LANE


                                                                                                                                                                                ~                      ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                            LANE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s·-r~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  · . .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               __ :                                   1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      w :::::>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      w en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (()
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                2 1 MAX
                                                                                                                                      ,~        )6==,j--i==~~~=~=~-~==st\~~~~ ' ,2:1                                                                      MAX.                        0:::                   0
                                                8" CRUSHED ROCKBASE.      W (MINUS)                                                                                                                                                     4" CONCRETE SIDEWALK                          1-           ~         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (f)
                                                                GfOTEXTILE FABRIC
                                                                                                                                                SEE ROAD PAVf:MENT
                                                                                                                                                 SECTION THIS SHEET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I.ANOSCAPE PLANTER         1\!TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             STREET TREE SPACED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (J EVf:RY 25' AS REQUIRED BY CITY OF SHERWOOD      _J           LiS       0:::
                                                   12 " FULLY COMPACTED SUBGRAOE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OR STREET LIGHT SPACED PER PGE PLAN                <(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0::: w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 24" CURB AND GUTTER                                               (()       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a_                     (f)
                                                  DAYBREAK SUBDIVISION PAVEMENT
                                                             SECTION
                                                                                                                                      "A". "8". "C". "D". "E". "F" STREET (DAYBREAK SUBDIVISION)
                                                                                                                                                                TYPICAL SECTION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      >-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1-           ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                   N.T.S.                                                                            CITY OF SHERWOOD 28' STANDARD RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                       N.T.S.




                                                                                                                                                                                            PROPOSED


                                                                                                                                                r-----~-
                                                                                                                                                     ----: ~3~:: 11(1\f::TH
                                                                                                                                                                                      4

                                                                                                                                  DAYBREAK                                - - - -- -- -- - I                                                  SCHOOL

                                                                                                                                 SUBDIVISION                                                ir~~~~                                            PROPERTY

                                                                                                                                                                                '              It            79'
                                                                                                                                            R.O. W.                                                                                     R.O. W
                                                                                                                                                                                      11'                                         73'     t    EX. 8'
                                                                                                                                         8·                           PARKING       TRAVF:L                                                       U.E. -j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "P..--
                                                                                                                                  -    ·
                                                                                                                                       P.U.E.                           7'
                                                                                                                                                                                     LANE                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                  1
                                    4" A.C. PAVF:MENT, LEVF:L 2, 1/2" ROCK MIX                                                         '-,      - 8' (       5'
                                           J" CRUSHED ROCKBASE,    1\"   (MINUS)                                                2:1 MA X.                I             ~
                                           g· CRUSHED ROCKBASE,    If    (MINUS)                                                       ...-"
                                                                                                                                                                                    SAWCUT EXISTING PAVF:MENT
                                                           GEOTEXTILE FABRIC
                                                                                                      LANDSCAPE PLANTER 1\!TH STREET TREE SPACCD                                    MINIMUM 7' REMOVAL
                                                                                                     0 EVER Y 25' AS REQUIRED BY CITY OF SHERWOOD
                                              72" FULLY COMPACTED SUBGRADE                                   OR STREET LIGHT SPACED PER PGE PLAN                                CONSTRUCT ASPHALT ROAOWA Y
                                                                                                                                                                                SEE ROAD PA Vf:MENT
                                                                                                                    PROPOSED 24" CURB AND WnfR                                  SECTION THIS SHEET

                                                              COPPER TERRACE
                                                                                                                                            COPPER TERRACE HALF-STREET TYPICAL SECTION
                                                             PAVEMENT SECTION                                                                                CITY OF SHERWOOD 38' NEIGHBORHOOD ROUTE LOOKING NORTH
                                                                              N. T.S.                                                                                                 N. T.S.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :r:         "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o:l     ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :r:                               :r:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CJ

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ""
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ::;;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             z

                                                                                                                                                                                               ! --    -     --PROPOSED 45' RO,W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0                     ~
                                                                                                                                                                                               1 - - EX            JO' R.O W                              DAYBREAK                                                     00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             z         z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                             25 '                                                                                            ti'
                                                                                                                                                                                                              12'       6'                                                                                   [ij       0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i!l
                                    5" A.C. PAVF:MENT, LEVEL 2, 1/2" ROCK MIX                                                                                                                          11.5'                                                                                                           00


                                           4" CRUSHED ROCKBASE,   ¥."    (MINUS)

                                          10" CRUSHED ROCKBASE,   If     (MINUS)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       >
                                                           CEOTEX1lLE FABRIC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~


                                             12" FULLY COMPACTED SUBGRAOE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "'
                                                               ELWERT ROAD
                                                                                                                                                ELWERT ROAD HALF-STREET TYPICAL SECTION
                                                             PAVEMENT SECTION                                                                                     WASHINGTON COUNTY ARTERIAL ROAD LOOKING NORTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SHEET NO

                                                                              N. T.S.                                                                                                 N. T.S.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LANDUSE suBMinAL                                          JOB NO,

~L-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------~----------~
I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DRH-64
         0           15       JO              60

                     SCAl f: 1"    ~   J O'



    LEGEND
    "·       =            =:> ·   S£0/MfNT FfNCf


         0 """"                   INLET PROTECTION


    ~                             GRAVfL CONSTRUCTION
    ~                             ENTRANCE


-        ~                -       £X/STING CONTOUR
-~1----                           PROPOSED CONTOUR
                     X%           APPROX. SLOP£ OF
                 -                FINISH SURFACE




                                                                                                a:
                                                                                                0..
                                                                                                      <D
                                                                                                      ~
                                                                                                :c    <D
                                                                                                :c

                                                      ,


                                                                                                                    z

                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                              1
                                                                                              -1--f--t--+--1-1-H    >


                                                     FILL AREA --------:..       · __)

                                                                             j

                                                     CU T AREA                           I!

                                                                                         I              5
                                                          CUT   I FILL DIAGRAM                             DRH-64
                                     \
                                                                                                                                                   I     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ::i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :z:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
I
r--~                                     \                                                                                                                                                                                   0....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     en    z

                                                                                                                                                 II
           EXISTING RIGHT OF WAy
           CENTERLINE
                                             \                                                                                                                                                                               ~ >           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ill           ill
I                                                                                                                                                    I                                                                       >    0        0:::



                                     ;:.- \ L-
                                                 \ \ -------- FUTURE EDGE
                                                              DF ASPHALT                                                                                                                                                     __j  co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             :::> ::::>    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
I                                        5:1        \                                                                                                                               0   2.5    5             JO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     en    0
I                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <(   ~ 0
                                                                                                                                                 I                                      SCALE: J"   ~   5'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0 <( ~

I                                         \    ~·"' .~," ~,
                                                          \
                                                                                                                                      I      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0::: w 0:::
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0:::
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0::::
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     co :r:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C/)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ~
I



I                                                             ',   \
                                                                                                                                     I   I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             __j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ill     0


                                                              ~\                   ~~~ru-""                                          I
I




I
             REALIGN EXSTING




                                                                       ' r-r- -:&ro->~~Dm'+
                                                                                      SIDN
                24" CULVfRT
                                                                                    11


                                                                       II                                                     -- - - -
                                                                       11           II                           ---------\                                         PROPERTY LINE



                               .Jo...~_.
                                      li..----==~~::::..Joft=--=_
                                                                =- :::- I~~-                     =L:RT
                                                                                                 EXTENSION   I
                                                                                                                          ~ EXISTING             CREEK CENTERLINE

                                                                        ~t---...L-1-., I




                                                                                                                                  TRACT "8"



         EXISTING EDGE
           OF ASPHALT




I
          PROPOSED
         WATER LINE

    PROPOSED STORM
         SEWER LINE
                                                                                                                                                                      ----
I
I
                                                                                            Ll

I-~
                                                                                           <J
                                                                                      5.00'



I



I
                                                                                                                                   LOT 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                        LANDUSE suBMinAL   JOBNO      DRH~
         I
         I
               1 /'"
         fdff .____ ~ACT
                             /
                                           EXIS71NG 24"//RCP CULVERT


                                                     .;
                                                                                                                                                            BLOWOFF AT END OF PUBUC WATER LINE; \
                                                                                                                                                                         FOR FUTURE CONN£C710N


                                                                                                                                                                                      ;           ·.        I               ;                                                                                                                                                                                                       :.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f rri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  fn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I 1 -.---:-:~-------::--:-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~--H       CONNECT TO EXISTING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~ ;· ::,~~I~Gs~~~gL~B

               ~
         !, . lf            :,             :                                 - -                                          "                I           ,.           I           ,     i:                ~I      · :1        i "         I         "                 I              "             I              ,                           I         '"                         I                                  '               l :·               .,,T!~~-·"'"~""""                                                                               :z:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cnz
               ~·                                                                                                                                                                                       ~                    F~" ,~,~ ,~.- <¥,..,                                                : r~~, d.,_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          11 "~"~"~ .~~,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       >8
        r
                                 ·                                       ..                             I                                  I                        I[                : ··                          .: :                                                                                                                                                     I                 I         _                          I        ·                                            1                                                            ow
               t'-                   h                                                                      '                                                            i__         J ..              ~I            ~["1f rn-~ ·~··- ~-                                                                                                                                                                            '                                    '                                                                                             ceo:::
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ::::::>0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cno
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,¥   ····
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .. .·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LiSs
                                 :1"-1.._       FUTURE PUBLIC ClASS
                                                                                                        · ;'t. f                                ~',                                                                                                                                                                                              ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r7                                                --                         I                       .!--        ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I                                                            c::::ffi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cc:r:
         I


               11
                             .I            , - 52 Dl WA1£
                                                        -R LINE-



                                                             ~U:,~~~~s;E~~. ~
                                                                                              1_
                                                                                                           ~ ~ - ~v 7
                                                                                                                     _I


                                                                                                                     J1
                                                                                                                                       <




                                                                                                                                         /~-~"
                                                                                                                                              -~' ~=~~-~~~~~~=~~-~
                                                                                                                                                 - · .. . .· . .· .
                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                          1   1

                                                                                                                                                                                                    -. =~~~~  .=
                                                                                                                                                                                                               .w :~*~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     --~~V~~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "Au STREf;,T

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~ f'{ '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ..                                           -......._                               , ,              \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7               I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       'dJ ~                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i                                                    ~(I)

         I ~-)
         I
                                 ·


                                 .1 -         sANITARY S£11£R       ~::~~)                         \I ·:
                                                                                                                \


                                                                                                                     'j                lr/ . / ' - - - - -- -'l~x : "':-~~.;;,;,f;·(TYP)- ___:_ - P:LI ;:R;I~m':r-J- .: -\,_·~- +d-$-frs.+-b)-1.
                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                       .. . .. ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JJ _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ' ):.1.·:--; /_                                                                               ._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,                                                            _ _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r;;     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0

                                     v        RIM = 2065      +/-                                               ·                                                    I                                                                             H                                                                            -T                                                                                                                                 I    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I                         fl:;

        1
        ~
             ../                         . ! : · IE IN= 193,6
                                         - T l!Mcr      "A     -    ·    ·
                                                                              · ·
                                                                              .     ·
                                                                                        SAN
                                                                                        .
                                                                                                   ~
                                                                                            ··rl .I ..
                                                                                                            l::' .   i
                                                                                                                    .T        '"
                                                                                                                                        .·. I                       25
                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                              l        26           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            27          I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I        29                  I         Jo                    I                                      -I I                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~        ;I      ~,-               I       ~:5: :~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '.J




               ~,-M_             '          FUTURE PUBLIC CLASS _ /                                                  -
                                                                                                                                            -II                 --                                                  I                                               I                            I                              I . ,,                    I~            .. ,_ - - - - _ I_ J "·D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,··
                                                                                                                     iI                    :                                                                                            I                       I
           ~
         I         I                            52 01
                                                                     ~;E                               I :.    ~                               I                                                                                                                                   sc~E~i'(~ ~ ~- ~ : - '                                                                    ·~. ·._ .·.                                     r:-r · . . ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I I~ t-~
                                                      wA1£R                                                                                                         2·                                                                                                  sANITARY
         I                                                   PUBLIC U71LITY                            I      Vl                               I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I                l - CONNECT TO          EXIS71NG

           tl           ~        '        I                                                            I    " ,l..JI                           I                                                                -       -                                                                                                                                                                                                           l i~~~~tlM~-L                                                 ~::I~A~6osr41\£R
         I j~                    ~ ,~                                                                  l ~.- IJ~II: ~                                                                                                                                                                                                :~H~r~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \::1,:::~:. -11~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~-11-11~~~~                                                                                                ~- 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i~;i1i\{ji~J:iYB
                                                                   -EASEM-ENT                                                      r       ··                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /:j       ;:;,   fl(ttl                                                               1-                        MANHOLE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ---!:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t Dr
         '
         1         __
                   1
                                                                                                                                                                -        -                    :                 ·                _ _ _ _j- - - - ---l.- - --_ -
                                                                                                                 ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~U+- 1 -h- r-1-~,-1-~:· ~ - ~-·.:.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       . ~ :___ -                                           ~~
                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                        22
                                                                                                                     ·.       F                 I :                 n                         I                                                                              32                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +=   .t=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _                                                                                          _-1                  l                                  I




         r~
         l -   ~
                       -                   PUBLIC 12'" PVC STORM  SEWER- LINE
                                                             INSTALL
                                                                     12
                                                                              (TYP) ../
                                                                         CLEANouT
                                                                                                       -/7      ·                                 I
                                                                                                                                                  PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PUBLIC 8" PVC - - '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SANITARY SEWER LINE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (TYP)           ~~ 1--'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I -:      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1--       "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t·-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _.         ·        IJ.~l         .--__..I--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :.-.-1\

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  v~-'-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EXISTING 16" WA 1£R MAIN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EXISTING 15 · Pvc s ToRM s£11£R


         I                                     PUBLIC 8" PVC SANITARY S£1\£R UNE (TYP)
                                           INSTALL 8 " CLEANOUT FOR FUTURE CONNEC710N
                                                                                                                                   L   BLOWOFF AT END OF PUBLIC WATER LINE
                                                                                                                                       FOR FUTURE CONNECTION                                                                                                                                                                     I               ~"----
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _ II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t__l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .I '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l                                                                       :   1·_.. ·        IHt-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       >.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ~.                            ------1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ......--,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EXIS71NG 15" PVC SANITARY SEI\£R


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JJ                             I .
         I
         i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~ : ;."~~c:· ,~:'[, ;.j -t~ : ,__ ._~ ~ i                                                                                                                    ·               i 1l: i jl                                            I

         ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~ ,. : I I                                                                                                                                                                :'! l1 r j
         I
         l
                                                                         t                                                                                                      PUBLIC a· Pvc SANITARY SEWER LINE
                                                                                                                                                                                INSTALL MANHOLE FOR FUTURE CONNEC710N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (TYP):,~k~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~ -- J----- ~ . l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ---....__ .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r----..._
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I . ·1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _I:                        ·.                      ·.                           !1   ~            "'                ·                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    J

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r::
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l'<jr.t'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~ .                                                                                                        z

                                                    0         15         JO                   60                                                                                        PUBLIC 12" PVC STORM SEWER LINE (TYP) - -
                                                                                                                                                                             INSTALL MANHOLE CLEANOUT FOR FUTURE CONNECTION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  - ...,.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ----~..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I    ----

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~-fl., -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,, -                                   ;:.......L_,~ iiJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   f9            1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1:·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I ~ ..                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i       ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ty'Q......._r- EXISTING       PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0


         I
         I
                                                             SCALE: I'" =         30'
                                                                                                                                                                                      BLOWOFF AT END OF PUBLIC WATER UN£
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~-----
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1, ' - - -  . --.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     · .-                               w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             c       STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4>          w                                 '           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ..                      -i .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~ ·. --,.___
                                                                                                                                                                                                   FOR FUTURE CONNECTION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~                                      .    t_U-.         ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7-        -    L- -~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1                                   1                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -~                   - ~--~~·                              k                                         - -                            "·.                 -~ ~ I
         I
         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r-- - -             -       -     -     -       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PUBUC FIRE HYDRAN T                              I .- ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1~                     .            I t_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <:!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I   I~  ··
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~    ~

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I REMOVE 7fNU REINSTALL EXISTING DITCH INLET

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ANcJ CONNECT TO EXIS71NG STORM SEWER 'lr!TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A    ~EANOUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -t-1-+-1--1-+-1--f >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,.~,:~                                                               l : Jl-~ ~ -- :·~ -!-~~1~----~-J--~g    F~1 r·: -+-J
"'
~
i
e
         l ------------------ -- - --- -- ----- -- ---- - - ----- -- - -- -- - -- -- - - - - - - - - -                                                                                                                                             -                                    · .,M,&)
~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSTALL 12"CLEANOUT                   ~':                                        ~,  :·r.  1 TJ)-/1- REt~T~~~~~I~LfT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I -                                            I                                                                                                       SHEET NO

~


         r-----------------------------------------------------------------------------~~~J~~~~£~~~;:~J~~~------j----------~--~~-~j_~·~-~-=                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
~
~
~
~
                                                                                                 EN~o?:(u~~ff ~~~~c~!~ LAND USE SUBMITTAL                                                                                                                                           BLDWOFF AT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              JOB NO


~L-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------~----~D~R~H~-M:__j
                                                                                                        :z
                                                                                                z       0
                                                                                                <(
                                                                                                _J
                                                                                                        en     z
                                                                                                               0
75    150           300
                                                                                                0....
                                                                                                z
                                                                                                        >      <..9
                                                                                                               w
                                                                                                        0      0:::
SCALE: 1" ~ 150 '
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                r-
                                                                                                        co     0
                                                                                                <(      :::>
                                                                                                _J
                                                                                                ~
                                                                                                        en     6
                                                                                                               0
                          r                                                                     u       ~      0
                                  _.. , r
                          I
                              _
                                                                                                0:::
                                                                                                u w w
                                                                                                        <(
                                                                                                         0:::
                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                   0::::
                                                                                                w co
                                                                                                r-       :r:
                                                                                                               Cf)
                                                                                                Cf)
                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                        0



                                                                                           ..
                                                                                          '1




                                                                              l      .·
                                                                          ........ .·
                                                                        -....<:
                                                                          i       ....




                                     \
                                         \
                                             \,\     _, ~   #/ /


                                                   .. , ..
                                                   /// /           ''
                                                                    :z
                                                                    0
                                                                    en             z
                                                                                   0
 0   75    ISO          JOO                                         >              <.9
                                                                                   w
                                                                    0              0:::
     SCAlE: 1" = 150'
                                                                    co             0
                                                                    :::::>         0-
                                                                    en             0
                                                                    ~              0
SURROUNDING LAND USE LEGEND                                         <(
                                                                    LU
                                                                                   s
                                                                                   0:::
MDRH = MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL HIGH                              0:::: w
                                                                    co             I
                                                                                   (f)
MDRL = MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL LOW
                                                                    ~
                                                                    0
IP = INSTinJTIONAL AND PUBLIC




                                                                   !!l       (/)           ,..,
                                                                   aJ        ::2           ~
                                                                                           I
                                                                                           u
                                                                                           "'
                                                                                           ""
                                                                                           ::;o
                                                               ~
                                                               ~
                                                               0                       ~


                                                                                           z

                                                                                           0




                                                                                           "'



                                                                    8
                                         LANDUSE SUBMinAL   ~JOBN0----1
                                                                DRH-64
                                                                                                       JL

l ,___ ___ ,
       ......,_


g~--~~~~~,~~~~

~ ...----+--_1
~




                                                                              . ,
                                                  · ··.    SCHOOL
                                                             ,..,.·- ......
                                     ·.
                                                                                    ... ··   ·.
                                                          ·.                                  ·. .·.
                  (l    I                                      · ··'4-.
                            '.,.... ...........
                  f ~2£/0   ""· ... :-- ·
                                                  ·,.
  Open
  See




---------




                ··-
            (.""'": City Boundary
                      Very L ow Density Residentiai-VLDR
                      PUD-VLDR
                                                            -
                                                            ~ PUD-OC
                                                            -
                                                                      Office Commercia~C


                                                                      Retail Commerciai-RC
                                                            ~ PUD-RC
                                                                                                     N
                                                            -         lnstiMional and Public-IP
                      Medium Denstty Residential Low-MDRL             Ught lndustriai-LI
                      PUD-MDRL                                        PUD-U




                                                                      Urban Growth /Vea- Concept Plan Required


            -
                      Neighborhood Commerciai-NC

                      General Commerciai-GC
                 ·zon+ng Gf unamexed p;~rcel& do es
                                                            ....
                                                            lb.
                                                                      Unannexed Parcel-Inside UGB·
                                                                   "'\!Old Town Overlay
                                                                      Urban Growth Boundary
                                                                                                     ft
                                                                                                          8It
                 not apply until amued ln\o city
MDRL DENSITY FOR DAYBREAK                      3-1-13

      Lot No.
            1      5920
            2      5024
            3      5021
            4      5017
            5      5177
            6      5169
           7       4756
           8       4702
           9       6967
          10       4317
          11       4937
          12       5000
          13       5000
          14       2100 Excludes 2886 sf of Lot 14 that is in the MRL zone
          27       4890 Excludes 308 sf of Lot 27 in the MDRH & includes 198 sf of Lot 26 in MDRL
          28       4900
          29       4900
          30       4776
          32       6547
          33       4605
          34       5024
           35     5300
           36     9201
   Total Area   119250
  Total Acres      2.74

Minimum density for MDRL at 5.6 units per acre   = 2.74 acres x 5.6 = 15.33 units
Maximum density for MDRL at 8 units per acre   = 2.74 acres x 8 = 21.90 units

Minimum density for both zones: 15.33 + 7.74 = 23 units

Maximum density for both zones: 21.90 + 15.47 = 37 units
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- SW Edy Rd                                                                                     QC JOB #: 10871805
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Thu, Dec 20 2012
                   0            0                             Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                                 0.0        0.0

                   0     0      0
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0


      127    0                         0   229
                                                                                                               0.0   0.0                      0.0       3.1
             91         0.57          42
                                                                                                                     0.0                      0.0
      164    73                      187   345
                                                                                                               1.8   4.1                      3.7       1.7

                  85     0     254
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 2.4

                  260          339
                                                                                                                            3.8        1.8



                         0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                     0                          0

             0                         5                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                     0                          0

                         0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                        NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                      NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                        NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count       SW Copper Terr                       SW Copper Terr              SW Edy Rd                    SW Edy Rd                   Total       Hourly
     Period         (Northbound)                         (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left Thru Right      U             Left     Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM     0    0      0     0              0         0      0     0    0       6      0      0     2       5      0    0               13
     7:05 AM     0    0      0     0              0         0      0     0    0       6      0      0     1       1      0    0                8
     7:10 AM     0    0      0     0              0         0      0     0    0       8      0      0     1       2      0    0               11
     7:15 AM     1    0      1     0              0         0      0     0    0       5      3      0     2       0      0    0               12
     7:20 AM     2    0      5     0              0         0      0     0    0       8      4      0    12       3      0    0               34
     7:25 AM     4    0      7     0              0         0      0     0    0      10      4      0    12       3      0    0               40
     7:30 AM     4    0     15     0              0         0      0     0    0       8      1      0    16       5      0    0               49
     7:35 AM    10    0     16     0              0         0      0     0    0       4     13      0    12       3      0    0               58
     7:40 AM     7    0     28     0              0         0      0     0    0      10     12      0    35       4      0    0               96
     7:45 AM    10    0     26     0              0         0      0     0    0       7     16      0    41       5      0    0              105
     7:50 AM    13    0     40     0              0         0      0     0    0       8     12      0    27       3      0    0              103
     7:55 AM    27    0     56     0              0         0      0     0    0       6      4      0    15       4      0    0              112              641
     8:00 AM     4    0     45     0              0         0      0     0    0      11      3      0     3       1      0    0               67              695
     8:05 AM     2    0     11     0              0         0      0     0    0       4      0      0    10       6      0    0               33              720
     8:10 AM     1    0      4     0              0         0      0     0    0      10      1      0     2       5      0    0               23              732
     8:15 AM     2    0      5     0              0         0      0     0    0       3      0      0     3       3      0    0               16              736
     8:20 AM     0    0      4     0              0         0      0     0    0       5      0      0     2       2      0    0               13              715
     8:25 AM     0    0      0     0              0         0      0     0    0       6      0      0     1       4      0    0               11              686
     8:30 AM     0    0      3     0              0         0      0     0    0       7      2      0     3       4      0    0               19              656
     8:35 AM     0    0      3     0              0         0      0     0    0       8      0      0     0       4      0    0               15              613
     8:40 AM     0    0      2     0              0         0      0     0    0       5      1      0     0       4      0    0               12              529
     8:45 AM     1    0      2     0              0         0      0     0    0       5      0      0     1       3      0    0               12              436
     8:50 AM     1    0      5     0              0         0      0     0    0       6      0      0     1       1      0    0               14              347
     8:55 AM     0    0      5     0              0         0      0     0    0       2      0      0     2       7      0    0               16              251
 Peak 15-Min            Northbound                            Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left Thru Right     U             Left     Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles 200    0    488     0              0         0      0     0    0      84    128      0   332      48      0    0                      1280
 Heavy Trucks    0    0     20                    0         0      0          0       0      0            0       0      0                            20
  Pedestrians         0                                     0                         0                          12                                   12
    Bicycles     0    0      0                    0         0      0          0       0      0            0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/27/2012 1:01 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- Laurel Ridge Middle School Dwy                                                                        QC JOB #: 10871803
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Thu, Dec 20 2012
                    188              291                            Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                                   3.7        0.7

                         0     68 120
                                                                   Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                    0.0 8.8 0.8


       0     0                             111   142
                                                                                                                       0.0   0.0                     0.9   0.7
             0                0.55           0
                                                                                                                             0.0                     0.0
       0     0                              31   213
                                                                                                                       0.0   0.0                     0.0   0.5

                         0    178 95
                                                                                                                                    0.0 0.6 0.0

                       99            273
                                                                                                                                    6.1        0.4



                               0                                                                                                     0    0    0



                                                                                                                             0                        0

             0                              31                                                                               0                        0

                                                                                                                             0                        0

                               0                                                                                                     0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                            NA                                                                                NA                      NA




                               NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Copper Terr                   SW Copper Terr       Laurel Ridge Middle School Dwy
                                                                                                               Laurel Ridge Middle School Dwy Total      Hourly
     Period                   (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                       Totals
 Beginning At     Left         Thru Right     U        Left     Thru Right    U      Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right       U
     7:00 AM       0             1      0     0          1        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        3
     7:05 AM       0             1      0     0          0        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        2
     7:10 AM       0             3      1     0          0        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        4
     7:15 AM       0             5      1     0          1        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      0     0        9
     7:20 AM       0             9      4     0          4        5      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      0     0       23
     7:25 AM       0            16      0     0         11        3      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0       30
     7:30 AM       0            14      8     0          4        5      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      3     0       34
     7:35 AM       0            24      8     0         10        5      0     0       0      0      0     0       3      0      6     0       56
     7:40 AM       0            25     13     0         17       10      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0     10     0       75
     7:45 AM       0            29     23     0         20        5      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0     19     0       96
     7:50 AM       0            21     12     0         21        5      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0     18     0       77
     7:55 AM       0            22     15     0         14       23      0     0       0      0      0     0       3      0     23     0      100          509
     8:00 AM       0             9      7     0          5        4      0     0       0      0      0     0      17      0     23     0       65          571
     8:05 AM       0             2      2     0          9        2      0     2       0      0      0     0       2      0      7     0       26          595
     8:10 AM       0             2      2     0          2        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       4      0      2     0       12          603
     8:15 AM       0             1      1     0          0        0      0     1       0      0      0     0       0      0      2     0        5          599
     8:20 AM       0             2      0     0          1        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      1     0        4          580
     8:25 AM       0             1      0     0          1        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      0     0        4          554
     8:30 AM       0             1      1     0          0        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      1     0        4          524
     8:35 AM       0             1      0     0          0        2      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      1     0        4          472
     8:40 AM       0             1      0     0          1        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      1     0        3          400
     8:45 AM       0             0      0     0          0        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        0          304
     8:50 AM       0             0      0     0          0        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      2     0        4          231
     8:55 AM       0             1      1     0          1        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       2      0      2     0        8          139
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                       Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left         Thru Right     U        Left     Thru Right    U      Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right       U            Total
  All Vehicles     0          288     200     0        220      132      0     0       0      0      0     0      12      0    240     0            1092
 Heavy Trucks      0             4      0                0        4      0             0      0      0             0      0      0                    8
  Pedestrians                    0                                0                           0                          80                          80
    Bicycles       0             0      0                0        0      0             0      0      0             0      0      0                    0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/27/2012 1:01 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- SW Handley St                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10871801
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Thu, Dec 20 2012
                       97            258                            Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                              5.2        0.4

                       31      0     66
                                                                   Peak 15-Min: 7:40 AM -- 7:55 AM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 7.6


       59    96                            162   190
                                                                                                                  1.7   1.0                      0.0       0.5
             25               0.56          28
                                                                                                                        0.0                      3.6
       121   0                               0    91
                                                                                                                  0.8   0.0                      0.0       5.5

                         0     0      0
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                         0            0
                                                                                                                               0.0        0.0



                               0                                                                                                0    0    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

             1                               7                                                                          0                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          0

                               6                                                                                                0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                            NA                                                                           NA                       NA




                               NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Copper Terr                   SW Copper Terr            SW Handley St             SW Handley St                 Total       Hourly
     Period                   (Northbound)                     (Southbound)              (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left         Thru Right     U        Left     Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
     7:00 AM       0             0      0     0          0        0      0     0     2     0      0      0    0      2     0     0                4
     7:05 AM       0             0      0     0          0        0      2     0     1     0      0      0    0      4     1     0                8
     7:10 AM       0             0      0     0          0        0      1     0     2     0      0      0    0      0     2     0                5
     7:15 AM       0             0      0     0          2        0      0     0     1     3      0      0    0      2     5     0               13
     7:20 AM       0             0      0     0          5        0      1     0     6     0      0      0    0      2     4     0               18
     7:25 AM       0             0      0     0          1        0      2     0    11     2      0      0    0      2     8     0               26
     7:30 AM       0             0      0     0          5        0      0     0    10     1      0      0    0      1    12     0               29
     7:35 AM       0             0      0     0          6        0      1     0    10     2      0      0    0      4    20     0               43
     7:40 AM       0             0      0     0          7        0      4     0    15     3      0      0    0      3    26     0               58
     7:45 AM       0             0      0     0          5        0      0     0    25     6      0      0    0      1    31     0               68
     7:50 AM       0             0      0     0          5        0      2     0     5     2      0      0    0      4    39     0               57
     7:55 AM       0             0      0     0         11        0      7     0     3     2      0      0    0      1    11     0               35              364
     8:00 AM       0             0      0     0         14        0     10     0     6     4      0      0    0      5     4     0               43              403
     8:05 AM       0             0      0     0          3        0      2     0     2     0      0      0    0      1     0     0                8              403
     8:10 AM       0             0      0     0          2        0      2     0     2     0      0      0    0      2     2     0               10              408
     8:15 AM       0             0      0     0          0        0      0     0     0     1      0      0    0      1     2     0                4              399
     8:20 AM       0             0      0     0          0        0      0     0     1     0      0      0    0      2     0     0                3              384
     8:25 AM       0             0      0     0          0        0      1     0     1     1      0      0    0      1     1     0                5              363
     8:30 AM       0             0      0     0          0        0      0     0     2     1      0      0    0      0     0     0                3              337
     8:35 AM       0             0      0     0          2        0      0     0     0     0      0      0    0      1     1     0                4              298
     8:40 AM       0             0      0     0          1        0      0     0     1     0      0      0    0      0     0     0                2              242
     8:45 AM       0             0      0     0          0        0      0     0     0     2      0      0    0      0     0     0                2              176
     8:50 AM       0             0      0     0          2        0      1     0     0     3      0      0    0      2     0     0                8              127
     8:55 AM       0             0      0     0          1        0      2     0     2     0      0      0    0      1     1     0                7               99
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                       Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left         Thru Right     U        Left     Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0             0      0     0         68        0     24     0   180    44      0      0    0     32   384     0                      732
 Heavy Trucks      0             0      0                8        0      0           4     0      0           0      4     0                             16
  Pedestrians                    0                                0                        0                         0                                    0
    Bicycles       0             0      0               0         0      0           0     0      0           0      0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/27/2012 1:00 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- SW Edy Rd                                                                                             QC JOB #: 10871809
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Wed, Dec 19 2012
                         0            0                             Peak-Hour: 2:05 PM -- 3:05 PM                                   0.0         0.0

                         0     0      0
                                                                   Peak 15-Min: 2:15 PM -- 2:30 PM
                                                                                                                                    0.0 0.0 0.0


       120   0                               0   183
                                                                                                                     3.3    0.0                        0.0       6.0
             77               0.82          77
                                                                                                                            3.9                        3.9
       97    20                            106   243
                                                                                                                     10.3   35.0                       7.5       4.1

                       43      0     166
                                                                                                                                    2.3 0.0 4.2

                    126              209
                                                                                                                                    11.9        3.8



                               0                                                                                                     0     0    0



                                                                                                                            0                            0

             0                              34                                                                              0                            0

                                                                                                                            0                            0

                               0                                                                                                     0     0    0




                               NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                            NA                                                                               NA                         NA




                               NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Copper Terr                   SW Copper Terr              SW Edy Rd                    SW Edy Rd                      Total       Hourly
     Period                   (Northbound)                     (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Totals
 Beginning At     Left         Thru Right     U        Left     Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     1:45 PM        1            0      0     0         0         0      0     0    0       9      0      0     0      10      0    0                  20
     1:50 PM        0            0      4     0         0         0      0     0    0       5      0      0     4       5      0    0                  18
     1:55 PM        1            0      4     0         0         0      0     0    0       5      0      0     2       8      0    0                  20
     2:00 PM        0            0      2     0         0         0      0     0    0       4      0      0     8       4      0    0                  18
     2:05 PM        1            0      0     0         0         0      0     0    0       4      0      0    21       5      0    0                  31
     2:10 PM        0            0      4     0         0         0      0     0    0       4      1      0    12       5      0    0                  26
     2:15 PM        3            0      3     0         0         0      0     0    0       3      2      0    13       3      0    0                  27
     2:20 PM        9            0     39     0         0         0      0     0    0       8      1      0     4       6      0    0                  67
     2:25 PM        5            0     40     0         0         0      0     0    0       3      0      0     4       3      0    0                  55
     2:30 PM        1            0     18     0         0         0      0     0    0       4      0      0     1       8      0    0                  32
     2:35 PM        0            0      3     0         0         0      0     0    0      12      0      0     5      10      0    0                  30
     2:40 PM        0            0      4     0         0         0      0     0    0       7      3      0     5       6      0    0                  25              369
     2:45 PM        0            0      3     0         0         0      0     0    0      10      2      0     8       7      0    0                  30              379
     2:50 PM        5            0     10     0         0         0      0     0    0       4      6      0    18       7      0    0                  50              411
     2:55 PM       11            0     26     0         0         0      0     0    0      10      3      0    11       7      0    0                  68              459
     3:00 PM        8            0     16     0         0         0      0     0    0       8      2      0     4      10      0    0                  48              489
     3:05 PM        5            0      9     0         0         0      0     0    0       9      0      0     2       9      0    0                  34              492
     3:10 PM        1            0      3     0         0         0      0     0    0       6      0      0     2      12      0    0                  24              490
     3:15 PM        0            0      0     0         0         0      0     0    0       0      0      0     0       0      0    0                   0              463
     3:20 PM        0            0      0     0         0         0      0     0    0       0      0      0     0       0      0    0                   0              396
     3:25 PM        0            0      0     0         0         0      0     0    0       0      0      0     0       0      0    0                   0              341
     3:30 PM        0            0      0     0         0         0      0     0    0       0      0      0     0       0      0    0                   0              309
     3:35 PM        0            0      0     0         0         0      0     0    0       0      0      0     0       0      0    0                   0              279
     3:40 PM        0            0      0     0         0         0      0     0    0       0      0      0     0       0      0    0                   0              254
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                       Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left         Thru Right     U        Left     Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                         Total
  All Vehicles     68            0    328     0         0         0      0     0    0      56    12       0    84      48      0    0                         596
 Heavy Trucks       4            0     28               0         0      0          0       0      0            4       0      0                               36
  Pedestrians                    0                                0                         0                          40                                      40
    Bicycles       0             0      0               0         0      0          0       0      0           0        0      0                                0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/27/2012 1:12 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- Laurel Ridge Middle School Dwy                                                                       QC JOB #: 10871807
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                         DATE: Wed, Dec 19 2012
                       82            149                           Peak-Hour: 2:05 PM -- 3:05 PM                                   11.0        1.3

                         0     47    35
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 2:15 PM -- 2:30 PM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 19.1 0.0


       0     0                             74   127
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      1.4   1.6
             1                0.59          0
                                                                                                                            0.0                      0.0
       1     0                             53    75
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      1.9   2.7

                         0     73    41
                                                                                                                                   0.0 1.4 4.9

                    100              114
                                                                                                                                   10.0        2.6



                               0                                                                                                    0     0    0



                                                                                                                            0                         0

             0                             68                                                                               0                         0

                                                                                                                            0                         0

                               0                                                                                                    0     0    0




                               NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                            NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                               NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Copper Terr                  SW Copper Terr       Laurel Ridge Middle School Dwy
                                                                                                              Laurel Ridge Middle School Dwy Total      Hourly
     Period                   (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                       Totals
 Beginning At     Left         Thru Right     U       Left     Thru Right    U      Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right       U
     1:45 PM       0             2      1     0         1        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      0     0        5
     1:50 PM       0             3      1     0         3        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      2     0       10
     1:55 PM       0             4      1     0         1        0      0     2       0      0      0     0       1      0      2     0       11
     2:00 PM       0             2      4     0         4        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      1     0       11
     2:05 PM       0             4      9     0        11        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0       25
     2:10 PM       0             4     10     0         6        2      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      2     0       25
     2:15 PM       0             3     11     0         9        4      0     0       0      0      0     0       2      0      9     0       38
     2:20 PM       0             7      2     0         2        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       7      0     25     0       44
     2:25 PM       0             3      1     0         2        4      0     0       0      0      0     0      27      0     19     0       56
     2:30 PM       0             2      2     0         0        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       5      0     13     0       23
     2:35 PM       0             4      0     0         1        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      1     0        7
     2:40 PM       0             4      0     0         1        3      0     0       0      0      0     0       3      0      2     0       13          268
     2:45 PM       0             8      1     0         1        0      0     2       0      0      0     0       0      0      2     0       14          277
     2:50 PM       0            15      1     0         0        4      0     0       0      0      0     0       3      0      0     0       23          290
     2:55 PM       0             8      2     0         0       14      0     0       0      0      0     0       2      0      1     0       27          306
     3:00 PM       0            11      2     0         0       13      0     0       0      1      0     0       2      0      0     0       29          324
     3:05 PM       0             5      0     0         0        1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        6          305
     3:10 PM       0             5      1     0         0        2      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      0     0        9          289
     3:15 PM       0             0      0     0         0        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        0          251
     3:20 PM       0             0      0     0         0        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        0          207
     3:25 PM       0             0      0     0         0        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        0          151
     3:30 PM       0             0      0     0         0        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        0          128
     3:35 PM       0             0      0     0         0        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        0          121
     3:40 PM       0             0      0     0         0        0      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        0          108
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                      Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left         Thru Right     U       Left     Thru Right    U      Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right       U            Total
  All Vehicles     0            52     56     0        52       36      0     0       0      0      0     0     144      0    212     0            552
 Heavy Trucks      0             0      8               0        8      0             0      0      0             4      0      4                   24
  Pedestrians                    0                               0                           0                         164                         164
    Bicycles       0             0      0              0         0      0             0      0      0             0      0      0                    0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/27/2012 1:12 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- SW Handley St                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10871804
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Wed, Dec 19 2012
                       97            102                          Peak-Hour: 2:05 PM -- 3:05 PM                              10.3        2.9

                       31      0     66
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 2:15 PM -- 2:30 PM
                                                                                                                             6.5 0.0 12.1


       40    47                            54   63
                                                                                                                5.0   4.3                       1.9       1.6
             13               0.83          9
                                                                                                                      0.0                       0.0
       60    0                              0   78
                                                                                                                3.3   0.0                       0.0      10.3

                         0     0      0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                         0            0
                                                                                                                             0.0         0.0



                               2                                                                                              0     0    0



                                                                                                                      0                           0

             0                             22                                                                         0                           0

                                                                                                                      0                           0

                               0                                                                                              0     0    0




                               NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                            NA                                                                         NA                        NA




                               NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Copper Terr                 SW Copper Terr            SW Handley St             SW Handley St                  Total        Hourly
     Period                   (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                Totals
 Beginning At     Left         Thru Right     U      Left     Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
     1:45 PM       0             0      0     0        1        0      0     0     0     1      0      0    0      2     3     0                 7
     1:50 PM       0             0      0     0        2        0      0     0     1     0      0      0    0      1     1     0                 5
     1:55 PM       0             0      0     0        1        0      0     0     1     1      0      0    0      1     4     0                 8
     2:00 PM       0             0      0     0        0        0      0     0     1     1      0      0    0      1     7     0                10
     2:05 PM       0             0      0     0        0        0      0     0     3     1      0      0    0      0    10     0                14
     2:10 PM       0             0      0     0        1        0      1     0     4     0      0      0    0      0    10     0                16
     2:15 PM       0             0      0     0        3        0      1     0     6     0      0      0    0      2     6     0                18
     2:20 PM       0             0      0     0        6        0      4     1     2     1      0      0    0      0     2     0                16
     2:25 PM       0             0      0     0       15        0     10     0     3     3      0      0    0      1     0     0                32
     2:30 PM       0             0      0     0        9        0      2     0     3     0      0      0    0      1     0     0                15
     2:35 PM       0             0      0     0        2        0      1     0     2     1      0      0    0      0     1     0                 7
     2:40 PM       0             0      0     0        1        0      4     0     2     3      0      0    0      0     4     0                14              162
     2:45 PM       0             0      0     0        0        0      0     0     3     2      0      0    0      0     4     0                 9              164
     2:50 PM       0             0      0     0        5        0      0     0    11     2      0      0    0      0     4     0                22              181
     2:55 PM       0             0      0     0       14        0      3     0     5     0      0      0    0      4     5     0                31              204
     3:00 PM       0             0      0     0        9        0      5     0     3     0      0      0    0      1     8     0                26              220
     3:05 PM       0             0      0     0        2        0      0     0     2     1      0      0    0      4     6     0                15              221
     3:10 PM       0             0      0     0        1        0      0     0     2     2      0      0    0      6     1     0                12              217
     3:15 PM       0             0      0     0        0        0      0     0     0     0      0      0    0      0     0     0                 0              199
     3:20 PM       0             0      0     0        0        0      0     0     0     0      0      0    0      0     0     0                 0              183
     3:25 PM       0             0      0     0        0        0      0     0     0     0      0      0    0      0     0     0                 0              151
     3:30 PM       0             0      0     0        0        0      0     0     0     0      0      0    0      0     0     0                 0              136
     3:35 PM       0             0      0     0        0        0      0     0     0     0      0      0    0      0     0     0                 0              129
     3:40 PM       0             0      0     0        0        0      0     0     0     0      0      0    0      0     0     0                 0              115
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left         Thru Right     U      Left     Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                       Total
  All Vehicles     0             0      0     0       96        0     60     4    44    16      0      0    0     12    32     0                       264
 Heavy Trucks      0             0      0              8        0      4           4     0      0           0      0     4                              20
  Pedestrians                    0                              4                        0                        32                                    36
    Bicycles       0             0      0             0         0      0           0     0      0           0      0     0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/27/2012 1:12 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- SW Edy Rd                                                                                          QC JOB #: 10871808
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                       DATE: Wed, Dec 19 2012
                         0           0                             Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                         0     0     0
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:20 PM -- 5:35 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


       160   0                              0   180
                                                                                                                    0.6   0.0                      0.0       0.6
             129              0.75        158
                                                                                                                          1.6                      0.6
       135   6                             22   149
                                                                                                                    1.5   0.0                      0.0       1.3

                         2     0     20
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                       28            22
                                                                                                                                 0.0        0.0



                               0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             0                              0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                               0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                           NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                               NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Copper Terr                  SW Copper Terr              SW Edy Rd                    SW Edy Rd                   Total       Hourly
     Period                   (Northbound)                    (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left         Thru Right     U       Left     Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     4:00 PM       0             0      3     0        0         0      0     0    0      11      0      0    0       12      0    0               26
     4:05 PM       0             0      4     0        0         0      0     0    0       9      0      0    2        6      0    0               21
     4:10 PM       0             0      3     0        0         0      0     0    0       3      0      0    1        2      0    0                9
     4:15 PM       0             0      1     0        0         0      0     0    0       5      0      0    1        8      0    0               15
     4:20 PM       1             0      0     0        0         0      0     0    0      10      1      0    4       11      0    0               27
     4:25 PM       1             0      3     0        0         0      0     0    0      14      0      0    3       18      0    0               39
     4:30 PM       1             0      6     0        0         0      0     0    0       9      0      0    1       16      0    0               33
     4:35 PM       1             0      4     0        0         0      0     0    0      11      0      0    1       16      0    0               33
     4:40 PM       0             0      1     0        0         0      0     0    0       4      1      0    0       12      0    0               18
     4:45 PM       1             0      6     0        0         0      0     0    0       9      0      0    2        6      0    0               24
     4:50 PM       0             0      1     0        0         0      0     0    0      15      0      0    2        9      0    0               27
     4:55 PM       0             0      0     0        0         0      0     0    0      15      0      0    4        8      0    0               27              299
     5:00 PM       0             0      5     0        0         0      0     0    0      10      0      0    2       17      0    0               34              307
     5:05 PM       1             0      0     0        0         0      0     0    0      10      1      0    3        8      0    0               23              309
     5:10 PM       0             0      2     0        0         0      0     0    0       6      0      0    4       14      0    0               26              326
     5:15 PM       0             0      0     0        0         0      0     0    0       9      1      0    1        9      0    0               20              331
     5:20 PM       0             0      0     0        0         0      0     0    0      16      0      0    2       16      0    0               34              338
     5:25 PM       0             0      4     0        0         0      0     0    0       8      0      0    1       20      0    0               33              332
     5:30 PM       0             0      3     0        0         0      0     0    0      18      0      0    2       22      0    0               45              344
     5:35 PM       0             0      2     0        0         0      0     0    0      14      3      0    1        7      0    0               27              338
     5:40 PM       1             0      2     0        0         0      0     0    0       4      0      0    1       12      0    0               20              340
     5:45 PM       0             0      1     0        0         0      0     0    0       8      0      0    2       11      0    0               22              338
     5:50 PM       0             0      1     0        0         0      0     0    0      14      0      0    1       10      0    0               26              337
     5:55 PM       0             0      0     0        0         0      0     0    0      12      1      0    2       12      0    0               27              337
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                      Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left         Thru Right     U       Left     Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0             0     28     0        0         0      0     0    0     168      0      0    20     232      0    0                      448
 Heavy Trucks      0             0      0              0         0      0          0       8      0            0       0      0                            8
  Pedestrians                    0                               0                         0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles       0             0      0              0         0      0          0       0      0           0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/27/2012 1:07 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- Laurel Ridge Middle School Dwy                                                                     QC JOB #: 10871806
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                       DATE: Wed, Dec 19 2012
                       32            25                          Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                   0.0        0.0

                         0     22    10
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:25 PM -- 5:40 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                             8   15
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                     0.0   0.0
             0                0.65         0
                                                                                                                          0.0                     0.0
       0     0                             7   24
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                     0.0   0.0

                         0     16    15
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                       29            31
                                                                                                                                 0.0        0.0



                               0                                                                                                  0    1    0



                                                                                                                          0                        0

             0                             1                                                                              0                        0

                                                                                                                          0                        0

                               0                                                                                                  0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                           NA                                                                              NA                      NA




                               NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Copper Terr                SW Copper Terr       Laurel Ridge Middle School Dwy
                                                                                                            Laurel Ridge Middle School Dwy Total      Hourly
     Period                   (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                       Totals
 Beginning At     Left         Thru Right     U     Left     Thru Right    U      Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right       U
     4:00 PM       0             1      1     0      0         1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      2     0        5
     4:05 PM       0             1      0     0      0         2      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      2     0        6
     4:10 PM       0             2      0     0      0         1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      2     0        5
     4:15 PM       0             1      0     0      0         0      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      0     0        2
     4:20 PM       0             0      0     0      0         2      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        2
     4:25 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      2     0        4
     4:30 PM       0             0      0     0      0         1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        1
     4:35 PM       0             2      0     0      0         2      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      2     0        6
     4:40 PM       0             3      0     0      0         0      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      1     0        5
     4:45 PM       0             2      0     0      0         1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      2     0        5
     4:50 PM       0             0      0     0      0         2      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        2
     4:55 PM       0             1      0     0      0         2      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        3           46
     5:00 PM       0             2      0     0      0         2      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      1     0        6           47
     5:05 PM       0             0      1     0      1         1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      1     0        4           45
     5:10 PM       0             3      0     0      3         2      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        8           48
     5:15 PM       0             0      0     0      1         3      0     1       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        5           51
     5:20 PM       0             1      5     0      1         1      0     0       0      0      0     0       2      0      0     0       10           59
     5:25 PM       0             4      3     0      0         1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      2     0       10           65
     5:30 PM       0             3      3     0      0         0      0     0       0      0      0     0       2      0      0     0        8           72
     5:35 PM       0             1      2     0      2         5      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      1     0       12           78
     5:40 PM       0             0      0     0      0         1      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      2     0        3           76
     5:45 PM       0             1      0     0      0         2      0     0       0      0      0     0       1      0      1     0        5           76
     5:50 PM       0             1      1     0      0         2      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        4           78
     5:55 PM       0             0      0     0      1         2      0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0      0     0        3           78
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                    Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left         Thru Right     U     Left     Thru Right    U      Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right       U            Total
  All Vehicles     0            32     32     0      8        24      0     0       0      0      0     0      12      0     12     0            120
 Heavy Trucks      0             0      0            0         0      0             0      0      0             0      0      0                   0
  Pedestrians                    0                             0                           0                           4                          4
    Bicycles       0             0      0            0         0      0             0      0      0             0      0      0                   0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/27/2012 1:07 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copper Terr -- SW Handley St                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10871802
 CITY/STATE: Sherwood, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Wed, Dec 19 2012
                       25            30                          Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                              0.0        0.0

                       10      0     15
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:20 PM -- 5:35 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0


       26    14                           16   32
                                                                                                               0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             33               0.73        16
                                                                                                                     0.0                      0.0
       48    1                             0   48
                                                                                                               0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         0     0     0
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

                         1           0
                                                                                                                            0.0        0.0



                               2                                                                                             0    0    0



                                                                                                                     0                          0

             0                             0                                                                         0                          0

                                                                                                                     0                          0

                               0                                                                                             0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                 NA




             NA                           NA                                                                         NA                       NA




                               NA                                                                                                 NA



 5-Min Count                 SW Copper Terr                SW Copper Terr            SW Handley St             SW Handley St                 Total       Hourly
     Period                   (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left         Thru Right     U     Left     Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
     4:00 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      0     0     1     1      0      0    0      0     1     0                4
     4:05 PM       0             0      0     0      2         1      0     0     1     1      0      0    0      0     1     0                6
     4:10 PM       0             0      0     0      0         0      1     0     1     2      0      0    0      0     1     0                5
     4:15 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      0     0     0     0      0      0    0      0     1     0                2
     4:20 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      0     0     0     1      0      0    0      0     0     0                2
     4:25 PM       0             0      0     0      0         0      1     0     1     3      0      0    0      0     0     0                5
     4:30 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      0     0     0     0      0      0    0      1     0     0                2
     4:35 PM       0             0      0     0      2         0      0     0     0     2      0      0    0      1     2     0                7
     4:40 PM       0             0      0     0      0         0      0     0     0     1      0      0    0      2     3     0                6
     4:45 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      0     0     1     2      0      0    0      3     0     0                7
     4:50 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      1     0     0     4      0      0    0      4     0     0               10
     4:55 PM       0             0      0     0      0         0      2     0     0     1      0      0    0      0     1     0                4               60
     5:00 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      1     0     0     2      0      0    0      0     1     0                5               61
     5:05 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      1     0     1     2      0      0    0      2     1     0                8               63
     5:10 PM       0             0      0     0      2         0      0     0     2     0      0      0    0      0     1     0                5               63
     5:15 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      1     0     0     2      0      0    0      0     0     0                4               65
     5:20 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      2     0     3     1      0      0    0      3     3     0               13               76
     5:25 PM       0             0      0     0      0         0      0     0     4     3      0      0    0      1     3     0               11               82
     5:30 PM       0             0      0     0      2         0      1     0     3     3      0      0    0      0     3     0               12               92
     5:35 PM       0             0      0     0      3         0      3     0     0     2      0      0    0      2     3     0               13               98
     5:40 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      0     0     0     7      0      0    0      3     0     0               11              103
     5:45 PM       0             0      0     0      2         0      0     0     0     4      0      0    0      1     1     0                8              104
     5:50 PM       0             0      0     0      1         0      1     0     1     3      0      0    0      2     0     0                8              102
     5:55 PM       0             0      0     0      0         0      0     0     0     4      1      0    0      2     0     0                7              105
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                    Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left         Thru Right     U     Left     Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0             0      0     0      12        0     12     0    40    28      0      0    0     16    36     0                      144
 Heavy Trucks      0             0      0             0        0      0           0     0      0           0      0     0                             0
  Pedestrians                    0                             8                        0                         0                                   8
    Bicycles       0             0      0            0         0      0           0     0      0           0      0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/27/2012 1:07 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
