                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                  Board of Supervisors
                                                                                                                  Jack R. Cavalier, Chairman
                                                                                                                  Gary F. Snellings, Vice Chairman
                                                                                                                  Meg Bohmke
                                                                                                                  Paul V. Milde, III
                                                                                                                  Laura A. Sellers
                                                                                                                  Cord A. Sterling
                                                                                                                  Robert “Bob” Thomas, Jr.
                                                                                                                  Anthony J. Romanello, ICMA‐CM
                                                                                                                  County Administrator



May 14, 2014

MEMORANDUM TO:                           Stafford County Planning Commission

FROM:                                    J


SUBJECT:                                 RC1300290; Reclassification – McWhirt Loop Commercial

ATTACHMENTS:

1. Location Map                                                               6. Traffic Impact Analysis, dtd 02/06/14

2. Application & Related Materials                                            7. Letter from VDOT, dtd 04/04/14

3. Boundary Survey and Legal Description                                      8. Proposed Proffers, dtd 4/16/14

4. Generalized Development Plan, dtd 04/01/14                                 9. Proposed Ordinance and Resolution

5. Impact Statement, dtd 02/06/14

ISSUE:

Consider the request for a reclassification of Assessor's Parcel 44-120B from the A-1, Agricultural Zoning
District to the B-2, Urban Commercial Zoning District.

BACKGROUND:

Location:                                South side of Warrenton Road, west of the intersection with McWhirt Loop

Election District:                       Hartwood

Parcel Size:                             2.92 Acres

Applicant:                               H. Clark Leming and Leming and Healy P.C.
                                         for Frontier Development, LLC
                                         223 Garrisonville Road, Suite 223
                                         Stafford, VA 22554

1300 Courthouse Road, P. O. Box 339, Staﬀord, VA 22555‐0339 Phone: (540) 658.8600 Fax: (540) 658.7643 www.staﬀordcountyva.gov
Memorandum to: Stafford County Planning Commission
May 14, 2014
Page 2 of 10

Property Owners:              Barbara Snellings Lewis, Trustee and Maynard E.T. Lewis, Trustee
                              1335 Truslow Road
                              Fredericksburg, VA 22406

Current Use:                  Residential

Proposed Use:                 Food service and/or general commercial

Comprehensive Plan:           Commercial Corridor / Suburban (Future Land Use)

Application Date:             May 24, 2013 (Complete Application April 16, 2014)

Advertisement Dates:          April 29, 2014 and May 6, 2014

Time Limit:                   August 12, 2014

Staff Project Manager:        John Harbin

Abutting Properties:

Location        Zoning                             Use                           Comprehensive Plan

North           B-2, Urban Commercial              General Commercial            Commercial Corridor /
                                                   and Gas Station               Suburban

South           B-2, Urban Commercial              CVS Pharmacy                  Commercial Corridor /
                                                                                 Suburban
                M-1, Light Industrial              Industrial Office Park        Business and Industry


East            B-2, Urban Commercial              Post Office                   Commercial Corridor /
                                                                                 Suburban

West            B-2, Urban Commercial              Church                        Commercial Corridor /
                M-1, Light Industrial                                            Suburban
Memorandum to: Stafford County Planning Commission
May 14, 2014
Page 3 of 10




                                              Zoning Map

Utilities:    This site is to be served by public water and sewer and is located within the Berea pressure
              zone. An existing 10-inch diameter water main is located along McWhirt Loop, along with
              an existing 8-inch gravity sewer line identified as the Sisson Industrial Park line.

Roads:        The subject property is located on the south side of Warrenton Road, just west of the
              intersection with McWhirt Loop. Currently, Warrenton Road at this location is a four lane
              divided road with a 45 mile per hour posted speed limit and a traffic count of 38,000
              vehicles per day (VPD) according to the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT)
              2012 traffic counts. Plans are underway to expand the stretch of Warrenton Road in the
              vicinity of the subject property to six lanes. Currently, McWhirt Loop is a two lane
              undivided road with a 35 mile per hour posted speed limit and a traffic count of 2,300 VPD
              according to VDOT 2012 traffic counts.

Schools:      There is no impact to the Public School system.

Parks and
Recreation:   There is no impact to the County Park system.

Noise
Impacts:      The use is not intended to generate loud noises.

Light
Impacts:      The proposed site lighting would be installed in compliance with Section 28-87 of the
              Zoning Ordinance.
Memorandum to: Stafford County Planning Commission
May 14, 2014
Page 4 of 10

Proffer
Valuation:    A proffer statement has been submitted with this application. No monetary proffers are
              included with this request.

COMMENTS:

The proposal is for the reclassification of Assessor’s Parcel 44-120B from A-1, Agricultural Zoning
District to B-2, Urban Commercial Zoning District for the development of food service/restaurants and
general commercial facilities on 2.92 acres.

Zoning History and Existing Conditions
Assessor’s Parcel 44-120B has been zoned A-1, Agricultural since zoning was established in Stafford
County. The property contains one single-family residence built in 1958. Access to the house is through a
private driveway from Warrenton Road. The remainder of the site is primarily open and gently sloping
down with the house located at the highest point. There are no streams, drainages, or wetlands on site and
no known cemeteries.




                                               Aerial View

Generalized Development Plan
The Generalized Development Plan (GDP) depicts how the commercial development is proposed on the
site. The development will have two access points – a right-in/right-out off of Warrenton Road and a full
access point off of McWhirt Loop. An inter-parcel connection to the adjacent parcel to the west will also
be provided. The GDP shows three buildings proposed, including a coffee shop, fast food restaurant, and
general retail or sit-down restaurant. All proposed buildings front Warrenton Road. The coffee shop and
Memorandum to: Stafford County Planning Commission
May 14, 2014
Page 5 of 10

fast food uses include drive-through facilities, which require a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) within the
Highway Corridor (HC) Overlay District. A separate application for this CUP has been submitted.

To be in conformance with the HC Overlay District, curb and gutter is provided along the perimeter of all
parking aisles and driveways. The GDP also shows curb and gutter along the improved section of
McWhirt Loop up to the full access point. Staff requested curb and gutter be extended along the full
frontage of McWhirt Loop to meet the intent of the HC Overlay District and be consistent with the GDP
for the adjacent parcels; however, the applicant has not complied with this request.




                                      Generalized Development Plan

Architectural Design
The applicant has proffered that the primary exterior material for all buildings shall be brick, split block,
stone, or masonry construction; or use stucco or hardiplank. Additionally, all buildings shall utilize
compatible colors and materials. Limited use of Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS) shall be
permitted only for architectural elements such as cornices, soffits, columns, accent areas, and building
sign areas. The applicant has also proffered that the color, design, and materials of all signs shall be
coordinated with the architectural design of the buildings on the site.

No specific architectural renderings were supplied with the application; however, due to the site’s location
within the HC Overlay District, all buildings must conform to the Neighborhood Design Standards
Manual, which include architectural design standards. This will allow for a review of the building
designs at site plan and building permit stages of development when specific users are known.
Memorandum to: Stafford County Planning Commission
May 14, 2014
Page 6 of 10

Proffers
The Applicant has made the following proffers, establishing standards for the development of the site and
improvements to be made to mitigate the impacts of the development:
  • restrict ingress and egress to one full service entrance on McWhirt Loop and one right-in/right-out
     entrance on Warrenton Road;
  • provide an inter-parcel connection to neighboring Tax Map Parcel 44-101A;
  • provide an additional through lane along McWhirt Loop with appropriate intersection transition;
  • provide additional easements and/or right of way for revised drainage construction by VDOT along
     Warrenton Road;
  • provide a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees in any screening areas, with a minimum of 50%
     evergreens;
  • restrict the combined uses constructed and/or operated on the property to those that generate no
     more than 4,117 average total vehicle trips per day, including 458 AM peak hour trips and 272 PM
     peak hour trips;
  • prohibit some uses which would otherwise be allowed in a B-2 Zoning District;
  • restrict the maximum building height to 40 feet or less;
  • establish building architecture standards;
  • require the color, design, and materials of all signs be coordinated with the architectural design of
     the buildings on site;
  • require all fencing, including fencing surrounding the dumpster, to be constructed of brick or stone;
     and
  • require the existing residence, well, and septic system be removed within 90 days of the approval of
     the reclassification and conditional use permit.

Transportation Impacts
The Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) Determination Form submitted with this application calculated
that the site would generate, at its highest volume, approximately 4,117 vehicle trips per day (VPD) and
458 AM and 272 PM peak vehicle trips per hour (VPH). The applicant submitted a TIA, which was sent
to VDOT for their review and comment. The study evaluated the site’s impact on the surrounding traffic
network. Planned developments in the vicinity of the site and widening plans for Warrenton Road were
included in the analysis.

The study evaluated the impact on the following existing intersections: Warrenton Road and McWhirt
Loop/Litchfield Boulevard and McWhirt Loop and CVS Pharmacy entrance. The study also evaluates the
impact on the following proposed intersections: McWhirt Loop and Site Driveway #1 and Warrenton
Road and Site Driveway #2. Time horizons included current existing conditions and future year 2017
background and build-out conditions, both of which include the future widening of Warrenton Road to 6
lanes.

The Transportation Plan chapter of the Comprehensive Plan recommends achieving a Level of Service
(LOS) of C at impacted intersections or road segments. Policy 6.7.7 states that if achieving LOS C is not
practical, improvements should be designed to not further degrade the LOS. LOS degradation can also
include an increase in delay time. In this area, there are several intersections along Warrenton Road that
either currently or will experience a LOS below C during peak AM/PM periods in future year conditions
without this project. The study findings show that the intersection of Warrenton Road and McWhirt
Loop/Litchfield Boulevard would operate at a LOS C (with a delay time of 34 seconds) during AM peak
period and a LOS D (with a delay time of 40 seconds) during PM peak period in 2017 without this
Memorandum to: Stafford County Planning Commission
May 14, 2014
Page 7 of 10

project. With full build-out of this project and the additional northbound left turn lane onto McWhirt
Loop, the same intersection would operate at a LOS D (with a delay time of 44 seconds) during AM peak
period and a LOS D (with a delay time of 45 seconds) during PM peak period. Due to the degradation in
LOS and increase in delay, the project is inconsistent with Comprehensive Plan Policy 6.7.7.

To accommodate dual-left turn lanes from northbound Warrenton Road being provided as part of the
widening project, this project will include construction of an additional receiving lane along McWhirt
Loop that would transition to a dedicated right turn lane into the project. This addresses one of the major
concerns VDOT had when initially reviewing the project. However, the full access point along McWhirt
Loop was moved 100 feet closer to Warrenton Road from its original location when the receiving lane
was added to the project. VDOT questioned this change, but no rationale was provided from the
applicant. Staff notes that the development must comply with all established sight distance requirements,
which will be reviewed at time of site plan.

Overall, the proposed development can be accommodated with marginal impact to the existing road
network and programmed 6-lane widening of Warrenton Road. The report suggests VDOT consider
signal timing modifications along the Warrenton Road corridor to maximize performance of the
intersections as part of the road widening project.

Staff notes that the information presented here is from the revised version of the TIA, which was reviewed
and commented on by VDOT. The latest comments provided from VDOT are advisory in nature, but do
express concern with the development’s impact on the Warrenton Road and McWhirt Loop/Litchfield
Boulevard intersection as previously noted. Additionally, VDOT suggests examining the feasibility of a
right-in/right-out shared driveway between the subject parcel and the parcel to the west from Warrenton
Road instead of the currently proposed access point that only serves the subject parcel. The shared
driveway would allow equal access to the two parcels. The adjacent parcel to the west was reclassified to
permit commercial uses in 2008. Staff is supportive of this idea, but acknowledges the challenges of
coordinating between two properties with different ownership and development schedules. Also, the
adjacent property did not anticipate a shared access.

Comprehensive Plan
The Land Use Plan designation for the property is Commercial Corridor within a Suburban area.
Commercial corridors are intended to encourage commercial activities where there are adequate
transportation facilities to accommodate proposed uses. Infill development and the reuse of
underdeveloped commercial sites are encouraged.
Memorandum to: Stafford County Planning Commission
May 14, 2014
Page 8 of 10




                                          Future Land Use Map

The proposed development is consistent with the recommended future land use. This proposal would
allow neighborhood serving commercial uses, consistent with recommendations in the Land Use Plan and
does not affect any nearby residential communities.

The site also lies within the Southern Gateway Redevelopment Area (RDA). The Southern Gateway
RDA was approved as a part of the Master Redevelopment Plan (RDA Plan), adopted by the Board of
Supervisors in May, 2011. The RDA Plan includes a land use concept for a portion of the Southern
Gateway RDA that includes a grid street system to optimize pedestrian and vehicle circulation; mixed-use
blocks with enclosed parking to foster residential and office uses over first-floor commercial; open space,
and pedestrian-friendly environments. In accordance with the land use concept, staff recommended the
building be moved forward on the site with parking located to the rear. The applicant has been able to
move the building slightly closer to Warrenton Road, although parking is still located forward of the
building.

Fiscal Impacts
The applicant’s Impact Statement estimates that the project at build-out will generate approximately
$16,082.75 annually in County tax revenue and add new full and part time jobs. The costs associated
with the project were not quantified, but should be minimal, potentially increasing fire and rescue and
utilities service demands.

Fire and Rescue
The applicant was requested by Fire and Rescue Department staff to provide and maintain National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) 13 fire sprinkler systems in the three commercial/restaurant buildings,
Memorandum to: Stafford County Planning Commission
May 14, 2014
Page 9 of 10

where they may otherwise not be required, for the purpose of mitigating impacts to Fire and Rescue
Services. The applicant has not complied with this request.

EVALUATION CRITERIA:
Section 28-206 of the Zoning Ordinance lists twelve (12) criteria to be considered at each public hearing
for reclassification. A summary of each criteria are as follows:

1.     Compliance of the request with the stated requirements of the district or districts involved - The
       request is in compliance with the stated requirements of the B-2 zoning district. The proposed
       layout also generally conforms to HC Overlay District standards.

2.     The existing use and character of the property and the surrounding property - The property is
       currently an older residential dwelling. The remainder of the site is open field. Surrounding
       properties are either currently developed with commercial and industrial use or planned to be in
       the near future.

3.     The suitability of the property for various uses - The conditions of the site make it suitable for a
       variety of uses. The size and existing conditions of the site allows for multiple land bays. There is
       no Critical Resource Protection Area (CRPA) or wetlands located on the site.

4.     The trend of growth and development in the surrounding area - The established trend of
       development is highway commercial development on properties fronting on Warrenton Road. To
       the west is a largely undeveloped parcel with an existing church and cell phone tower. This
       parcel underwent a rezoning in 2008 and is planned to be redeveloped into an office and retail
       shopping center that is similar in nature to the current proposal.

5.     The current and future requirements of the County for land - This project includes the dedication
       of right-of-way along Warrenton Road and McWhirt Loop to accommodate planned road
       improvements. No other County needs are identified on the site.

6.     The transportation requirements of the project and the County, and the impact of the proposed land
       use on the county transportation network - Despite the transportation improvements being offered,
       it has been determined that the proposed development would negatively impact the existing
       transportation network by reducing the level of service below C or further degrading failing LOS
       at certain locations. This does not comply with Policy 6.7.7 of the Comprehensive Plan.

7.     Requirements for schools, parks, recreational lands and facilities, and other public services,
       potentially generated by the proposed classification - The proposal would reduce the potential
       impact on parks, recreational lands and schools, while increasing potential impacts to utilities
       and Fire and Rescue.

8.     The conservation of property values in the surrounding area - Staff believes that the project would
       not have a negative affect on any property values in the surrounding area. The uses in the project
       would generate minimal noise dust or smoke emissions. The commercial uses proposed are
       typical to what is found along the Warrenton Road corridor.

9.     The preservation of natural resources and the impact of the proposed uses on the natural
       environment - The site does not contain sensitive natural resources.
Memorandum to: Stafford County Planning Commission
May 14, 2014
Page 10 of 10

10.    The most appropriate use of land - The Land Use Plan recommends the area as Commercial
       Corridor in the Suburban Land use designation. The proposed location and scale of the proposed
       uses in the development conform to the recommended location and density standards established
       in the Plan and fit in with the established development patterns on adjacent properties.

11.    The timing of the development of utilities and public facilities and the overall public costs of the
       development - Water and sewer utilities are in place to support this development. Upon
       development of the project, the applicant will be required to make any required transportation and
       utility improvements required for their project. Overall improvements associated with the
       widening of Warrenton Road will occur separately at a later date.

12.    The consistency, or lack thereof, of the proposed rezoning with the Stafford County
       Comprehensive Plan as in effect at that time - The proposal is not fully consistent with the
       Comprehensive Plan. The type of development is consistent with the land use recommendations.
       The level of development is projected to negatively impact the transportation network and does
       not comply with Policy 6.7.7.

SUMMARY OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE FEATURES:

POSITIVE:

1.     The proposal is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan land use recommendations.

2.     The proposal is consistent with the established and proposed development patterns on adjacent
       properties.

3.     Proffers would minimize potential visual impacts on surrounding properties.

4.     Transportation improvements incorporate pedestrian safety measures.

NEGATIVE:

1.     The proposal is not in conformance with the Transportation Plan recommendations.

2.     The proposal does not meet all of the Fire and Rescue safety recommendations.

RECOMMENDATION:

Staff is generally supportive of this reclassification with the proposed proffers. However, additional
consideration should be given to VDOT’s comments and the lack of conformance with Transportation
Plan recommendations. Fire and Rescue staff recommends the Planning Commission consider their
requests regarding fire sprinklers.

JAH:jmh

Attachments (9)
                                                                                                                                      Attachment 1




                            VD
     M                                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 1
      C




                          BL
      W
                                                                                     RECLASSIFICATION RC1300290




                                                          R
          H




                        D




                                                      D
          IR




                         EL




                                                  N
          T
                                                                                     McWHIRT LOOP COMMERCIAL




                                              O
                       FI
           LO




                                           TI
                     CH




                                         TA
               O
               P   ^
                   _                                                                 ASSESSOR'S PARCEL 44-120B

                   LI




                                        AN
               R          W




                                PL
                           AR
            YD

                                R




                                                           NELMS CIR
                          TR        EN
          WA




                               AD        TO
          LE




                                    E         N
                                        ST        R
                                                      D
               Y
              W
          PK




                        WA
          RD




                           R   RE
      FO




                                                                                 D
                                    NT




                                                                                R
                                         ON


                                                                              EE
     S
    NK




                                                  RD
                                                                           TR
    BA




                                                                           N
                                                                       EE
                                                                       R
                                                                       G



                                                                                                                                           SE
                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                      IN
                                                                                                                                                           G
                                                                                                                                  D                            D
                                                                                                                                LV                                 R
                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                   E   LD
                                                                                                                FI
                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                        C
                                                                                                     LI


                                                                                SITE
                                                                             TM: 44-120B
                                                                 MCW HIR T
                                                                             L OOP
          DR
     AY
     W
    LE




¯
0   125    250          500
                                                            Feet
                                                          750
                                                                        05-14-14                                Stafford County Department of
                                                                                                                Planning & Zoning
                                                                                                                P.O. Box 339
                                                                                                                Stafford, VA 22555
                                                                                                                (540) 658-8668
                                                                                                                                          Attachment 2
                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 10
STAffORD COU:"'TY
Department of Hanning and Zorung


                                          Project Information & Primary Contacts

      PROJECT INFORMATION                                                                PROJECT#                l3 oDZ,<tD
      ..Mefuj ct. I.nnp              ('hnnAn::j a]
      PRQTECT :".... :'\IE                                                                                     SECTIO:.:
                                                                                                                2.9234
      ADDRESS (lF AYAIL\BLE)                                                                                   TOTAL SITE ACRHGE
        44-120B                                                                                                A-1 proposed to be         1 ~ zoned   to B-;
      TA.~   ::..llJ> .P.l.RCELIS)                                                                             ZO);!):G DISTRICT

       On comer of Warrenton Road and McWhirt Loop
      LOC-\TIO:" OF PROJECT




      APPUCANT/AGENT (Pro,ide attachment if                                              Primary Contact Person 1m
                     Applicant and Agent dilJer)
       H. Clark Leming and Leming and Healy P .c.         Laning and                                                  Heal~       P.C.
      :J.,l~
           Frontier Developnent, LIC              co:- IP.-\.'-:Y
       233 Garrisonville Road, SUite 204, Stafford, VA 22554
      ADDRESS                                                           C!Ti'                        ST.o\TE               : rP
       540-659-5155                              540-659-1651                                lemingandhealyl @msn. can
      PHO:\'E :-:c:.l.mER                       F_-\.\ ><1:!\ IBER                       EHlJL\DDRESS


      OWNER (Provide attachments if multiple owners)                                    Primary Contact Person 0
      Barbara Snellings Lewis, Trustee and Maynard E. T. Lewis, Trustee
      X.-\:. IE                                                                          CO:.IP.-\."\1.
       1335 Truslow Road, Fredericksburg, VA                                         22406
      .-\ODRESS                                                         CITI"                        $TATE                 ::1P



      PHOXE :'.T:'-mER                          F.-\.'1\ :'\T:<. IBER                   EH\IUDDRESS




      PROFESSIONAL (Engineer, Surveyor, etc.}                                           Primary Contact Person 0

                                                                                 -
      XA~ IE                                                                             cm. IP.-\.'\1.



      ADDRESS                                                           C! Ti'                                 SLHE                .:IP


      PHOXE:-.-DmER                            F.-\.'\ :"D,JBER                         E:\llJ L.lJ)ORESS




                                                                          Page5
                                                                 Attachment 2
                                                                  Page 2 of 10
STAFFORD COC:\T\
Department ot Planning and Zorung


                                         General Information

Clearly indicate all information that applies to this project:

DEI AILED DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT
       Propozed rezoning fran A-1 to B-2




INFORMATION FOR FEE CALCULATIONS


     2. 9324
--==-=-==~--
                    ;; of Acres

Type of Rezoning:
QJ       Standard Rezoning
0        Planned Development
0        Proffer Amendment
0        Minor Proffer Amendment



INFORMATIONAL

Previous Ordinance# _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Previous Resolution if _ _ _ _ _ _ __

~of    Lots (if rezoning to residential) _ __
Original Zoning _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
Proposed Zoning _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Proposed Cse(s) general ccmnercial




                                                  Page 7
                                                                                                     Attachment 2
                                                                                                      Page 3 of 10


STAFFORD COUNTY
Department of Planning and Zoning


                                    Statements of Understanding



I, as owner/co-owner of the property subject to this application, do hereby certify that I have read and
understand the requirements for the submission of a conditional use permit as provided under the Stafford
County Code, and further, that this submittal is in compliance with the requirements and applicable
provisions of the Stafford County Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 28 of the Stafford County Code.




Signature of Owner/Co Owner                 Printed Name                      Date




Signature of Owner/Co Owner                 Printed Name                      Date




Signature of Owner/Co Owner                 Printed Name                      Date




                              ~M~"tfue property subject to this application, do hereby certify that I have
I, as applicant or agent for the
read and understand the requirements for the submission of a conditional use permit as provided under the
Stafford County Code, and further, that this submittal is in compliance with the requirements and applicable
provisions of the Stafford County Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 28 of the Stafford County Code.



                                                 H. Clark Laning           5/24/13
                                            Printed Name                      Date




* Additional sheets may be used, if necessary.




                                                   Page7
                                                                                            Attachment 2
                                                                                             Page 4 of 10




                                  OWNER'S CONSENT FORM


       I. Eric Grodon, manager of Frontier Development, LLC, contract purchaser of

Assessors Parcel44-l208 as shown on the land records of the Commissioner of the

Revenue for Stafford County, Virginia, authorize H. Clark Leming of Leming and Healy

P.C. to apply for a rezoning reclassification and one or more conditional use permits for

this parcel.



                                                  Eric Gordon



CGMMONWEAL I W STATE OF         F t.ov-~.-Jt~
COUNTY/C-ITY ef fv\LtUkt i _0_4-d.<...,
                              _..___t_o_w_it-: - - - - -


      I the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the county and state aforesaid, do
hereby certify that Eric Gordon, whose name is signed to the foregoing document. has
personally acknowledged the same before me in my aforesaid jurisdiction.

       GIVEN under my hand and seal this             li_ day of May, 2013.

                                                              Wrd ~
                                                             Notary Public

My Commission    Expires:_)~,<-\t-H.; . .fw:. .\~. ':.f.__
                                                      .~
                                                                                         Attachment 2
                                                                                          Page 5 of 10




                             OWNER'S CONSENT FORM


      We, Barbara Snellings Lewis, Trustee under the Barbara Snellings Lewis Trust

Agreement dated November 21 , 1997 and Maynard E. T. Lewis, Trustee under the

Maynard E. T. Lewis Trust Agreement dated November 21, 1997, owners of Assessor' s

Parcel44-120B as shown on the land records of the Commissioner of the Revenue for

Stafford County, Virginia, authorize Frontier Development, LLC, the contract purchaser of

the property and its attorney H. Clark Leming of Leming and Healy P.C. to apply for a

rezoning reclassification and one or more conditional use permits for this parcel.

                                         z,~t.L ~. d aJ_,~ ~ -- ~~v
                                         Barbara Snellings Lewis, Tru&fee . 7 ~


                                         / YY..!Y j!Yt..VrA- (   J   ~ w1;l   T ' v~t.
                                          Maynard E. T. Lewis, Trustee



COMMONWEALT~~IA
COUN=F¥/CITY OF                r~~ , to wit:


      I the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the county and state aforesaid, do
hereby certify that Barbara Snellings Lewis, Trustee and Maynard E. T. Lewis, Trustee,
whose names are signed to the foregoing document, have personally acknowledged the
same before me in my aforesaid jurisdiction.

       GIVEN under my hand and seal this A~day of May, 2013 .




My Commission Expires:
Notary Registration NumbeC
                          b·!/,     ~.1-<J ft.
                                o ) t4   7
                                                                                                    Attachment 2
                                                                                                     Page 6 of 10
ST.HFORD COU:-.'TY
Department of Planning .and Zoning


                                             Application Mfidavit
This form to be filed with:

STAFFORD COUNTY                                                   Internal Use Onlv
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS                            Project N a m e : - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                                A/P#:
1300 COURTHOUSE ROAD                            Date:
STAFFORD, VIRGINIA 22555

All applicants for a special exception, a special use permit, conditional use permit, amendment to the
zoning ordinance or variance shall make complete disclosure ot the equitable ownership of the real
estate im·olved in the application, including in the case of corporate ownership, limited liability
compan~· ownership or similar business ownership, the name of stockholders, officers, managing
partners, general partners, owners and members, and in anv case the names and addresses of all of
the real parties in interest. llte requirement of listing nam~ of stockholders, officers and directors
shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is traded on a national or local stock exchange and
having mOI"e than 500 sruueholders. In the event the ownership of the involved real estate changes in
any respect during the time the application is pending, the applicant shall make complete disclosure
of the new equitable ownership of the real estate involved in the application as required herein. If the
applicant is a contract purchaser, the ownership information required herein shall be provided for the
contract purchaser in addition to the owner of the real estate involved in the application. This section
applies to applications before the board of supenisors, planning commission and board of zoning
appeals.

See Section 15.2-2289 for State Enabling Authori~·

1. Applicant information

    Name of Applicant                H. Clark Laning and ~eming and Healy P.C. fo.t:
    Name of Company                  Frontier Developnent, LIC

        Applicant Address


   A pplic:ant's Signature
                                     H. Clark                  and Healy P .c. for
   Name of Agent                     Frontier Developnent, LLC
   Address of Agent                  233 Garrisonville Road. SUite 204. Staffotd, VA 22554

2. Type of Application

           [}9 Conditional Use Permit                   D   Variance

           [29 Rezoning                                 D   Special Exception

                                                   Page 13
                                                                                                      Attachment 2
 STAFFORD COUNTY                                                                                       Page 7 of 10
 Department of Hanning and Zoning



                                                        Project N a m e : - - - - - - - - -
Application Affidavit                                   A/P#:
Page2                                                   Date:
Applicant:------------


3. Property Information

Assessors Parcel(s)                   44-120B

         Address                      833 Warrenton Road
                                      Fredericksburg, VA     22406

4. Unless the equitable ownership is a corporation, limited liability company or similar business
ownership, list all equitable owners of the property.

Name of owners          Address
Barbara Snellings Lewis, Trustee -- 1335 Truslow Road, Fredericksburg, VA 22406
t-taynard E. T. Lewis, Trustee -- 1335 Truslow Road, Fredericksburg, VA 22406



5. If the equitable ownership of the property is a corporation, limited liability company or similar
business ownership, list all officers, managing partners, general partners, share holders, owners
and members. This provision shall not apply if the corporation is listed on a national or local stock
exchange and has more than 500 share holders.

Name of Members                     Address
  NIA




6. Unless the applicant is a contract purchaser and is a corporation, limited liability con1pany or
similar business ownership, list all individuals involved with the purchase of the property.
Name of Members             Address
   N/A




                                                   Page 14
                                                                                                     Attachment 2
SfAfFORD COU:'>o1\
                                                                                                      Page 8 of 10
Department of Planrung and Zoning



Application Affidavit                                    Project N a m e : - - - - - - - - -
Page3                                                    A/P#:
Applicant:------------                                   Date:




7. If the applicant is a contract purchaser and is a corporation, limited liability company or similar
business ownership, list all officers, managing partners, general partners, share holders, owners
and members. This provision shaU not apply if the corporation is listed on a national or local stock
exchange and has more than 500 share holders

Name of Members
Eric Gordon, Frontier Develo}:.!l1Emt, LLC, 1801 SW 3rd Avenue, Suite 500, Miami, FL 33129
James F. Leach, Frontier Developnent, LIC, 1801 SW 3rd Avenue, SUite 500, Miami, FL 33129




8. Have all individuals listed on this affidavit been notified of the purpose of the application?

         ~        Yes                 D   No


9. If #8 is No, list all individuals who have not been notified about this application plus submit
the cost required for the Department of Planning and Zoning or Code Administration to send
certified letters notifying those listed below of this application prior to the public hearing.

                                    Address, including zip code, no P.O. Box please




Number of owners to be notified:  N/A X
Cost for certified letters   $ _ _ _ _ _ (cost as of the day of submittal)
Total due:                   $        (Make checks payable to County of Staftord)

Please submit a check in the amount due with this application to cover the cost of serving the
individuals listed in this section.



                                                      Page 15
                                                                                                       Attachment 2
                                                                                                        Page 9 of 10
STAFFORD COU:\.'TY
Department of Plannlng.md Zorung



                                                 Project Name:
Application Mfidavit                             A/P #:        _ _ _ _ _ __
Page4
Applicant:-----------                          I Dare:         ___________




10. Affirmation & Witness

I hereby make oath or affirmation that the contents of this affidavit are true and
correct to the best of my knowledge, information and belief. In the event the
ownership of the involved real estate changes during the time the application is
pending, I shall make complete disclosure of the new equitable ownership of the
real estate involved in the application as required herein.
                                                    __._r_e_ _ __
Printed name of Signer __H_._c_l_ar_k_L_enun_·_g_,_E_sqw.

C~rporate Office~
Stguature     --+~_,~-+~---+----"''o,.------------
Date            May{24, 2013          ~
COMMONvVEALTH OF VIRGINIA
COUN1Y OF STAFFORD, to 1·vit:                                    .    <tb,
        The forgoing d!lidavit was acknowledged beloro me this   ~f      da,. of'-IV\W&   Jo /3   lw

    l-J. · C,la:rK L.e.m~-fapplicant.
         My commission expires: 3/3/ JJ(p


              DEBORAH M WOODBURY
                  NOTARY PUBLIC
                                        ~~i/hfA~
          CO~EGISTRATION II 7517934
              MONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA
            MY COMMISSION EXPIRES
                 MARCH 31, 2016




                                              Page 16
                                                                                                             Attachment 2
                                                                                                             Page 10 of 10




STAFFORD COL·:-.:n
:Jer.u!men: ot Pl.ln1UI1£ and Zoruns

CO~DITIOX.\L     l"SE PER:\IIT
TR.\~SPORTA TIO~ DIP..\.CT                                           RECEI\"ED Bl"T l'OT OFRCIAI.L YSl"&\IITTED
..\~..\.LYSIS DETER\IIX.\. TIO~                                      DATE:            1.:'\ITIALS

:\ame of deYelopment McWhirt Loop Commercial                         OFFICIALL YSl"B\IITTED
Type of de,·elopment Commercial Pad Sites                            DATE::....__ _ _ l.:'\ITI.-\LS_ __
Parcel:: Parcel44 1208

Traffic Yolume Calculations
This site generates:
 493           \"PH (insert the highest VPH)
 42,210 \ ·po on state controlled highways ( inse11 highest Yolume).
   458        Peak A:\1 (\"PH)
_2_72_ _ Peak P:\1 (VPH)
_4_6_0__ Peak Saturdny (VPH)
   4,117        \"PD highest intensity*    Weekday shown, Saturday estimate, NO ITE Code 937

***Attach a page sho,,ing the calculations and the ITE uip generation codes to this fonn.***

:\linimum Thresholds to submit a Tl.-\
Any proposal that generates 1:'0 or more vehick trips per day abon: the existing use. and the ~ire meets the
\"DOT requirements for TIAs tuH.ler 24 YAC 30-1:':' or Stafford County Rezoning TL-\ reqmremems. See
..\"DOT Traftic Impact .--\nalysis Requirements"' table on next page.

Tlip Generation Calculation Guideline!>
      Traftic Yohunes shall be based on the rates or equations published in the late~t edition of the Institute of
      Transportation Engineers Trip Generation.
      If a site has multiple entrances to highways. , ·ohm1es ou all entrances shall be combined for the puJVCI~e::.
      ofthis detennination.
      If the site does not ha,·e direct access to a state maintained road. the sire· s connectiou is where the ~i tc
      connects to the state highway system.
      Traffic ,·olumes shalll\OT be reduced through intemal captme rates. pass by rates. or any other
      reduction methods.
      For rede,·elopment sites only: when the existing use is to be developed at a higher intensity. trips
      currently generated by the existing de,·dopment that will be remo,·ed may be deducted from the total
      trips that will be generated by the proposed hmd use.
      \\ l1en rezoning. use the highest po~sible traffic generating use unless de,·elopment is limited by proffer
      to less than the possible highest traffic generation.

For deYelopment proposals that generate 1000 or more ,·ehicle trips per peak hour the appli~ant shall request a
scope of work meeting with \"DOT <md Stafford County Office of Transportation to discuss the required
dements of a traftic impact analysis .

*The highest intensity use is the highest possible use allowable under the zoning requiremems tor the entire
property should it be de,·eloped to its fill lest extell! possible under the cunent building guidelines. The only
exception is ifprotiers limit the area and type of uses.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Attachment 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2

                                                                                       RD                         INTERNATIONAL
                                                                                     FO
                                                                                   AF
                                                                                 ST KES             EA
                                                                                                                       PKWY                       GENERAL NOTES
                                                                                  LA WY         BER RCH                                           1. LOT LINES ASSOCIATED WITH EACH BUILDING AREA WILL BE ESTABLISHED WITH FINAL SITE PLAN
                                                                                                   U
                                                                                   PK            CH
                                                                                                  RD                                              SUBMISSION.
                                                                                                                                                  2. STREET LIGHTS WILL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE STAFFORD COUNTY ZONING ORDINANCE.
                                                                                                                                                  3. THE PROJECT WILL BE SERVED BY PUBLIC WATER AND SEWER.




                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                 M OO
                                                                                                                                                  4. METES AND BOUNDS SHOWN HEREON ARE THE RESULT OF A CURRENT FIELD BOUNDARY SURVEY




                                                                                                                               VD EL
                                                                                                  CW P
                                                                                                  L




                                                                                                                           BL HFI
                                                                                                                                                  PERFORMED BY PAUL F. MCCONNELL.




                                                                                                                          E N
                                                                                                    HI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FOROUGHI & ASSOCIATES
                                                                                                                        IV TIO
                                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                       RT
                                                                                                                                                  5. PROPOSED ZONE: B-2.




                                                                                                                           LI




                                                                                                                      DR TA
                                                                                            BANKS FORD                                            6. ALL EXISTING STRUCTURES SHALL BE REMOVED.




                                                                                                                       AN
                                                                                                             DR
                                                                                              PKWY                                                7. THE ASSESSOR'S TAX MAP NUMBER AND EXISTING ZONE FOR THE PROPERTIES SHOWN HEREON ARE AS




                                                                                                                             PL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ENGINEERING, PLLC
                                                                                                        AY
                                                                                                                                  W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (540) 720-7375 [FAX]
                                                                                                                                                  FOLLOWS (OWNER: BARBARA SNELLINGS LEWIS, TRUSTEE & MAYNARD E. T. LEWIS, TRUSTEE):




                                                                                                                        Y E
                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                               SITE                AR




                                                                                                                       W RC
                                                                                                     LE
                                                                                                                                        R                    44-120B             ZONE: A-1; USE: VACANT;     INST# 04-0023307;




                                                                                                                    PK ME
                                                                                              CE A P
                                                                                                                                      RO EN




                                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                                                        AD TO     8. THE PROPERTY SHOWN HEREON LIES WITHIN UNSHADED FLOOD HAZARD ZONE "X", AREAS DETERMINED TO




                                                                                                LE KW
                                                                                                V




                                                                                                                    CO
                                                                                                                                              N




                                                                                                  BR Y
                                                                                                                                                  BE OUTSIDE THE 0.2% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOODPLAIN, AS DEPICTED ON FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STAFFORD, VIRGINIA 22554
                                                                                                     AT
                                                                                                                                                  COMMUNITY PANEL #5101540182E, HAVING AN EFFECTIVE DATE OF FEBRUARY 4, 2005 AND PREPARED BY THE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             113 COLUMBUS COVE
                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                  FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
                                                                                                                                                  9. THERE ARE NO KNOWN RESOURCE PROTECTION AREAS, WETLANDS OR CEMETERIES ON THE SITE
                                                                                                                                                  10. A TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA) DATED MAY 09, 2013 PREPARED BY PENNONI ASSOCIATES HAS BEEN
                                                                                                                                                  PREPARED AND SUBMITTED TO STAFFORD COUNTY FOR REVIEW AND REVISED FEBRUARY 6, 2014.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (540) 720-6488 [OFFICE]
                                                                                                                                                  11. CONCRETE SIDEWALK ALONG US-17 SHALL BE INSTALLED WITH VDOT PROJECT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                                                                                                  VICINITY MAP                                    HCOD. CONCRETE SIDEWALK ALONG MCWHIRT LOOP SHALL BE INSTALLED BY APPLICANT.
                                                                                                            SCALE: 1" = 2,000'                    12. DUMPSTER FENCES SHALL BE A MINIMUM OF SIX FOOT TALL.
                                                                                                                                                  13. THE LOCATION OF THE DRAINFIELD IS NOT KNOWN. THE WELL SHALL BE ABANDONED VIA AN
                                                                                                                                                  ABANDONMENT PERMIT WITH THE VIRGINIA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. THE SEPTIC TANKS WILL BE PUMPED,
                                                                                                                                                  CRUSHED AND FILLED WITH GRAVEL. THE DISTRIBUTION BOX SHALL BE DISCONNECTED FROM THE
                                                                                                                                                  UNDERGROUND TRENCHES AND ALSO PUMPED, CRUSHED AND FILLED WITH GRAVEL.
                                                                                                                                                  14. THE MIX OF USES SHOWN ON THE PLAN IS ILLUSTRATIVE. THE TRAFFIC STUDY FOR THIS PROJECT
                                                                                                                                                  ASSUMED THAT THE MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT OF THE SITE WOULD BE BASED ON USES GENERATING NO
                                                                                                                                                  MORE THAN 4,117 AVERAGE VEHICLE TRIPS PER DAY, AS CALCULATED BY THE 8TH EDITION OF THE ITE
                                                                                                                                                  MANUAL. THE FOLLOWING USES WERE ASSUMED IN THE TRAFFIC STUDY: A 6,500 SQUARE FOOT SIT DOWN
                                                                                                                                                  RESTAURANT, A 3,500 SQUARE FOOT FAST FOOD RESTAURANT WITH DRIVE THROUGH, AND A 1,900 SQUARE
                                                                                                                                                  FOOT DRIVE THROUGH WITH A DRIVE THROUGH. THE APPLICANT HAS SUBMITTED PROFFERS THAT STATE
                                                                                                                                                  THAT THE COMBINED USES CONSTRUCTED ON THE SITE SHALL NOT GENERATE MORE THAN 4,117 AVERAGE
                                                                                                                                                  VEHICLE TRIPS PER DAY. THE GDP SHOWS BUILDINGS WITH SMALLER FOOTPRINTS THAN UTILIZED IN THE
                                                                                                                                                  TRAFFIC STUDY. OTHER LESS INTENSIVE USES, SUCH AS SPECIALTY RETAIL, COULD ALSO BE CONSTRUCTED
                                                                                                                                                  THAT GENERATE FEWER VEHICLE TRIPS PER DAY THAN THE USES SHOWN ON THE GDP.
                                                                                                                                                  15. GDP IS FOR ILLUSTRATIVE PURPOSES ONLY AND THAT IT IS NOT BEING REVIEWED FOR FULL COMPLIANCE
                                                                                                                                                  WITH THE ZONING ORDINANCE AT THIS TIME.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CONDITIONS PLAN &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BOUNDARY SURVEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EXISTING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      McWHIRT LOOP COMMERCIAL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DATE: 09 MAY 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HARTWOOD MAGISTERIAL DISTRICT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  STAFFORD COUNTY, VIRGINIA
Tue, Apr 15 2014 Ryan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CONTOUR INTERVAL = 2'
C:\temp\AcPublish_2740\Frontier Development Frontage Improvements_01082014.dwg




                                                                                                                                                                                                          STAFFORD COUNTY FILE NUMBER: RC1300290
                                                                                                                                                                                                          STAFFORD COUNTY FILE NUMBER: CUP1300291
                                                                                                                                                                                                       DATE    BY           COUNTY REVISIONS

                                                                                                                                                                                                       2/6/14   RKF   REVISIONS PER COUNTY COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                       4/1/14   RKF   REVISIONS PER COUNTY COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                                              30          0             30        60

                                                                                                                                                                           SCALE: 1" = 30'
Attachment 3
  Page 2 of 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Attachment 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Page 1 of 1

                                                                                 LEGEND                                  STAFFORD B-2 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
                                                                                 ESMT      EASEMENT
                                                                                 SQ. FT.   SQUARE FEET                   PROJECT NAME
                                                                                 D.B.      DEED BOOK                     McWHIRT LOOP COMMERCIAL
                                                                                 W/L       WATERLINE
                                                                                 EX.       EXISTING
                                                                                                                         SITE CALCULATIONS
                                                                                                                         TOTAL SITE AREA (BEFORE DEDICATION):    3.2480-ACRES OR 141,483-SQUARE FEET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FOROUGHI & ASSOCIATES
                                                                                 LLC       LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY
                                                                                                                         TOTAL SITE AREA (AFTER DEDICATION):     2.8626-ACRES OR 124,694-SQUARE FEET
                                                                                 INSTR#    INSTRUMENT NUMBER
                                                                                 T.M.      TAX MAP                       RECLASSIFICATION AREA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ENGINEERING, PLLC
                                                                                 BMP       BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES     ACRES:                                  2.8626




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (540) 720-7375 [FAX]
                                                                                 SWM       STORMWATER MANAGEMENT         SQUARE FEET:                            124,694
                                                                                 PG.       PAGE                          FLOOR AREA RATIO (B-2 AREA):            0.70 OR 89,542-SQUARE FEET (MAXIMUM)
                                                                                                                         OPEN SPACE RATIO (B-2 AREA):            0.25 OR 31,979-SQUARE FEET (MINIMUM)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                STAFFORD, VIRGINIA 22554
                                                                                 1         DUMPSTER (APPROXIMATE         BUILDING SETBACKS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  113 COLUMBUS COVE
                                                                                           LOCATION)                     FRONT:                                  40-FEET
                                                                                 2         PARKING SPACE(S)              SIDE:                                   0-FEET
                                                                                 3         LOADING SPACES (APPROXIMATE   BACK:                                   40-FEET (NORMALLY 25', 40' DUE TO DUAL FRONTAGE)
                                                                                           LOCATION)
                                                                                                                         BUILDING HEIGHT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (540) 720-6488 [OFFICE]
                                                                                           BUILDING ENTRANCE
                                                                                                                         PERMITTED:                              65-FEET (MAXIMUM)
                                                                                           (APPROXIMATE LOCATION)
                                                                                           LIGHT POLE                    PARKING REQUIREMENTS
                                                                                           MONUMENT SIGNS                PARKING (FAST FOOD):                    15.00 SPACES PER 1,000 GROSS FLOOR AREA
                                                                                           (APPROXIMATE LOCATION)        PARKING (SIT DOWN):                     11.00 SPACES PER 1,000 GROSS FLOOR AREA
                                                                                                                         TOTAL PARKING REQUIRED:                 127 SPACES
                                                                                                                         PARKING PROVIDED:                       127 SPACES (INCLUDES HANDICAPPED)
                                                                                                                         LOADING SPACES:                         1 SPACE [12'x25'] & 1 SPACE [12'x50'] 7,501-15,000 GFA
                                                                                                                         LOADING SPACES PROVIDED:                1 [12' x 25'] & 1 SPACE [12'x50']
                                                                                                                         HANDICAPPED SPACES REQUIRED:            4 SPACES
                                                                                                                         HANDICAPPED SPACES PROVIDED:            6 SPACES
                                                                                                                         VAN ACCESSIBLE SPACES:                  1 SPACE PER 8 HANDICAPPED SPACES (1 MINIMUM)
                                                                                                                         VAN ACCESSIBLE SPACES PROVIDED:         6 SPACES
                                                                                                                         BULK REGULATIONS
                                                                                                                         TOTAL BUILDING SQUARE FOOTAGE:          10,041-SQ. FT.
                                                                                                                         PROPOSED FAR:                           0.08 = (10,041/124,694)
                                                                                                                         PROPOSED O.S.                           0.38 = (47,772/124,694)
                                                                                                                         NAME OF OWNER & APPLICANT
                                                                                                                         OWNER:                                  BARBARA SNELLINGS LEWIS, TRUSTEE &
                                                                                                                                                                 MAYNARD E. T. LEWIS, TRUSTEE
                                                                                                                                                                 1335 TRUSLOW ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                 FREDERICKSBURG, VIRGINIA 22406
                                                                                                                         APPLICANT:                              FRONTIER DEVELOPMENT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DEVELOPMENT PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                 MR. JAMES F. LEACH
                                                                                                                                                                 1801 SW 3RD AVENUE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GENERALIZED
                                                                                                                                                                 SUITE 500
                                                                                                                                                                 MIAMI. FL 33129
                                                                                                                         CONTACT:                                LEMING AND HEALY
                                                                                                                                                                 H. CLARK LEMING
                                                                                                                                                                 (540) 659-5155




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  McWHIRT LOOP COMMERCIAL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DATE: 09 MAY 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HARTWOOD MAGISTERIAL DISTRICT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       STAFFORD COUNTY, VIRGINIA
Tue, Apr 15 2014 Ryan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CONTOUR INTERVAL = 2'
C:\temp\AcPublish_2740\Frontier Development Frontage Improvements_01082014.dwg




                                                                                                                                                                                  STAFFORD COUNTY FILE NUMBER: RC1300290
                                                                                                                                                                                  STAFFORD COUNTY FILE NUMBER: CUP1300291
                                                                                                                                                                               DATE    BY           COUNTY REVISIONS

                                                                                                                                                                               2/6/14      RKF    REVISIONS PER COUNTY COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                               4/1/14      RKF    REVISIONS PER COUNTY COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                  30           0            30           60

                                                                                                                                               SCALE: 1" = 30'
                                                                                           Attachment 5
                                                                                             Page 1 of 3


                                IMPACT STATEMENT
                         McWhirt Loop Commercial Rezoning
                                     Parcel 44-120B
                 (±2.8626 acres after VDOT acquisition of right-of-way)

                                     February 6, 2014

         Me Whirt Loop Commercial is a proposed commercial development on Warrenton
Road near Celebrate Virginia. It is located within the Urban Service Area and is
designated Suburban in the Comprehensive Plan. A combination of retail uses, including
specialty retail and fast food restaurants with drive-throughs, will be located on the
Property. No more than 2 drive-through uses will be permitted. The traffic study .
performed by Pennoni Associates evaluated traffic impacts based on traffic generated by
a mix of retail uses on the site that generated the highest volumes of traffic, including 2
drive-throughs. The traffic study assumed a maximum of 4,117 daily vehicular trips.
The Applicant has proffered not to construct uses that exceed the 4,117 VPD maximum.
The actual uses assumed by the traffic study included a 6,500 square foot sit down
restaurant, a 3,500 square foot fast food restaurant with a drive-through, and a 1,900
square foot coffee shop with a drive-through, for a total of 11,900 square feet. The GDP
illustrates these uses with a slightly smaller footprint. As the uses are not proffered, the
proposed rezoning would allow other retail uses, provided the combined uses do not
generate more than 4,177 VPD. The Applicant is filing an application for a
reclassification ofthe zoning district from A-1 to B-2, as well as a conditional use permit
application to permit a maximum of two (2) drive-through windows.

I.     Capacity Impacts

A) Transportation - The primary access to the site is from Me Whirt Loop (SR 700).
Additionally, a right-in, right-out entrance is proposed for secondary access on
Warrenton Road. A Traffic Impact Analysis prepared by Pennoni Associates, Inc., dated
May 9, 2013 and updated February 6, 2014, indicates that the proposed development
would generate 4,117 Vehicles Per Day (VPD) along Warrenton Road, with 272 PM
peak hour trips. In contrast, development under the current zoning classification would
generate 10 VPD, based on an estimated ten trips per day per single family dwelling.

        Warrenton Road currently operates at an overall LOS D. By 2017, with the
background traffic but without this proposed development, ·eastbound and westbound
approaches on Route 17 will operate at an LOS E. Also by 201 7 the Route 17
intersection with McWhirt Loop will continue to operate at LOS D without this project.

        VDOT is scheduled to commence widening the portion of Route 17 abutting this
project to six lanes within the next year. The Applicant has agreed to construct an
additional receiving lane on McWhirt Loop. The Pennoni Associates traffic impact study
updated on February 6, 2014 demonstrates that these transportation improvements will
allow this intersection to continue operating at LOS D - with no change observed - .with



                                             1
 ..
                                                                                          Attachment 5
                                                                                            Page 2 of 3


the addition ofthis project. The LOS on Route 17 traveling north will improve from
LOS D to LOS C/D in AM/PM peak hours.

         No change to the existing signal timing is proposed on Route 17 by the Applicant.
It is believed that a change would improve the overall operations of roads in this area;
however, the corridor timing would need to be evaluated once VDOT's expansion of
Route 17 to six lanes is complete.

         VDOT has already acquired the right-of-way for this site, leaving 2.8626 acres for
future development. No additional right-of way is needed for Warrenton Road. The
Applicant will be dedicating a variable amount of ROW on Me Whirt Loop (between 25-
30 ft.) and a small amount of ROW at the McWhirt Loop/Route 17 intersection.


B) Uti1ities - The development will utilize existing public water and sewer service lines
in the Warrenton Road area. This project is located in the Berea pressure zone. The
proposed area to be rezoned lies completely within the Urban Services Area. A proposed
10" water line will connect near the frontage of Warrenton Road.

The anticipated water demands for this project are as follows:
       2.9 ac Commercial x 2,000 gpd/ac = 5,800 gpd

Developing the site by-right would yield water demands as follows:
      1 dwelling unit x 240 gpd/dwelling unit= 240 gpd

         An 8" proposed sewer line is proposed to connect to the south.

The anticipated sewage demands for this project are as follows :
       2.9 ac Commercial x 2,000 gpd/ac = 5,800 gpd

Developing the site by-right would yield sewage demands as follows:
      1 dwelling unit x 192 gpd/dwelling unit = 192 gpd.

C) Storm drainage - Storm drainage will be provided through conventional or
underground stormwater facilities and BMPs.

II.      Fiscal Impacts

Recurrent Annual Revenue- The commercial development (11 ,900 SF) will generate
substantial additional annual revenues in the form of real property, business property,
meals and sales tax. Similar B-2 parcels are appraised at $75.00 per square foot. Based
on this value, the following real estate tax per year will be generated:

$75.00   X 11.900 sq. ft.   X   1.07
         $100.00                                    $ 9,549.75



                                            2
                                                                                           Attachment 5
                                                                                             Page 3 of 3


Business Property - In addition, the following business property tax will be generated:

 11,900 sfx $25/sfx $5.49 x 40%
        $100                                       =         $ 6,533.10

Total                                              =         $16,082.75


        In comparison, the development of 1 by right home at a density of 1 unit per 3
acres valued at $375,000 each with 2.3 average cars per house valued at $12,000 each
would generate the following continuing revenues:


Real Estate Tax                $375.000 X 1 X 1.07
                                      $100.00                                 $4,012.50

Personal Property Tax          $12,000 X 1 X 2.3       X   6.89 X .40     =   $ 760.65
                                      $100.00

Vehicle License Fee            1 X 2.3   X   $23                          =   $   52.90

Total                                                                         $4,826.05


III.    Environmental Impacts

        There are no known resource protection areas or wetland~ on the Property.

IV.     Impacts to Adjacent Properties

       The impacts to adjacent properties would be minimal. There will be no adverse
impact from noise, dust and smoke emissions. The Property is effectively buffered
because it has dual frontage on 2 roads: Warrenton Road and McWhirt Loop. The
abutting property contains a church and a cell tower. The abutting property will benefit
from an interparcel access being designed for the Property.

V.      Historical Features

        There are no known historical features or cemeteries located on the Property.

VI.     Schools/Recreational Facilities

        As a commercial development, this project is not anticipated to have any impact
on the level of services of schools or parks.
                                                                 Attachment 6
                                                                 Page 1 of 103




                                                       www.pennoni.com




                         Traffic Impact Analysis


                McWhirt Loop Commercial

                      Stafford County, Virginia




Prepared For:                                Prepared By:
Frontier Development                         Pennoni Associates Inc.
1801 SW 3rd Avenue, Suite 500                14532 Lee Road
Miami, FL 33129                              Virginia, VA 20151
Tel: (305) 692-9992                          Tel: (703) 449-6700



                                                 February 06, 2014
                                                             Attachment 6
                                                             Page 2 of 103




       A Traffic Impact Analysis for



McWhirt Loop Commercial

                    Located in

        Stafford County, Virginia




                   Prepared for:

         Frontier Development
     1801 SW 3rd Avenue, Suite 500
           Miami, FL 33129




                   Prepared by:


  Pennoni Associates Inc.
   Engineers . Surveyors . Planners . Landscape Architects
                          14532 Lee Road
                          Chantilly, Virginia 20151
                          T 703.449.6700 • F 703.449.6714




               February 06, 2014
                                                                                                                                                                          Attachment 6
                                                                                                                                                                          Page 3 of 103




                                                           TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................1

2.        PURPOSE OF REPORT & STUDY OBJECTIVE ..........................................................................................5

3.        BACKGROUND INFORMATION ............................................................................................................8
     A)      FUTURE TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS .................................................................................................... 8
     B)      DESCRIPTION OF ON-SITE DEVELOPMENT LAND USE......................................................................................... 8
     C)      STUDY AREA.............................................................................................................................................. 9
     D)      EXISTING ROADWAYS .................................................................................................................................. 9
     E)      BICYCLE, PEDESTRIAN, AND TRANSIT FACILITIES ............................................................................................. 10
4.        ANALYSIS OF 2013 EXISTING CONDITIONS ........................................................................................14
     A)      DAILY AND PEAK HOUR(S) TRAFFIC VOLUMES................................................................................................ 14
     B)      CAPACITY ANALYSIS AND QUEUING ANALYSIS ................................................................................................ 14
5.        ANALYSIS OF 2017 CONDITIONS WITHOUT DEVELOPMENT ..............................................................19
     A)      TRAFFIC GROWTH .................................................................................................................................... 19
     B)      APPROVED / UNBUILD BACKGROUND DEVELOPMENTS .................................................................................... 19
     C)      PLANNED ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS .......................................................................................................... 19
     D)      DAILY AND PEAK HOUR(S) TRAFFIC VOLUMES................................................................................................ 21
     E)      CAPACITY ANALYSIS AND QUEUING ANALYSIS ................................................................................................ 21
6.        TRIP GENERATION.............................................................................................................................25
     A)      PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT TRIP GENERATION ................................................................................................ 25
     B)      PASS-BY, INTERNAL CAPTURE AND TRANSIT TRIPS .......................................................................................... 25
     C)      PROPOSED LAND USE ALTERNATIVES ........................................................................................................... 26
7.        SITE TRAFFIC DISTRIBUTION AND TRAFFIC ASSIGNMENTS ................................................................29

8.        ANALYSIS OF 2017 CONDITIONS WITH SITE .......................................................................................34
     A)      DAILY AND PEAK HOUR(S) TRAFFIC VOLUMES................................................................................................ 34
     B)      CAPACITY ANALYSIS AND QUEUING ANALYSES ............................................................................................... 34
9.        TURN LANE ANALYSIS .......................................................................................................................42

10. SITE IMPACTS ....................................................................................................................................45

11. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ........................................................................................46
                                                                                                                                                                                             Attachment 6
                                                                                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 103




LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Vicinity Map.................................................................................................................................................................. 6
Exhibit A: Conceptual Plan ........................................................................................................................................................ 11
Figure 2: Zoning Map.................................................................................................................................................................. 12
Figure 3: Stafford County Comprehensive Plan ............................................................................................................................ 13
Figure 4: 2013 Existing Traffic Conditions................................................................................................................................. 16
Figure 5: 2013 Existing Lane Geometry & Levels of Service ..................................................................................................... 17
Figure 6: 2017 Background Traffic Conditions without Site ........................................................................................................ 22
Figure 7: 2017 Background Lane Geometry & Levels of Service................................................................................................. 23
Figure 8: Trip Distribution .......................................................................................................................................................... 30
Figure 9: Development-Generated Trips Assignment (Total) ........................................................................................................ 31
Figure 9A: Development-Generated Trips Assignment (Sub-Total) ............................................................................................. 32
Figure 9B: Development-Generated Trips Assignment (Pass-by) .................................................................................................. 33
Figure 10: 2017 Build-out Traffic Conditions with Site ............................................................................................................... 37
Figure 11: 2017 Build-out Lane Geometry & Levels of Service .................................................................................................. 38
Figure 12: 2017 Build-out - Proposed Lane Geometry & Recommendations ............................................................................... 49
                                                                                                                                                                                     Attachment 6
                                                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 103




LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1: PROPOSED LAND USE DENSITIES ........................................................................................................................ 7
TABLE 2: STUDY AREA INTERSECTIONS PEAK HOURS .................................................................................................... 14
TABLE 3: 2013 EXISTING LOS, DELAY & BOQ (95%) RESULTS ................................................................................... 18
TABLE 4: HISTORICAL TRAFFIC GROWTH .......................................................................................................................... 20
TABLE 5: 2017 BACKGROUND LOS, DELAY & BOQ (95%) RESULTS .......................................................................... 24
TABLE 6: PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT TRIP GENERATION.............................................................................................. 25
TABLE 6A: TRIP GENERATION (ALTERNATIVE 1) ............................................................................................................ 26
TABLE 6B: TRIP GENERATION (ALTERNATIVE 2) ............................................................................................................ 27
TABLE 6C: TRIP GENERATION (ALTERNATIVE 3) ............................................................................................................ 27
TABLE 6D: TRIP GENERATION (ALTERNATIVE 4) ............................................................................................................ 28
TABLE 7: 2017 BUILD-OUT LOS, DELAY & BOQ (95%) RESULTS ................................................................................ 39
TABLE 7A: RTE 17/MCWHIRT LOOP - SIMTRAFFIC BOQ (95%) RESULTS ................................................................. 41
TABLE 8: LEFT-TURN LANE WARRANT ANALYSIS............................................................................................................ 43
TABLE 9: RIGHT-TURN LANE WARRANT ANALYSIS ......................................................................................................... 44
TABLE 10: SITE IMPACTS ........................................................................................................................................................ 45



APPENDICIES
APPENDIX A:               SCOPING DOCUMENT
APPENDIX B:               TRAFFIC COUNTS
APPENDIX C:               2013 EXISTING CONDITIONS – SYNCHRO 7 WORKSHEETS
APPENDIX D:               2017 BACKGROUND CONDITIONS – SYNCHRO 7 WORKSHEETS
APPENDIX E:               2017 BUILD-OUT CONDITIONS – SYNCHRO 7 & SIMTARFFIC WORKSHEETS




Contact Information
The analysis was prepared by                                                                               Pennoni Associates Inc.
                                                                                                               14532 Lee Road
Pennoni Associates Inc. :
                                                                                                         Chantilly, Virginia 20151-1679
Mr. Douglas R. Kennedy, PE                                                                                      (703) 449-6700
Mr. Apurva R. Andurlekar, E.I.T.
                                                                                                    Attachment 6
                                                                                                    Page 6 of 103
  A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                         February 06, 2014



1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

  Pennoni Associates Inc. (Pennoni) has revised this traffic study to present the traffic impact
  analysis associated with the proposed development of “McWhirt Loop Commercial” in
  Stafford County, VA. This revision reflects the analysis changes to address the VDOT’s
  comments dated August 08, 2013, as well as lane improvements along McWhirt Loop
  proffered by applicant along with addition on northbound left turn lane on Warrenton Road
  (US Route 17) by VDOT. No changes to land uses are proposed with this revision and it
  remains the same as shown in “A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial”
  dated May 09, 2013. Site access locations are also remain same except Site-driveway #1
  on McWhirt Loop is proposed to be located at approximately 300 feet west of CVS
  entrance instead of 400 feet as previously shown. The site is located on a parcel of
  approximate size of 2.95 acres in Fredericksburg at northwest quadrant of the intersection
  of Warrenton Road (US Route 17) and McWhirt Loop/Lichfield Blvd (Route 700). For the
  purposes of the TIA, the proposed rezoning development is being analyzed with the
  following assumed land uses:
  - 6,500 SF of High-Turnover (Sit-Down) Restaurant
  - 3,500 SF of Fast Food Restaurant with a Drive Through
  - 1,900 SF of Coffee Shop with a Drive Through

  The proposed development is expected to generate approximately 4,117 daily trips and 458
  trips during AM peak hour and 272 trips during PM peak hour. The subject site parcel is
  identified as Parcel 44 120B on the tax map and is currently unoccupied and zoned as A1
  (Agriculture). This report was prepared in support of the rezoning application and in
  accordance with “Chapter 527” guidelines contained in §15.2-2222.1 of the Code of
  Virginia and the Virginia Traffic Impact Analysis Regulations (24 VAC 30-155) for
  submittal to Stafford County and Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) planning
  staff. Proposed development generated average daily traffic does not satisfy the
  requirement of Chapter 527 submission since ADT is less than 5000 vehicles. Pennoni has
  used Chapter 527 format for TIA report purpose only. A copy of the scope of work
  submitted to Stafford County is included in the Appendix A of this report.

  The Future Land Use Plan shown in the Stafford County Comprehensive Plan (2010-30)
  designates the proposed site for Suburban Use. The subject property is currently zoned A1
  (Agriculture) and will require a rezoning to B-2 (Urban Commercial) to accommodate the
  proposed development. A copy of the Generalized Development Plan (GDP) is included as
  Exhibit A in section 2 of this report for reference.

  Access to the site is proposed via two site-driveways as shown in the (GDP). The first
  entrance (Site-driveway #1) is a proposed full access entrance to be located on McWhirt
  Loop approximately 300 feet west of CVS entrance. This driveway was previously
  proposed to be located at 400 feet west of CVS entrance. The second entrance (Site-
  driveway #2) is a proposed right in/right out only access to be located on Warrenton Road
  approximately 410 feet north of McWhirt Loop. The improvements and R-O-W along
                                          Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                    Page 1
                                                                                                  Attachment 6
                                                                                                  Page 7 of 103
A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                         February 06, 2014




US Route 17 are consistent with the VDOT widening of Route 17 to six lanes with added
turn lanes (0017-089-118, P101, R201, C501 (UPC 717774), with construction expected
by VDOT starting in 2014.

The study analyzes existing year conditions (2013), future background year conditions
(2017) without development and future build out year conditions (2017) with proposed
development and with the US Route 17 widening. This TIA has analyzed the Weekday
traffic conditions for AM peak hour and PM peak hour. The study area for this analysis
includes the following intersections:
Existing Intersections
- Warrenton Road (US Route 17) & McWhirt Loop / Lichfield Blvd: (Signalized)
- McWhirt Loop & CVS Pharmacy Entrance: (Unsignalized)
Proposed Intersections by Applicant
- McWhirt Loop & Site-driveway #1: (Unsignalized, Full Access). Add right turn lane on
  McWhirt Loop at new entrance
- Warrenton Road (US Route 17) & Site-driveway #2: (Unsignalized, Right In/Out Only).
  Route 17 by VDOT

No other background developments are modeled in the vicinity of the subject site, however
in general growth was added to the corridors. Also VDOT published ADT data show the
negative growth trend along Route 17 from year 2004 to 2011. For this TIA, Pennoni has
utilized a conservative growth rate of 2 percent to obtain 2017 background traffic. Site
traffic distributions are determined based on existing trip distributions derived from traffic
count data and utilized for site traffic assignments purposes. The site traffic is assigned to
the road network and combined with the future background traffic and analyzed for level-
of-service, back of queue and delay results. Warrants for turn lanes at site-driveway #1 are
also reviewed and documented.

Based on the potential traffic impacts associated with the proposed “McWhirt Loop
Commercial” development and the evaluation of 2013 existing conditions, 2017
background conditions and 2017 build-out conditions, the following recommendations and
conclusions are offered:

 a) Trip Generation
    The proposed development uses will generates 458 AM weekday peak hour, 272 PM
    peak hour and 4,117 weekday trips based on ITE Trip Generation Manual (8th Edition)
    rates. The traffic volumes associated with the proposed land uses do not trigger a
    VDOT Chapter 527 review.




                                        Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                    Page 2
                                                                                                Attachment 6
                                                                                                Page 8 of 103
A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                       February 06, 2014




 b) Intersections
    Warrenton Road/McWhirt Loop/Lichfield Blvd
      • Under 2013 existing conditions, intersection operates at overall LOS “D” or
          better with northbound approach operates at LOS “D”. All other approaches
          operate at LOS “E/F”.
        •   Under 2017 background conditions (with 6-lane US Route 17), intersection will
            operate at overall LOS “D” or better with northbound/southbound approaches at
            LOS “D” or better. Eastbound and westbound approaches will continue to
            operate at LOS “E/F”. Change in the signal timings, if considered with other
            corridor signals on US Route 17, can improve the overall intersection and
            approach LOS and will reduce the delay and queue to the side street traffic.
        •   Under 2017 build-out conditions (with 6-lane US Route 17), intersection will
            operate at overall LOS “D” during PM peak hour. In AM peak hour,
            intersection will operate at LOS “E” with a slight increase of 0.6 seconds over
            the 55 second “D” threshold in the overall delay based on existing timing plans.
            Eastbound and westbound approaches will continue to operate at LOS “E/F” as
            in background conditions without site traffic.
            With an additional northbound left turn lane along US Route 17 and a receiving
            lane along McWhirt Loop, this intersection will operate at LOS “D” in both
            peak hours. Also delay to northbound left turn traffic will be significantly
            reduced in both peak hours with reduction in queue. Northbound approach LOS
            will improve to “C/D” in AM/PM peak hours.
            Change in the existing signal timings with US Route 17 can further improve the
            overall and approach LOS and will reduce the delay and queue to the side street
            traffic. However, as the corridor timing will need to be evaluated with the
            VDOT Route 17 widening project to the six existing signals in the corridor,
            additional timing changes are not proposed.

    McWhirt Loop/CVS Access
      • No Improvements are needed. Intersection will operate at acceptable LOS for
         all turning movements in all three analysis conditions (2013 existing, 2017
         background and 2017 build-out).
            A proffered additional receiving lane on McWhirt Loop for second northbound
            left turn lane of Route 17 will continue through this intersection and will
            operate as a second westbound through lane. With this proffered improvements
            by applicant at this intersection, no change in LOS is observed.

    McWhirt Loop/Site-driveway #1
      • This is a new full access intersection. Intersection will operate at acceptable
         LOS for all turning movements with all shared lane geometry during 2017
         build-out traffic. Per turn lane warrant analysis left turn lane is not warranted
         into the site on McWhirt Loop. A separate right turn lane is warranted on
                                        Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                  Page 3
                                                                                                  Attachment 6
                                                                                                  Page 9 of 103
A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                         February 06, 2014




            McWhirt Loop per turn lane warrants. A proffered additional receiving lane on
            McWhirt Loop for second northbound left turn lane of Route 17 will continue
            through CVS intersection and will terminate as a westbound right turn lane into
            site. Intersection capacity will operate at LOS “A” with or without separate
            westbound right turn.

    US Route 17/Site-driveway #2
       • This is a new right in/right out only intersection. Intersection will operate at
          LOS “A” for inbound traffic from US Route 17 with a separate continuous
          southbound right turn lane. Outbound turning movements operate at LOS “B”
          and “C” during AM and PM peak hour, respectively. Intersection Capacity
          Utilization (ICU) LOS will be at “A” during both peak hours.

 c) Site Impacts:
    Site impacts are less than 4.5 percent of future traffic for US Route 17 and less than 6.5
    percent for Lichfield Blvd. Changes in traffic on Lichfield Blvd are also minimal
    ranging from 3-6 percent. Site impacts along McWhirt Loop are greater than 15
    percent since the existing traffic along McWhirt Loop is low and also there are no other
    anticipated background traffic to pass through it. But even with increase in the traffic
    with site trips along McWhirt Loop, the proposed intersection on McWhirt Loop will
    operate at acceptable LOS and within capacity. If considered a site impact on
    individual turning movements then proposed site impact would be at 48%-58% for
    northbound left turn traffic long US Route 17.

 d) Overall:
    The proposed development associated with rezoning application can be accommodated
    with the existing roadway network, programmed 6-lane widening of US Route 17 and
    addition of a second northbound left turn lane on US Route 17 with a receiving lane
    along McWhirt Loop.
    It is proffered by developer to grant added easement for revised drainage construction
    by VDOT in northwest quadrant of Route 17/McWhirt Loop intersection to allow
    future sidewalk extension with rezoning. Also it is proffered by developer to extend
    McWhirt Loop pavement to proposed entrance #1 as 24 ft section with 50 ft long
    transition and construct a sidewalk.
    Based on the anticipated LOS at the US Route 17/McWhirt Loop/Lichfield Blvd
    intersection, VDOT should consider signal timing modifications to maximize
    performance, as the Route 17 signals are upgraded with the VDOT widening project
    0017-089-188,P101, R201,C501 (UPC #71774). This would require review of corridor
    optimization and coordination with other signalized intersections in the vicinity, and
    should be part of VDOT optimization after construction by others.




                                        Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                    Page 4
                                                                                                  Attachment 6
                                                                                                 Page 10 of 103
  A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                      February 06, 2014




2. PURPOSE OF REPORT & STUDY OBJECTIVE

  Pennoni has prepared this report to present the potential traffic impacts and required
  improvements needed to support the proposed commercial development of proposed
  “McWhirt Loop Commercial”. The proposed development will include a 6,500 SF of
  High-Turnover (Sit-Down) Restaurant, a 3,500 SF of Fast Food Restaurant with a Drive
  Through and a 1,900SF of Coffee Shop with a Drive Through. The 2.95 acre site is
  identified on Stafford County Tax Map as Parcel 44 120B. The site is located in
  Fredericksburg at northwest quadrant of the intersection of Warrenton Road (US Route 17)
  and McWhirt Loop/Lichfield Blvd (Route 700) as shown in Figure 1.

  This Traffic Impact Analysis has the following objectives:
      - Documentation of the impacts of the proposed development
      - Documentation of the changes of traffic with development to the anticipated build out
        year of 2017.
      - Documentation of the changes in the traffic in terms of roadway needs, and
      - Identify mitigation options.




                                          Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                 Page 5
 Attachment 6
Page 11 of 103
                                                                                                Attachment 6
                                                                                               Page 12 of 103
A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                      February 06, 2014




The study analyzed existing year conditions (2013), future background year conditions
(2017) and future build-out year conditions (2017). Currently, the proposed site is
unoccupied and zoned as zoned A1 (Agriculture). The subject parcel will require a
rezoning to B-2 (Urban Commercial) uses to accommodate the proposed commercial
development.

Pennoni coordinated with Frontier Development, VDOT staff and Stafford County staff to
define the scope of the traffic study as shown in Appendix A. A formal scoping meeting
was not requested. The proposed (2017 build-out) site densities associated with the traffic
analysis are summarized in Table 1 below. Note that GSF sizes shown on the GDP are
lower than the GSF shown in table 1. This traffic study has maintained higher GSF for
shown land uses for flexibility. The proposed development site trips, in the professional
opinion of Pennoni, would not satisfy VDOT Chapter 527 rezoning traffic study
thresholds.

                           TABLE 1: PROPOSED LAND USE DENSITIES

 ITE Land                           Land Use Description                     Proposed
 Use Code                                                                     Density
                                                                            (Year 2017)

    932                    High-Turnover (Sit-Down) Restaurant               6,500 GSF

    934            Fast Food Restaurant with a Drive Through Window          3,500 GSF

    937                 Coffee Shop with a Drive Through Window              1,900 GSF




                                        Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                 Page 7
                                                                                                     Attachment 6
                                                                                                    Page 13 of 103
  A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                         February 06, 2014




3. BACKGROUND INFORMATION

  a) Future Transportation Improvements
  Based on a review of the Stafford County’s Comprehensive Plan US Route 17 widening to
  6-lane was identified for inclusion in this TIA analyses.

  This TIA assumes that Warrenton Road (US Route 17) widening would be completed per
  VDOT Plan 0017-089-118, P101, R201, C501 (UPC 717774) for road widening to 6 lanes.
  The plan is anticipated to widen the existing 4-lane Route 17 to 6-lane road with turn lanes
  from south of McWhirt Loop/Lichfield Blvd to Village Parkway (Route 1800). The
  improvements include revising the traffic signal control at six signals in the corridor.

  b) Description of On-Site Development Land Use
  The proposed development will occupy County Tax Map Parcels (TMP) 44-120B. The
  subject parcels are currently zoned A1 (Agriculture). Figure 2 shows the current zoning
  for the subject parcel and surrounding parcels as obtained from the Stafford County online
  GIS maps (accessed by Pennoni in April 2013). The site is currently unoccupied and has
  level terrain. The site is bounded to the east by Warrenton Road and to the south by
  McWhirt Loop.

    i. Comprehensive Plan
      The Future Land Use Plan as shown in the 2010–2030 Stafford County Comprehensive
      Plan designates the proposed site for Suburban Use. Figure 3 is provided to show the
      Stafford County Comprehensive Plan in the vicinity of the subject site.

   ii. Proposed Development
      The proposed development of “McWhirt Loop Commercial” will include following
      land uses on approximately 29.5 acre site,
      - 6,500 SF of High-Turnover (Sit-Down) Restaurant
      - 3,500 SF of Fast Food Restaurant with a Drive Through
      - 1,900 SF of Coffee Shop with a Drive Through
      Presently there are no specific tenants identified for the project. The subject property
      will require rezoning to B-2 (Urban Commercial) to accommodate the proposed
      commercial uses. Since there are no existing uses on-site, the proposed development
      will not displace any existing site trips. For the purposes of this analysis, the proposed
      development is anticipated to be completed by build-out year of 2017. The shown
      footprint sizes for proposed uses may vary on lower side but this TIA has maintained
      the SF of potential land uses on higher side for flexibility.




                                          Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                    Page 8
                                                                                                   Attachment 6
                                                                                                  Page 14 of 103
A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                         February 06, 2014




iii. Proposed Site Access
    Proposed development will be accessed via two site-driveways. The first entrance
    (Site-driveway #1) is a proposed full access entrance to be located on McWhirt Loop
    approximately 400 feet west of CVS entrance. McWhirt Loop is a 2-lane road at the
    proposed location of the site-driveway #1. The second entrance (Site-driveway #2) is a
    proposed right in / right out only access to be located on Warrenton Road (US Route
    17) approximately 410 feet north of McWhirt Loop. Warrenton Road is a 4-lane
    divided roadway with a continuous southbound right turn lane running at the frontage
    of the site at proposed location of site-driveway #2. A Generalized Development Plan
    is provided in Exhibit A for reference which shows general locations of the proposed
    site-driveways along with a conceptual layout of proposed land uses. There are no
    identified safety elements or conditions along the site frontage. The sight distance from
    the site-driveway #1 to west (SDR) exceeds the 35 MPH design speed requirements of
    390 feet for 2-lane major road. Sight distance from proposed right in/right out
    driveway on Route 17 to the north exceeds the 45 MPH design speed requirements of
    595 feet for 6-lane major road.

 iv. Development Phasing
    For the purposes of this analysis, the proposed development is anticipated to build-out
    by a single transportation phase year 2017.The Applicant may only build initial pad site
    with coffee house and drive through, but entrances and impacts shown in this report are
    for full build-out of 3 pad sites by 2017.

c) Study Area
For analysis purposes, Pennoni has included the following intersections in this TIA,
  Existing Intersections
  - Warrenton Road (US Route 17) & McWhirt Loop / Lichfield Blvd: (Signalized)
  - McWhirt Loop & CVS Pharmacy Entrance: (Unsignalized)
  Proposed Intersections by Applicant
  - McWhirt Loop & Site-driveway #1: (Unsignalized, Full Access). Add right turn lane
    on McWhirt Loop at new entrance
  - Warrenton Road (US Route 17) & Site-driveway #2: (Unsignalized, Right In/Out
    Only). Route 17 by VDOT

d) Existing Roadways
A description of the study area roadways in the vicinity of the site is provided below:
Warrenton Road (US Route 17): is a 4-lane divided principal arterial which traverses in
north-south direction and connects major cities. It is connected to Interstate 95 on south
side of in the immediate vicinity of the intersection. US Route 17 is posted with a speed
limit of 45 MPH in both directions in the vicinity of the site. It is signalized at the
intersection with McWhirt Loop / Lichfield Blvd (Route 700). The VDOT widening

                                        Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                     Page 9
                                                                                                        Attachment 6
                                                                                                       Page 15 of 103
A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                              February 06, 2014




project 0017-089-188, P101, R201, C501 (UPC #71774) will widen Warrenton Road to a
six lane section with turn lanes for a length of 2.018 miles between south of McLane Drive
to north of Stafford Lakes Parkway. Based on the latest available VDOT traffic count data
(Year 2011), this road segment carries 42,000 annual average daily vehicle trips (AADT)
in the vicinity of the site.
The Stafford County Comprehensive Plan calls for this segment of Route 17 to widen to a
six-lane divided road. It is classified as an Urban Arterial based on the VDOT Functional
Classification map. US Route 17 includes separate left and right turn lanes in northbound
and southbound directions at intersection with McWhirt Loop / Lichfield Blvd. A transit
service operated by Fredericksburg Regional Transit currently runs a transit route “Stafford
County South” on US Route 17 in the immediate vicinity of the site.
Proposed site-driveway #2 (Right In/Right Out Only) will be located on US Route 17
(along west side) at approximately 410 feet north of the McWhirt Loop.

McWhirt Loop: is a 2-lane road which bound the subject site on south side. It is
connected to US Route 17 on east side and Banks Ford Pkwy-International Pkwy on west
side. It is posted with a 35 MPH speed limit in the vicinity of the site. It serves to two
commercial developments located along south side with two separate unsignalized
intersections. One of the unsignalized entrances to the CVS pharmacy located on south
side of McWhirt Loop is included in this study for the analysis purposes. Proposed site-
driveway #1 will be located on McWhirt Loop at approximately 400 feet west of the
existing CVS entrance.

Lichfield Blvd (Route 700): is a 2-lane road expanded to 4-lane with a divided median
near US Route 17. It is posted with a speed limit of 35 MPH in the vicinity and connects
to US Route 17 on west side and to Plantation Drive on east side. It serves the major
residential developments located on east of the intersection of US Route 17 & McWhirt
Loop/Lichfield Blvd.

Information about existing lane geometry and turn lane storage lengths is provided in
existing conditions analysis section of this report.

e) Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Transit Facilities

No bicycle facilities are present in the immediate vicinity of the subject site.
Sidewalks are present on east side of US Route 17 in the immediate vicinity of the site.
Also side walk is present on west side of the US Route 17 on south of McWhirt Loop. This
sidewalk is built up to approximately 180 feet west of existing CVS entrance along south
of McWhirt Loop. No sidewalk is present along north of McWhirt Loop.
The Fredericksburg Regional Transit currently operates several routes in Stafford County,
with a route named “Stafford County South Route” serving the Warrenton Road (US Route
17) west of the Interstate 95 in the vicinity of the site.

                                        Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                         Page 10
                 Attachment 6
                Page 16 of 103




                  




                                  	   
      
 Attachment 6
Page 17 of 103
 Attachment 6
Page 18 of 103
                                                                                                     Attachment 6
                                                                                                    Page 19 of 103
  A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                         February 06, 2014



4. ANALYSIS OF 2013 EXISTING CONDITIONS

  a) Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes

  Pennoni has conducted weekday peak period manual turning movement traffic counts on
  Tuesday, April 09, 2013 from 6.00 AM to 9.00 AM and from 4.00 PM to 7.00 PM at the
  following intersections:
      -   Warrenton Road (Route 17) / McWhirt Loop / Lichfield Blvd
          (Peak Hours: 7.15 AM to 8.15 AM and 4.30 PM to 5.30 PM)
      -   McWhirt Loop / CVS Entrance
          (Peak Hours: 8.00 AM to 9.00 AM and 4.00 PM to 5.00 PM)

  Based upon the turning movements, the weekday AM and PM peak hours at the study
  intersections were identified as shown in Table 2.

                      TABLE 2: STUDY AREA INTERSECTIONS PEAK HOURS
            Intersection                                        Peak Hour

                                                    AM                         PM
     US Route 17 & McWhirt
                                          7.15 AM to 8.15 AM            4.30 PM to 5.30 PM
      Loop / Lichfield Blvd
      McWhirt Loop / CVS
                                          8.00 AM to 9.00 AM            4.00 PM to 5.00 PM
            Entrance

  The traffic counts at afore mentioned intersections are included in Appendix B of this
  report. VDOT data has not provided with the K factor for Route 17 in the vicinity of the
  site. Pennoni has assumed a K factor of 0.85 for Route 17 to calculate Average Daily
  Traffic based upon peak hour volumes. Accordingly Route 17 ADT is estimated at 42,200
  vehicles in the immediate vicinity of the subject site. Pennoni has proportionately balanced
  the traffic on McWhirt Loop in eastbound and westbound directions between CVS entrance
  intersection and US Route 17 intersection. Through traffic movements on McWhirt Loop
  at future Site-driveway #1 location is calculated based upon traffic counts at McWhirt
  Loop / CVS Entrance intersection. Similarly, through traffic movements on Route 17 at
  future Site-driveway #2 location is calculated based upon traffic counts at Route 17 /
  McWhirt Loop intersection. Figure 4 is provided to show the 2013 Weekday AM and PM
  peak hour traffic volumes at study area intersection as well as ADT within the study area.

  b) Capacity Analysis and Queuing Analysis

  Existing peak hour factors and heavy traffic percentages calculated based upon traffic
  counts are utilized in Synchro 7 model for analyzing the 2013 existing conditions. Existing
  signal timings, cycle length, offset, split times, clearance intervals as provided by VDOT
  are utilized for the signalized intersection of US Route 17 and McWhirt Loop/Lichfield

                                          Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                    Page 14
                                                                                                   Attachment 6
                                                                                                  Page 20 of 103
A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                         February 06, 2014



Boulevard. Figure 5 shows the lane geometry, intersection traffic control and weekday AM
and PM peak hour traffic levels of service at the study area intersections for the 2013
existing conditions.

Based upon Synchro analyses results following results are observed,
  - Warrenton Road/McWhirt Loop/Lichfield Blvd intersection operates at Overall
    LOS “D” or better during AM and PM peak hour. Only northbound approach operates
    at acceptable LOS “D” during AM and PM peak hour. All other approaches
    (eastbound, westbound and northbound) operate at LOS “E/F” during AM and PM
    peak hours. Failing approach LOS is observed due to the heavy traffic volume and less
    capacity (in terms of lanes) along US Route 17. Also existing signal timing settings to
    allow more time to US Route 17 traffic to maintain less queue and avoid delay to
    mainline traffic also leads to failing approach LOS for side streets with increased delay.
    Queue on eastbound approach under existing conditions is observed at 214 feet
    exceeding beyond CVS driveway on McWhirt Loop. Available distance on McWhirt
    Loop from CVS entrance to US Route 17 is approximately 180 feet.

  - McWhirt Loop/CVS Entrance intersection operate at LOS “A” for inbound traffic
    from McWhirt Loop. Outbound turning movements operate at LOS “B” or better
    during AM and PM peak hour. Intersection Capacity Utilization (ICU) LOS is “A”
    during both peak hours.

Table 3 is provided to show the existing peak hour levels of service as well as the turn lane
lengths, 95th percentile back of queue (in feet) and delay (in seconds) for each lane/lane
group, approach and overall intersection. Synchro 7 worksheets for 2013 existing
conditions are included in the Appendix C of this report.




                                        Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                    Page 15
 Attachment 6
Page 21 of 103
 Attachment 6
Page 22 of 103
                                                                                                                                                              Attachment 6
                                                                                                                                                             Page 23 of 103
A Traffic Impact Analysis for McWhirt Loop Commercial                                                                              February 06, 2014




                       TABLE 3: 2013 EXISTING LOS, DELAY & BOQ (95%) RESULTS
                                                                                               AMPeak Hour                         PMPeak Hour
                                                                 Existing/
                                                   Lane Group/   Proposed                           Delay Back of                      Delay Back of
   #          Intersection         Traffic Control
                                                    Approach     turn-lane               LOS          (in    Queue           LOS         (in    Queue
                                                               lengths (feet)                      seconds) (infeet)                  seconds) (infeet)

                                                          EB/LT               -            E         62.6         66           F        129.3        214
                                                                                  #
                                                           EB/R            175             E         58.5         40           E         77.4        132
                                                          EB LOS                           E         60.3          -           F         97.2          -
                                                                                  #
                                                          WB/L             220             F         87.4        261           F        109.8        218
                                                          WB/T                -            D         53.0         46           E         70.8         63
                                                          WB/R              225            D         53.2         80           E         69.8         83
                                                        WB LOS                             E         66.2          -           F         82.8          -
                                                           NB/L             300            E         78.4        135           F        125.1        174
            WarrentonRoad
            (US Route 17) &           Signalized           NB/T               -
   1                                                                                       E         57.8        997           E         55.2       1161
             McWhirt Loop /                                NB/T               -
              Lichfield Blvd                               NB/R             450            A          8.4         25          B          12.8         25
                                                         NB LOS                            E         57.5          -          E          55.5          -
                                                           SB/L             290            F         106.4       238           F         85.3        317
                                                           SB/T               -
                                                                                           C         27.3        610          C          28.4        844
                                                           SB/T               -
                                                                                  #
                                                           SB/R            1215            B         13.3         25          B          11.5         25
                                                          SB LOS                           C         33.6          -          C          34.4          -
                                                Overall                       -            D         48.9          -          D          50.5          -
                                                           EB/T               -            A          0.0          0          A          0.0          0
                                                           EB/R              50            A          0.0         25          A          0.0          25
         McWhirt Loop &CVS           Unsignalized
   2                                                      WB/LT               -            A          2.0         25          A          4.8          25
             Entrance
                                                          NB/LR               -            A          9.2         25          B          10.8         25
                                                Overall                       -            A          1.9          -          A          3.4           -

            McWhirt Loop &
   3        Site-driveway#1                -                                              FUTUREINTERSECTION
              (Full Access)


            WarrentonRoad
            (US Route 17) &
   4                                       -                                              FUTUREINTERSECTION
            Site-driveway#2
           (Right In-Out Only)

 - Minimumqueue length assumed to be 25 feet. EB = Eastbound, WB =Westbound, NB = Northbound, SB = Southbound, L: Left, T:Thru, R: Right
 - For unsignalized intersection, Intersection Capacity Utilization (ICU) Levels of Service is shown which is based upon ICU percentages. Synchro does not
 provide overall LOS based upon delay for unsignalized two-way stop controlled intersection.
 - For signalized intersection, existing signal timings & cycle length are utilized.
 - LOS, Delay & Back of Queue (95%) results shown in this table are based upon Synchro 7 analysis.
 # Denotes a continuous lane frompreceding intersection with no taper. Approximate available storage to preceding intersection is shown.




                                                             Pennoni Project #FRNT-1301                                                          Page 18
                                                                                                                                                                    Attachment 6
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 67 of 103

Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd) -- Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop                                                                      QC JOB #: 10913401
 CITY/STATE: Fredericksburg, VA                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Apr 09 2013
                      1530          1922                          Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM
                             0.98                                                                                                     9.6         9.4

                       4 1403 123
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                      0.0 9.8 7.3


       73      5                           195    343
                                                                                                                       17.8   60.0                        6.7      8.5
        0.92   21            0.95           16   0.91
                                                                                                                              4.8                        12.5
       60      34                          132    164
                                                                                                                       20.0   23.5                       10.6     12.2

                       56 1701 40
                                                                                                                                      19.6 9.6 25.0

                      1571          1797
                             0.94                                                                                                     10.2        10.3



                              1                                                                                                        0     0     0



                                                                                                                              0                            1

               0                             0                                                                                0                            1

                                                                                                                              0                            0

                              0                                                                                                        0     0     0




                             NA                                                                                                              NA




               NA                          NA                                                                                 NA                          NA




                             NA                                                                                                              NA



 15-Min Count         Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd)               Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd)   Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop   Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop Total                    Hourly
    Period                (Northbound)                        (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                   Totals
 Beginning At       Left Thru Right       U             Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U      Left Thru Right        U
    6:00 AM          17    144      8     0               7    192      0     4     0       0      4     0       18       3      5     0    402
    6:15 AM          22    219     16     0              12    213      0     3     1       0      8     0       35       9     13     0    551
    6:30 AM          22    249     18     1              15    250      1     6    10       3     14     0       30       3     12     0    634
    6:45 AM          14    369      8     1              14    273      2     5     3       4     10     0       34       3     18     0    758                         2345
    7:00 AM          10    350      4     1              21    292      0     5     3       3      9     0       36       0     20     0    754                         2697
    7:15 AM          11    420     10     1              22    354      0     3     0       4     10     0       30       3     29     1    898                         3044
    7:30 AM          11    443     15     1              26    341      0     3     0       4      9     0       39       2     62     0    956                         3366
    7:45 AM          15    451     10     1              28    357      1     3     1       4      9     0       34       6     60     0    980                         3588
    8:00 AM          16    387      5     0              26    351      3    12     4       9      6     0       28       5     44     0    896                         3730
    8:15 AM          21    391      9     0              18    322      2     1     2       4     15     0       35       4     56     0    880                         3712
    8:30 AM          16    405     23     1              25    309      3     3     2       5      9     0       31       4     64     0    900                         3656
    8:45 AM          15    366     23     2              29    307      4     6     4       4     13     0       25       4     60     0    862                         3538




 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                          Southbound                  Eastbound                      Westbound
   Flowrates        Left Thru Right     U               Left Thru Right    U      Left   Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right    U                         Total
  All Vehicles       60 1804     40     4               112 1428      4   12       4      16    36     0        136      24   240     0                         3920
 Heavy Trucks        12  144     12                      12  156      0            4       0    12                8       0    12                                372
  Pedestrians              0                                   0                           0                              0                                       0
    Bicycles          0    0      0                       0    0      0            0       0      0               0       0     0                                 0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/15/2013 6:05 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                                                Attachment 6
                                                                                                                                                               Page 68 of 103

Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd) -- Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop                                                                     QC JOB #: 10913402
 CITY/STATE: Fredericksburg, VA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Apr 09 2013
                      1805          1798                          Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM
                             0.89                                                                                                    6.6        8.5

                       22 1585 198
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                                     4.5 7.2 2.0


       92      22                          174    291
                                                                                                                       19.6   0.0                     1.7      4.1
        0.85   59            0.93           21   0.93
                                                                                                                              0.0                     9.5
       212     131                          96    324
                                                                                                                       5.2    8.4                     7.3      1.9

                       52 1579 90
                                                                                                                                     28.8 9.5 2.2

                      1815          1721
                             0.91                                                                                                    7.3        9.7



                              0                                                                                                       0    0    0



                                                                                                                              0                        0

               0                             0                                                                                1                        0

                                                                                                                              0                        0

                              0                                                                                                       0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                            NA




               NA                          NA                                                                                 NA                      NA




                             NA                                                                                                            NA



 15-Min Count         Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd)               Rte 17 (Warrenton Rd)   Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop   Lichfield Blvd/McWhirt Loop Total               Hourly
    Period                (Northbound)                        (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At       Left Thru Right       U             Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right        U      Left Thru Right        U
    4:00 PM          13    336     26     2              38    417      4     1     7      14     31     0       23       6     59     0     977
    4:15 PM          19    330     17     4              43    363      3     4     6      15     26     0       15       8     64     0     917
    4:30 PM          12    406     21     1              39    454     11     3     8      21     40     0       19       5     44     0    1084
    4:45 PM          19    367     21     1              50    365      5     7     3      20     44     0       28       7     54     0     991                    3969
    5:00 PM          11    358     28     1              39    380      4     5     6       7     32     0       32       4     39     0     946                    3938
    5:15 PM           7    448     20     0              47    386      2     8     5      11     15     0       17       5     37     0    1008                    4029
    5:30 PM           5    354     27     1              37    345      5     9     6      13     32     0       28       8     31     0     901                    3846
    5:45 PM          16    361     30     0              48    357      1     3     7      10     22     0       27      10     40     0     932                    3787
    6:00 PM          17    308     17     0              36    289      5     4     8       6     25     0       15       6     40     0     776                    3617
    6:15 PM          11    303     24     2              32    308      7    12     5      10     10     0       24       8     35     0     791                    3400
    6:30 PM           7    305     29     1              29    323      4     6     7       6     22     0       28       7     25     0     799                    3298
    6:45 PM          10    266     23     0              36    274      2     5     3       9     11     0       17       6     21     0     683                    3049




 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                          Southbound                  Eastbound                      Westbound
   Flowrates        Left Thru Right     U               Left Thru Right    U      Left   Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles       48 1624     84     4               156 1816     44   12       32     84   160     0         76      20   176     0                     4336
 Heavy Trucks        12  220      8                       8  100      0             0      0    12                4       4     0                            368
  Pedestrians              0                                   0                           0                              0                                   0
    Bicycles          0    0      0                       0    0      0            0       0      0              0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/15/2013 6:05 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                                                 Attachment 6
                                                                                                                                                                Page 69 of 103

Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: CVS Entrance -- McWhirt Loop                                                                                          QC JOB #: 10913403
 CITY/STATE: Fredericksburg, VA                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Apr 09 2013
                           0          0                           Peak-Hour: 8:00 AM -- 9:00 AM
                               0.00                                                                                               0.0         0.0

                           0    0     0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 8:15 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0


       74      0                            0     94
                                                                                                                   23.0   0.0                         0.0      20.2
        0.71   66              0.94        71   0.78
                                                                                                                          24.2                       23.9
       69      3                           23     77
                                                                                                                   24.6   33.3                        8.7      23.4

                           3    0     11
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 18.2

                         26           14
                               0.58                                                                                               11.5        14.3



                                0                                                                                                  0     0     0



                                                                                                                          0                             0

               0                            0                                                                             0                             1

                                                                                                                          0                             0

                                0                                                                                                  0     0     0




                                NA                                                                                                       NA




               NA                          NA                                                                             NA                          NA




                                NA                                                                                                       NA



 15-Min Count                  CVS Entrance                   CVS Entrance              McWhirt Loop               McWhirt Loop                      Total        Hourly
    Period                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                    Totals
 Beginning At       Left        Thru Right       U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right     U    Left   Thru Right            U
    6:00 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0       4      0     0     0      20      0            0            24
    6:15 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0       9      0     0     0      30      0            0            39
    6:30 AM          0            0     1        0      0        0     0     0    0      25      0     0     1      24      0            0            51
    6:45 AM          1            0     1        0      0        0     0     0    0      17      0     0     2      17      0            0            38              152
    7:00 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0      15      0     0     0      12      0            0            27              155
    7:15 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0      14      0     0     0      14      0            0            28              144
    7:30 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0      13      0     0     1      13      0            0            27              120
    7:45 AM          0            0     0        0      0        0     0     0    0      15      1     0     2      18      0            0            36              118
    8:00 AM          1            0     2        0      0        0     0     0    0      17      1     0     4      19      0            0            44              135
    8:15 AM          0            0     1        0      0        0     0     0    0      19      1     0     6      20      0            0            47              154
    8:30 AM          1            0     5        0      0        0     0     0    0      13      1     0     6      16      0            0            42              169
    8:45 AM          1            0     3        0      0        0     0     0    0      17      0     0     7      16      0            0            44              177




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates        Left       Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right    U     Left    Thru Right    U                          Total
  All Vehicles       0           0      4     0         0       0      0     0    0      76      4    0      24      80     0     0                          188
 Heavy Trucks        0           0      0               0       0      0          0      32      0            4      28     0                                 64
  Pedestrians                    0                              0                         0                           0                                        0
    Bicycles         0           0      0               0       0      0          0       0      0           0        1     0                                  1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/15/2013 6:05 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                                              Attachment 6
                                                                                                                                                             Page 70 of 103

Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: CVS Entrance -- McWhirt Loop                                                                                         QC JOB #: 10913404
 CITY/STATE: Fredericksburg, VA                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Apr 09 2013
                           0          0                           Peak-Hour: 4:00 PM -- 5:00 PM
                               0.00                                                                                              0.0        0.0

                           0    0     0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 4:45 PM -- 5:00 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


       74      0                            0    117
                                                                                                                   18.9   0.0                      0.0      13.7
        0.88   190             0.88        49   0.91
                                                                                                                          7.9                     28.6
       201     11                          68    235
                                                                                                                   7.5    0.0                      2.9       6.8

                         25     0     42
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 2.4

                         76           67
                               0.80                                                                                              2.6        1.5



                                0                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

               0                            0                                                                             1                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                                0                                                                                                 2    0    0




                                NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                          NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                                NA                                                                                                     NA



 15-Min Count                  CVS Entrance                   CVS Entrance              McWhirt Loop                McWhirt Loop                  Total        Hourly
    Period                     (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Totals
 Beginning At       Left        Thru Right       U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right     U    Left    Thru Right         U
    4:00 PM          4            0    11        0      0        0     0     0    0      45      2     0     18       7      0         0           87
    4:15 PM          7            0     4        0      0        0     0     0    0      37      4     0     16      15      0         1           84
    4:30 PM          6            0    14        0      0        0     0     0    0      53      3     0     14      13      0         2          105
    4:45 PM          8            0    13        0      0        0     0     0    0      55      2     0     17      14      0         0          109              385
    5:00 PM          2            0     4        0      0        0     0     0    0      39      5     0     10      12      0         0           72              370
    5:15 PM          4            0     9        0      0        0     0     0    0      25      1     0      7       6      0         1           53              339
    5:30 PM          2            0     7        0      0        0     0     0    0      41      1     0     11       7      0         0           69              303
    5:45 PM          1            0     8        0      0        0     0     0    0      27      3     0     10      10      0         0           59              253
    6:00 PM          2            0     8        0      0        0     0     0    0      32      2     0     16      16      0         0           76              257
    6:15 PM          3            0     6        0      0        0     0     0    0      20      2     0     18       8      0         0           57              261
    6:30 PM          5            0    13        0      0        0     0     0    0      22      0     0     11       7      0         0           58              250
    6:45 PM          4            0     6        0      0        0     0     0    0      16      3     0      6      10      0         0           45              236




 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates        Left       Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right    U    Left   Thru Right    U     Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles       32          0     52     0         0       0      0     0    0     220      8    0      68      56     0     0                       436
 Heavy Trucks         0          0      0               0       0      0          0      12      0            4      16     0                              32
  Pedestrians                    0                              0                         0                           0                                     0
    Bicycles         0           0      0               0       0      0          0       1      0           0        0     0                               1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 4/15/2013 6:05 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
