                                                                  AGENDA ITEM NO. 6.2
                      Planning Commission Staff Report
                      May 5, 2016

                      PROJECT:    Costco Wholesale
                      FILE:       EG-15-039
                      REQUEST:    Conditional Use Permit and Major Design Review
                      LOCATION:   Southeast Corner of Elk Grove Boulevard and Bruceville Road
                      APN:        132-2120-005, -009, -010
                      STAFF:      Jessica Jordan, Planning Manager

PROPERTY OWNER:                     APPLICANT:
Cordova 83 Properties, LLC          Costco Wholesale
2020 L Street                       9 Corporate Park, Suite 230
Sacramento, CA 95811                Irvine, CA 92606

Staff Recommendation
Staff recommends that the Planning Commission adopt a Resolution making a recommendation
that the City Council:
   1. Find no further CEQA review is necessary for the Costco Wholesale Project pursuant to
      Section 15183 of Division 6 of Chapter 3 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations
      (State CEQA Guidelines); and
   2. Adoption of a Resolution approving the Conditional Use Permit and Major Design Review
      for the Costco Wholesale Project, (EG-15-039), subject to the findings and conditions of
      approval contained in Attachment 1.

Project Description
The project consists of a Conditional Use Permit and Major Design Review for the construction of
a Costco Wholesale retail store on approximately 17 acres near the southeast corner of Elk
Grove Boulevard and Bruceville Road and a new signalized intersection on Elk Grove Boulevard
at Ginther Drive. Construction would include development of an approximately 150,000 square
foot retail store; a 24-pump fueling facility with capacity for future expansion to 30 pumps; a
parking lot with 751 parking stalls; building signage; landscaping; a right-in, right-out driveway
access point at the eastern end of the project site on Elk Grove Boulevard; two driveways on
Civic Center Drive, and all underground infrastructure to support such development.

Background
The Laguna Ridge Specific Plan (LRSP), approved by the City Council in June 2004,
encompasses approximately 1,900 acres and is located in the southwestern portion of the City
of Elk Grove. The LRSP area lies west of Highway 99, south of Elk Grove Boulevard, east of
Bruceville Road and the East Franklin Specific Plan area, and north of Bilby Road. Planned land
uses within the LRSP include single and multifamily residential, commercial, office, and a civic
center, interconnected by paseos, pedestrian corridors, and parks. The Project site was
designated for commercial uses at that time.

The City Council approved the Laguna Ridge Town Center Specific Plan Amendment in June
2008. This change to the Specific Plan modified the land plan for the area between Elk Grove
Boulevard and Civic Center Drive from Bruceville Road to Laguna Springs Drive to include
development of a large medical campus, to remove any anticipated residential development,
and to establish areas for large commercial development. The Project site is located within the
LRSP Town Center area. A Subsequent Environmental Impact Report (EIR) and the adoption of
the Laguna Ridge Town Center Design Guidelines were included in the June 2008 actions.




                                                                                                     1
    Elk Grove Planning Commission
    Costco Wholesale (EG-15-039)
    May 5, 2016
    Page 2

    Project Setting
    This Project site is located near the southeast corner of Elk Grove Boulevard and Bruceville Road.
    Civic Center Drive provides the southern boundary of the site. The property is currently
    undeveloped. Table 1 lists the uses adjacent to the Project site. Figures 1 and 2 show the
    location of the project.

                             Table 1. Adjacent Land Designations and Uses
                               Existing Uses                  General Plan                Zoning
        Project Site              Vacant                      Commercial                    SC
           North         Single Family Residential        Low Density Residential          RD-7
           South         Single Family Residential        Low Density Residential          RD-5
           West              Shopping Center           Commercial/Office/Multi-family       SC
            East         Vacant, Medical Office               Commercial                    SC
                                  Building

                                      Figure 1 - Vicinity Map




2
Elk Grove Planning Commission
Costco Wholesale (EG-15-039)
May 5, 2016
Page 3


                                 Figure 2 – Aerial Photograph




                                           Project
                                             Site




Analysis
The proposed Project has been reviewed in accordance with the City’s General Plan, the
development standards of the Laguna Ridge Specific Plan and Title 23 of the Municipal Code
(herein after the Zoning Code), the City’s Design Guidelines, the Laguna Ridge Specific
Supplemental Design Guidelines, and the Elk Grove Town Center Design Guidelines.

Conditional Use Permit
The Laguna Ridge Specific Plan (LRSP) requires that, “in addition to the City’s Design Review
process, major retail anchor stores measuring over 100,000 square feet in area are required to
process a Conditional Use Permit with City Council approval authority to ensure land use and
high quality architecture is provided.” The Project proposes development of a 150,000 square
foot retail store hence, a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) is included.
For the purposes of the Zoning Code, the proposed Costco Wholesale project would be defined
as “Retail, Warehouse/club”. Costco Wholesale operations require shoppers to pay an annual
membership fee to gain access to the store. The Zoning Code establishes special studies
requirements for other large format retailers but not for “Retail, Warehouse/club”. The concerns
generally associated with typical big box retailers such as economic and urban decay are not
anticipated results of permitting a Costco Wholesale or similar membership only store.
The need for a Conditional Use Permit in this case is then focused on land use compatibility and
architecture. The site is appropriately zoned for this scale of development. The SC zone
(Shopping Center) designation is intended for medium to high intensity shopping centers with a
local or regional market area and used on medium to large sized sites near freeways, along
arterials, and at major intersections. When adjacent to single family residential, vehicles using the
shopping center should not have a direct impact on the entrances to the neighborhood. The
Zoning Code looks for this size of development to incorporate pedestrian-friendly designs that
include walkways interior to the Project as well as connections to adjacent uses and
neighborhoods, but also be auto-accommodating.




                                                                                                        3
    Elk Grove Planning Commission
    Costco Wholesale (EG-15-039)
    May 5, 2016
    Page 4

    The Project site is located on a highly traveled corridor within the City. Both Elk Grove Boulevard
    and Bruceville Road are designated 6-lane arterials in the General Plan, which is ideal for an SC
    zoned property. The traffic analysis performed for the Project indicates that the Project’s
    anticipated traffic volumes are within those anticipated by the City in previous analysis of the
    overall transportation system. The improvements included in the Project will continue to ensure
    adequate capacity and site access are maintained on both of these important roadways.

    The Project site is located on the north side of Civic Center Drive, adjacent to existing single
    family homes. The site has been laid out to alleviate negative effects to these neighbors to the
    fullest extent possible. Main vehicular access into the proposed shopping center will occur along
    Elk Grove Boulevard and Bruceville Road as opposed to Civic Center Drive. The building is
    positioned to orient the loading dock and store maintenance activities on the north and west
    sides of the building. These activities will be screened by a wall and landscaping to alleviate
    noise and visual impacts. The truck route has been selected to utilize Civic Center Drive for truck
    entry and departure on Elk Grove Boulevard to eliminate extensive maneuvering by the trucks.
    As a commercial collector, Civic Center Drive was built to withstand truck traffic. The design will
    afford the Project with the ability to queue delivery trucks on the Project site away from the
    existing residences on the south side of Civic Center Drive.

    Major Design Review
    Commercial Projects are subject to Design Review for compliance with the Zoning Code and
    the Citywide Design Guidelines development standards. The Project is also subject to the
    development standards of the LRSP Town Center Design Guidelines. The Applicant has provided
    site plans, building elevations, floor plans, landscape plans, and signage plans associated with
    the development of the Project. Table 2 provides a summary of the Project’s conformity with the
    development standards followed by additional discussion on the site layout, building
    architecture, landscaping, and signage.

                            Table 2 - Conformity with Development Regulations

         Development
                                             Required                        Proposed         Complies
           Standard
                                               Front: 25’                    Front: 866’
    Building Setbacks                       Interior Side: 0’               Interior: 66’;      Yes
                                               Rear: 35’                    Rear: 48’ 9”
    Building Height Limit               40 feet maximum                        33’ 4”           Yes
                                   15 feet (Civic Center Drive)               40 feet
                              6 feet (eastern abutting int. property     10 feet at eastern
    Landscaping                                                                                 Yes
                                             line only)                    property line
                                  20% minimum site coverage               28% coverage
    Parking                                  675 stalls                      751 stalls         Yes
                                                                                              Yes, with
                               Building Signs for stores greater than
                                                                                               Design
    Signage                   50,000 s.f.: 2.5:1 with maximum 250 s.f.   Approx 1,085 s.f.
                                                                                               Review
                                              for all signs
                                                                                              Deviation

    Site Plan
    The proposed Costco Wholesale building and overall site development occupies approximately
    17 acres (EG-15-043). The approximately 150,000 square foot building is located in the southern


4
Elk Grove Planning Commission
Costco Wholesale (EG-15-039)
May 5, 2016
Page 5

portion of the future Costco parcel with the main access driveway, parking field, main building
entry, and fueling center oriented towards Elk Grove Boulevard. The Project includes installation
of a new signalized intersection at Elk Grove Boulevard and Ginther Drive. A secondary right-in,
right-out access driveway is located on Elk Grove Boulevard, at the northeastern corner of the
property. A third access driveway is located on Civic Center Drive, shared with the future
medical campus to be located on the eastern side of the future shopping area. Truck access is
proposed from a fourth driveway at Civic Center Drive, in the southwestern corner of the site.

Both vehicular and pedestrian access has been planned for the entire Ridge Shopping Center
site meaning that vehicle access points, pedestrian pathways and amenities, and parking will
appear seamless across the entire 40 acre site. However, for purposes of Code analysis, the
Costco project has been analyzed as a stand-alone Project. As indicated in Table 2 above, the
Project meets or exceeds the required Code standards with the exception of requiring a Design
Review Deviation for signage, discussed in detail below. Figures 3 and 4 provide the site plan
and landscape plan as proposed.

Traffic
A site evaluation for traffic was prepared by Kittelson & Associates, Inc. The purpose of the
analysis was to address site access, circulation, trail considerations, and connections planned as
part of the proposed Project and the overall commercial shopping center site. The analysis used
a conservative approach to estimating trip generation to ensure that site access locations are
appropriately designed and managed to avoid impacts to the public roadway system.

The traffic study identified that the new traffic signal at Elk Grove Boulevard and Ginther Drive is
required to be designed to maintain right-in, right-out access from the existing neighborhood to
the north, minimizing potential cut-through traffic to and from the Project. With the exception of
this neighborhood access, the new traffic signal will provide full access in and out of the
shopping center. Other improvements of the shopping center site development include use of
the existing striped shoulder along Elk Grove Boulevard as an auxiliary lane to allow for turning
movements into the shopping center outside of the normal traffic flow areas; extension of left-
turn bay along Elk Grove Boulevard to support the new traffic signal; extension of a raised
median along Civic Center Drive at Bruceville Road to ensure elimination of unwanted left-turn
movements from the shopping center; and improvements to the multi-use trail along Elk Grove
Boulevard with extensive warning devices to ensure pedestrians are not in conflict with drivers in
the area. Ultimately, the traffic analysis concluded that the study intersections would operate
acceptably with full buildout of the entire shopping center.




                                                                                                       5
    Elk Grove Planning Commission
    Costco Wholesale (EG-15-039)
    May 5, 2016
    Page 6

                                       Figure 3 – Site Plan


                        New
                        Signalized
                        Intersection



       Fueling Center




                                                              Shared
                                                              Driveway with
                                                              Medical
                                                              Campus
                                                              (Conceptual
                                                              configuration
                                                              in Attachment
                                                              1)




6
Elk Grove Planning Commission
Costco Wholesale (EG-15-039)
May 5, 2016
Page 7

                                  Figure 4 – Landscape Plan




Design Review Deviation – Laguna Ridge Town Center Guidelines
The Project site is located within a portion of the Western Mixed Use District of the Laguna Ridge
Town Center. The Town Center focuses on pedestrian facilities including extensive dedicated
access throughout the District and pedestrian nodes (plazas, gathering spots) in key locations.


                                                                                                     7
    Elk Grove Planning Commission
    Costco Wholesale (EG-15-039)
    May 5, 2016
    Page 8

    Pedestrian amenities have been provided in several locations on the proposed site plan,
    including a large pedestrian spine running north south from the store entry to the far end of the
    parking field; two pedestrian connections to the east; and one main connection to the
    remainder of the shopping center to the west. The layout and design of such pedestrian
    amenities is slightly modified from that originally envisioned by the Town Center Guidelines and
    as such, is identified as a Design Review deviation. As currently designed, the entire shopping
    center site provides a balance between the vehicular movements necessary to accommodate
    the anticipated traffic to the site with the desire for some patrons to walk and/or bike to the site.
    In particular, the Costco Wholesale retail store is more generally frequented by customers in
    vehicles because of the nature of the bulk products being sold and, accordingly, pedestrian
    amenities are focused elsewhere on the balance of the shopping center site.

    Architecture
    The City’s Design Guidelines establishes criteria for non-residential development to achieve a
    product of high quality design that is compatible with the character of the surrounding area. The
    Project is also subject to design standards for Big Box Retail in the Zoning Code. Figures 5-7
    provide a view of the proposed building. Additional elevations and rendering are included in
    Attachment 1.

    Standards within the Design Guidelines look to ensure buildings incorporate a variety of
    materials, colors, articulation, and plane breaks for the purpose of visual interest. The project
    incorporates all of these treatments on all building facades. The main entry incorporates a large
    canopy feature that is detailed with various materials and signage. Building facades will be
    treated with three different materials including masonry block, ribbed metal panels, and
    textured metal panels in various colors. Steel trellises are included in multiple locations as well.


                                   Figure 5 – Architectural Elevation




                                 Figure 6 – Customer Entry Rendering




8
Elk Grove Planning Commission
Costco Wholesale (EG-15-039)
May 5, 2016
Page 9

                       Figure 7 – Eastern Building Elevation Rendering




Per Chapter 23.74, Big Box Retail Design Standards, the Project is required to incorporate a
variety of design treatments for the purposes of ensuring the development is compatible with
the surrounding area and is integrated into the built environment. The Project has incorporated
the Code standards for roof lines, façade details, roof line details, use of a variety of building
materials, and inclusion of a defined customer entrance with canopy and projections. This
section also requires that community spaces be included in the Project, which are provided with
the pedestrian connections on the site plan as well as within the overall shopping center
development plan.

Design Review Deviation – Big Box Retail Design Standards
The Code requires that facades greater than 100 feet in length incorporate wall plane
projections or recesses having a depth of at least three percent of the length of the facade and
extending at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any
facade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet. The Applicant has indicated that the use of alternating
building materials, colors, and textures serves to break up the façade to the extent feasible.
Additionally, the Code requires that the building entry be located on the façade that abuts the
public street. In this case, the Civic Center Drive façade abuts the public street. If this design
requirement were incorporated, significant customer activity would be occurring along Civic
Center Drive. This would be undesirable to the existing single family residences along this
frontage. In this case, strict adherence to the Code may not provide compatibility of the Project
with its surroundings. Therefore, a design deviation in this case is warranted.

Signage
Building-mounted signage allowances for uses within commercially zoned properties currently
allow a ratio of 2.5 square feet of signage per every foot of building frontage with a maximum of
250 square feet for all signs. The Project proposes approximately 1,085 square feet of signage.
Table 23.62-2 includes a footnote that allows buildings over 75,000 square feet to exceed the
maximum signage through a major design review approval.

Design Review Deviation – Allowed Sign Square Footage
Given the size of the proposed building, a maximum sign allowance of 250 feet for all signage
combined would be a detraction from the overall appearance of the Project as signage would
be too small and appear odd on such a large building. Rather, the Applicant’s proposed
building-mounted signage is in scale with the building façade lengths and heights and appears
right-sized to the identification needs of the store. In order to continue being mindful of the

                                                                                                     9
     Elk Grove Planning Commission
     Costco Wholesale (EG-15-039)
     May 5, 2016
     Page 10

     existing single family residences to the south of the site, Condition 9 prohibits signage on the
     southern elevation.

     Letters from Commenting Agencies
     This Project was routed to various City, County, and State agencies for review. No technical
     issues of concern were identified by these agencies. Comments from agencies have either been
     addressed through the processing of the project or have been included as draft conditions of
     approval in Attachment 1.

     Community Outreach
     The City and the Applicant held a community meeting on March 7, 2016, to receive comments
     and answer questions about the proposed project. Additionally, a website form on the City’s
     website for person(s) wishing to provide electronic comments or questions was also established.
     Many comments were received in support of the Project. Conversely, many comments
     expressed concern about the appropriateness of the Project’s location, the anticipated traffic
     congestion from the Project, and safety of the proposed fueling station. Attachment 2 provides
     a record of the messages received related to the Project.

     Environmental Analysis
     The California Environmental Quality Act (Section 21000, et. seq. of the California Public
     Resources Code, hereafter CEQA) requires analysis of agency approvals of discretionary
     “projects.” A “project,” under CEQA, is defined as “the whole of an action, which has a
     potential for resulting in either a direct physical change in the environment, or a reasonably
     foreseeable indirect physical change in the environment.” The proposed project is a project
     under CEQA.

     The proposed project is exempt from CEQA under to CEQA Guidelines Section 15183
     (Consistency with a General Plan, Community Plan, or Zoning for Which an EIR was Prepared).
     This exemption applies to projects that are consistent with the General Plan. Section 15183 (i)(2)
     of the CEQA Guidelines defines “consistency” as “that density of the proposed project is the
     same or less than the standard expressed for the involved parcel in the general plan…or zoning
     action for which an EIR has been certified, and that the project complies with the density-
     related standards contained in that plan or zoning.”
     The subject property was zoned for commercial development, consistent with the City’s General
     Plan, in 2004 with the approval of the Laguna Ridge Specific Plan. It was further evaluated in
     2008 with the approval of the Laguna Ridge Town Center Specific Plan Amendment. EIRs were
     prepared for both of these projects – the Laguna Ridge Specific Plan EIR (SHC 2000082139) and
     Laguna Ridge Town Center Subsequent EIR (SCH 2007082169). Staff has reviewed the proposed
     action for consistency with the existing allowed development density, as described under the
     CEQA Guidelines. A technical memo prepared by Fehr & Peers and provided by the Applicant
     determined that the proposed action would result in less vehicular traffic from what was
     previously analyzed in the Laguna Ridge Town Center Subsequent EIR (see Table 3).




10
Elk Grove Planning Commission
Costco Wholesale (EG-15-039)
May 5, 2016
Page 11

                                  Table 3. CEQA Consistency
                  Source                                  Trip Generation
                                                 Daily           AM                PM
   Laguna Ridge Town Center DSEIR               24,820          1,660            2,221
   The Ridge and Costco Projects1               18,930           727             1,5841
                              Difference         5,890           933              637

 Source: Fehr & Peers, March 2016

Therefore, this Project qualifies for the identified exemption and no further environmental review
is required.

Recommended Motions
Should the Planning Commission agree with staff’s recommendation, the following motions are
suggested:

 “I move that the Planning Commission adopt a resolution recommending that the City Council
find the Costco Wholesale project exempt from CEQA pursuant to State CEQA Guidelines
Section 15183 and approve the Project, subject to the findings and conditions of approval
contained in the draft resolution.”

Attachments
1. Resolution Recommending Approval to Council
   Exhibit A – Project Description
   Exhibit B – Project Exhibits
   Exhibit C – Conditions of Approval
2. Public Comments
3. Traffic Analysis




                                                                                                     11
                                                                        ATTACHMENT 1

                                    RESOLUTION NO. 2016-XX
                                         MAY 5, 2016

            A RESOLUTION OF THE CITY OF ELK GROVE PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDING
             THAT THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ELK GROVE APPROVE A CONDITIONAL USE
                                  PERMIT AND MAJOR DESIGN REVIEW
                                             FOR THE

                                   COSTCO WHOLESALE PROJECT
                                    PROJECT NO. EG-15-039
                  SOUTHEAST CORNER OF ELK GROVE BOULEVARD AND BRUCEVILLE ROAD
                       APN: 132-2120-005, 132-2120-009, & 132-2120-010

            WHEREAS, the Development Services Department of the City of Elk Grove
     received an application on September 28, 2015, from Costco Wholesale (the
     “Applicant’) requesting a Conditional Use Permit and Major Design Review (the
     “Project”); and

            WHEREAS, the proposed Project is located on real property in the incorporated
     portions of the City of Elk Grove more particularly described as APN 132-2120-005, -009,
     and -010; and

            WHEREAS, the City determined that the Project is subject to the California
     Environmental Quality Act; and

            WHEREAS, State CEQA Guidelines Section 15183 (Consistency with a General
     Plan, Community Plan, or Zoning for Which an EIR was Prepared) applies to projects that
     are consistent with the General Plan; and

            WHEREAS, the Planning Commission held a duly noticed public hearing on May 5,
     2016, as required by law to consider all of the information presented by staff,
     information presented by the Applicant, and public testimony presented in writing and
     at the meeting.

            NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that the Planning Commission of the City of Elk
     Grove finds that no further environmental review is required under the California
     Environmental Quality Act for the Project pursuant to State CEQA Guidelines Section
     15183 based upon the following finding:

     CEQA

     Finding: No further environmental review is required under the California Environmental
     Quality Act pursuant to State CEQA Guidelines Section 15183 (Consistency with a
     General Plan, Community Plan, or Zoning for Which an EIR was Prepared).

            Evidence: The subject property was zoned for commercial development,
     consistent with the City’s General Plan, in 2004 with the approval of the Laguna Ridge
     Specific Plan. It was further evaluated in 2008 with the approval of the Laguna Ridge
     Town Center Specific Plan Amendment. EIRs were prepared for both of these projects –




12
the Laguna Ridge Specific Plan EIR (SHC 2000082139) and Laguna Ridge Town Center
Subsequent EIR (SCH 2007082169). Staff has reviewed the proposed action for
consistency with the existing allowed development density, as described under the
CEQA Guidelines.

      AND, BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that the Planning Commission of the City of Elk
Grove hereby recommends that the City Council of the City of Elk Grove approve the
Conditional Use Permit and Major Design Review for the Project, as described in Exhibit
A and illustrated in Exhibit B, subject to the conditions of approval in Exhibit C (all
incorporated herein by this reference), based upon the following findings:

CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT

Finding #1: The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable
provisions of this title.

        Evidence: The proposed Project is consistent with the overall development
expectations of the Commercial General Plan Land Use Designation and SC (Shopping
Center) zone. A Conditional Use Permit (CUP) is required due to the size of the proposed
store. The CUP provides the City with the ability to ensure project design is of a high
standard and that conditions of approval are in place to alleviate any specific
concerns associated with the Project. The overall site layout is responsive to the context
of the surrounding area and various architectural treatments such as varying building
materials, undulating parapet heights, and color changes are incorporated into the
building for visual interest and compatibility. The Project is subject to comply with all
applicable conditions of approval.

Finding #2: The establishment, maintenance or operation of the use applied for will not,
under the circumstances of the particular case (location, size, design, and operating
characteristics), be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, or
general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such use, or the
general welfare of the City.

        Evidence: The proposed retail store will provide a shopping opportunity to the
City’s residents that does not currently exist. The Project includes improvements to the
adjacent roadways to ensure continued operational capacity and safe passage for
pedestrians and vehicles alike. The gas station has been located away from the existing
single family homes, near the Project’s main entry drive. Truck routes are designed to
easily access the loading and gas tank areas while avoiding conflicts with passenger
vehicles.

MAJOR DESIGN REVIEW

Finding #1: The proposed Project is consistent with the objectives of the General Plan,
complies with applicable zoning regulations, specific plan provisions, special planning
area provisions, Citywide and/or other applicable design guidelines, and improvement
standards adopted by the City.



Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Page 2 of 31
                                                                                             13
             Evidence: The Project has been evaluated for consistency with all applicable
     zoning regulation and design standards. The site plan establishes a building location
     and orientation appropriate for the surrounding area and provides main access from
     Elk Grove Boulevard. Ample additional access points are also incorporated. Building
     height, setback, landscaping, and lighting standards are all consistent with Code.
     Architectural variety is achieved through the use of multiple building colors and
     materials as well as the use of a large canopy at the main building entry and trellises
     along the building facades to break up the overall façade plane. The Project seeks
     design deviation approval for strict adherence to the Laguna Ridge Town Center
     Design Guidelines, Big Box Retail standards, and the building-mounted sign allowances.
     Such deviations are supported through the incorporation of amenities and details to
     the fullest extent possible. Therefore, the Project is consistent with the overall objectives
     of the General Plan and other land use documents.

     Finding #2: The proposed architecture, site design, and landscape are suitable for the
     purposes of the building and the site and will enhance the character of the
     neighborhood and community.

             Evidence: The Project is within the appropriate scale and intensity anticipated in
     the Shopping Center zone. The site is of an adequate size to house the proposed
     building and fueling center, provide landscaping, and parking necessary for the
     anticipated customers. The site is currently undeveloped but is adjacent to existing
     shopping centers to the west and northwest, and will provide a shopping opportunity
     that does not currently exist within the City limits. The site has been designed to be
     sensitive to the existing single family residences to the south. It is anticipated that
     development of the Project will enhance the neighborhood and community.

     Finding #3: The architecture, including the character, scale and quality of the design,
     relationship with the site and other buildings, building materials, colors, screening of
     exterior appurtenances, exterior lighting and signing and similar elements establishes a
     clear design concept and is compatible with the character of buildings on adjoining
     and nearby properties.

            Evidence: The Project has incorporated multiple design strategies to ensure the
     overall character of the area is enhanced upon project construction. Multiple building
     materials and colors serve to provide visual interest while loading and store
     maintenance activities are screened from public view. Exterior lighting will provide a
     safe shopping environment and building signage is appropriate to the overall scale of
     the building. All of these approaches combined will ensure that the project is
     compatible with the surrounding properties.

     Finding #4: The proposed Project will not create conflicts with vehicular, bicycle, or
     pedestrian transportation modes of circulation.

           Evidence: The Project includes improvements to the roadway system that will
     enhance vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian needs in the area. The currently existing
     asphalt pathway along Elk Grove Boulevard will be replaced with the permanent
     concrete and decomposed granite trail anticipated in the City’s Bicycle, Pedestrian
     and Trails Master Plan. Extensive signage will be installed to ensure pedestrian and
     Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Page 3 of 31
14
bicyclist safety along the project frontage. Additional pedestrian access will be
established with the construction of a new signalized intersection at Ginther Drive.



       The foregoing Resolution of the City of Elk Grove was passed and adopted by
the Planning Commission on the 5th day of May 2016, by the following vote:

AYES:
NOES:
ABSENT:
ABSTAIN:



ATTEST:




Sandy Kyles,                                   Fedolia ”Sparky” Harris, CHAIR of the
PLANNING SECRETARY                             PLANNING COMMISSION




Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Page 4 of 31
                                                                                       15
                                                                                     EXHIBIT A
     Exhibit A
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Project Description

                                        PROJECT DESCRIPTION


      The project consists of a Conditional Use Permit and Major Design Review for the construction of
     a Costco Wholesale retail store on approximately 17 acres near the southeast corner of Elk
     Grove Boulevard and Bruceville Road and a new signalized intersection on Elk Grove Boulevard
     at Ginther Drive. Construction would include development of an approximately 150,000 square
     foot retail store; a 24 pump fueling facility with capacity for future expansion to 30 pumps; a
     parking lot with 751 parking stalls; building signage; landscaping; a right-in, right-out driveway
     access point at the eastern end of the project site on Elk Grove Boulevard; two driveways on
     Civic Center Drive; and all underground infrastructure to support such development.

     Conditional Use Permit (CUP)

     A CUP is required by the Laguna Ridge Specific Plan for retail stores in excess of
     100,000 square feet.

     Major Design Review

     The Major Design Review includes analysis of the overall site plan, landscaping,
     lighting, building setbacks and height, architecture, and signage of the
     proposed Costco Wholesale store.

                                                    ###




16
EXHIBIT B




            17
18
                                                                                                       APPROVED BY:




                                                                                                            MECHANICAL
                                                                                                            PLATFORM
                                                                                                            SCALE: 1/16" = 1'-0"




                                                                                                            ELECTRICAL
                                                                                                            PLATFORM
                                                                                                            SCALE: 1/16" = 1'-0"




                                                                                                            EQUIPMENT
                       X   X
                                                                                                            PLATFORM
                                                                                                            SCALE: 1/16" = 1'-0"




                                                                                                                      0            8'         16'                       32'

                                                                                                                       1/16" = 1'-0"




                                                                                                                       ELK GROVE, CA
                                                                                                                            US




                                                                   PROJECT DATA                                    1101 SECOND AVE | SUITE 100
                                                                                                                                  SEATTLE, WA | 98101
                                                                   NET BUILDING AREA          150,132 SF
                                                                                                                     t 206.962.6500 | f 206.962.6499
                                                                   ENVELOPE / EXTERIOR WALL     1,622 SF
                                                                   SUB-TOTAL BUILDING         150,233 SF
                                                                   NET PUMP ROOM                 473 SF                                               MG2.com
                                                                   NET ENCLOSED CANOPY             0 SF
                                                                   TOTAL BUILDING             152,101 SF
                                                                   RACK COUNT:
                                                                   GROCERY RACKS (15 ft)             278
                                                                                                               12-0164-01
                                                                   GROCERY PALLETS
                                                                   CENTER SECTION
                                                                                                     689
                                                                                               19,856 SF
                                                                                                               DECEMBER 21, 2015
                                                                   HARDLINE RACKS (15 ft)            165
                                                                   HARDLINE PALLETS                  366
                                                                   NOTES:
                                                                                                              FLOOR PLAN


COSTCO WHOLESALE               CONCEPT FLOOR PLAN                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                        of 17



                                                                                                                                                                                      19
                                                                                                           © MulvannyG2 Architecture. All rights reserved. No part of this document


E L K G R O V E , CA                        D E C E M B E R 2 1, 2 0 1 5                                   may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission in
                                                                                                           writing from MulvannyG2 Architecture.
                                                                                                                                                                                  VERTICAL RIBBED METAL PANEL -
                            32’-6”                         32’-4”                                  29’-8”                             31’-4”                                      ‘METALLIC CHAMPAGNE’
                            T.O. PARAPET                   T.O. PARAPET                            T.O. PARAPET                       T.O. PARAPET


     29’-8”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           27’-4”
     T.O. PARAPET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T.O. PARAPET

     12’-0”
     T.O. CONC




                                                              STEEL COLUMN WRAPPED IN                                 TEXTURED METAL PANEL -
                                                              SPLIT FACE MASONRY                                      ‘SURREY BEIGE’                                                 SMOOTH FACE MASONRY - TAN



                                           PERFORATED METAL
                    32’-6”                 SCREEN                                                  31’-4”                                            28’-8”                   29’-8”
                    T.O. CANOPY
                                                                                                   T.O. PARAPET                                      T.O. PARAPET             T.O. PARAPET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16’-2”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T.O. CANOPY




                                                                                                                                       STEEL TRELLIS -                               INSET STEEL CHANNEL -
                                                                                                                                       ‘COOL HARVEST’                                ‘COOL HARVEST’




                                                                                                                   33’-4”
                                            28’-8”
                                                                                    31’-4”
                                                                                                                   T.O. PARAPET
                                                                                                                                                            ACCENT STRIPE -
                                                                                    T.O. PARAPET
                                            T.O. PARAPET                                                                                                    ‘SAFETY RED’

     27’-4”                                                                                                                                                                                                                28’-8”
     T.O. PARAPET                                                                                                                                                                                                 T.O. PARAPET

     14’-0”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12’-0”
     T.O. PARAPET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T.O. CONC




                                                                                                    31’-4”
                                              27’-4”                                                T.O. PARAPET                  27’-4”
                                              T.O. PARAPET                                                                        T.O. PARAPET
     31’-4”
     T.O. PARAPET                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1           2
     16’-2”
     T.O. CANOPY


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of 17




20
5
of 17




        21
     6
     of 17




22
7
of 17




        23
     8
     of 17




24
25
                                                                                    13' 6"                                                                               13' 6"




                                                           CANOPY AND DISPENSER ISLANDS
                PARCEL 1.31 AC                         1   SCALE: 1/8" = 1'-0"




                                                                               1                            1




                                                                WARNING   MEMBERS            WARNING   MEMBERS
                                                                           ONLY                         ONLY




                                 PARKING INFORMATION
                                                                                                                            CONTROLLER ENCLOSURE
                                                           CANOPY AND DISPENSER ISLANDS                                     EXTERIOR ELEVATIONS
                                                       2   SCALE: 1/8" = 1'-0"
                                                                                                                        3   SCALE: 1/8" = 1'-0"




     CONCEPT FUEL TRUCK ROUTE                               CONCEPT ELEVATIONS

                                                                                                                                                   CONCEPTUAL STACKING




                                                                                                                                                                                   0     10'      20'   40'

                                                                                                                                                                                    1" = 20'-0"


                PARCEL 1.31 AC                                                                                   PARCEL 1.31 AC



                                                                                                                                                                                    ELK GROVE, CA




     DETAIL SITE PLAN                                       STACKING PLAN                                                                                                         12-0164-02
                                                                                                                                                                                  DECEMBER 18, 2015
                                                                                                                                                                                  CONCEPT FUEL
                                                                                                                                                                                  FACILITY PLAN



      COSTCO WHOLESALE                                     CONCEPT FUEL FACILITY PLAN                                                                                                   10
26
                                                                                                                                                                                          of 17
11
of 17




        27
                                                                                                                                          PRELIMINARY PLANT LEGEND
                                                                                                                                          Symbol    Botanical / Common Name                         Size       WUCOLS Comments                                          QTY
                                                                                                                                                    TREES:
                                                                                                                                                    Lagerstroemia hyb. ‘Dynamite’ /                 24” box    L            Matched Standards in parking lot 66
                                                                                                                                                    Dynamite (Red) Crape Myrtle                                             and Multi-branch at building,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            matched in size.

                                                                                                                                                    *L
                                                                                                                                                     Laurus 'Saratoga' /Saratoga Bay Laurel         24“ box    L            Matched Standards                           99


                                                                                                       Stormwater treatment planter
                                                                                                       Sto                                          *Quercus virginiana ‘Heritage’ /
                                                                                                                                                    *Q                                              24” box    M            Matched Standards                           81
                                                                                                                                                    Heritage Southern Live Oak
                                                                                                                                                    He

                                              Stormwater treatment planter                                                                          *Quercus wislizenii/ Interior Live Oak
                                                                                                                                                    *Q                                              24“ box    VL           Matched Standards                           14

                                                                                                                                                    *Ulmus parvifolium ‘True Green’ /               24” box    L            Matched Standards                           76
                                                                                                                                                    True Green Chinese Elm


                                                                                                                                                    SHRUBS:
                                                                                                                                                    Cistus x pulverulentus 'Sunset'/                5 gal.     L
                                                                                                                                                    Magenta Rock Rose                                                           SHADE CALCULATIONS
                                                                                                                                                    Dietes vegeta ‘Variegatum’ /                    5 gal.     L               NOTE: PER CITY OF ELK GROVE 50% OF PARKING LOT NEEDS TO BE SHADED
                                              Stormw
                                              Stormwater treatment planterss                                                                        Variegated Fortnight Lily
                                                                                                                                                    Euonymus fortunei 'Canadale Gold'/              5 gal.     M               TreeSpecies                      Size        Coverage    Qty         Area(SF) Total(SF)
                                                                                                                                                    Canadale Gold Wintercreeper                                                Lagerstroemiahyb.‘Dynamite’     20'         Full                 22        315      6930
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ThreeQt.                      236          0
                                                                                                                                                    Hakea suaveolens / Sweet Hakea                  15 gal.    L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Half                 18        158      2835
                                                                                                                                                    Lavandula x ginginsii 'Goodwin Creek Gray'/     5 gal.     L                                                             Quarter                         79          0
                                                                                                                                                    Goodwin Creek Gray Lavender                                                                                              Total                                   9765
                                                                                                                                                    Plumbago auriculata ‘Monite’/ White             5 gal.     L
                                                                                                                                                    Cape Plumgao                                                               Laurus'Saratoga'                30'         Full                 48       707      33929
                                                                                                                                                    Plumbago auriculata ‘Monott’/ Royal             5 gal.     L                                                             ThreeQt.            33       530      17495
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Half                 13       353       4595
                                                                                                                                                    Cape Plumbago
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Quarter                       177          0
                                                                                                                                                    Rhamnus alaternus 'John Edwards' /              15 gal.    L                                                             Total                                  56019
                                                                                                                                                    Italian Buckthorn
                                                                                                                                                    Rosa meidrifora ‘Coral Drift’ /                 5 gal.     M               Quercusvirginiana‘Heritage’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Quercus virginiana ‘              38'         Full                 12      1135      13620
                                                                                                                                                    Coral Drift Shrub Rose                                                                                                   ThreeQt.            12       851      10215
                                                                                                                                                    Rosa meigalpio ‘Red Drift’ /                    5 gal.     M                                                             Half                 34       568      19295
                                                                                                                                                    Red Drift Shrub Rose                                                                                                     Quarter               2       284        568
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Total                                  43698
                                                                                                                                                    Rhaphiolepis indica ‘Ballerina’/                5 gal.     L
                                                                                                                                                    Ballerina Indian Hawthron                                                           wis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wislizenii               35'         Full                  0       963          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ThreeQt.             0       722          0
                                                                                                                                                    PERENNIALS:                                                                                                              Half                  0       482          0
               Stormwater treatment planter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Quarter               0       241          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Total                                      0
                                                                                                                                                    Chondropetalum tectorum / Cape Rush             1 gal.     L
                                                                                                                                                    Dianella revoluta ‘Little Rev’ /                1 gal.     L                      parvifolia‘TrueGreen’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      parv                       38'         Full                 47      1134      53298
                                                                                                                                                    Little Rev Dianella                                                                                                      ThreeQt.            15       851      12758
                                                                                                                                                    Lomandra longifloia ‘Breeze’ /                  1 gal.     L                                                             Half                 10       567       5670
                                                                                                                                                    Dwarf Mat Rush                                                                                                           Quarter                       284          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Total                                  71726
                                                                                                                                                    Muhlenbergia rigens/ Deer grass                 5 gal.     L
                                                                                                                                                    Nandina domestica ‘Gulf stream’/                1 gal.     L                                                                         TotalShadeCoverage      181207 SF
                                                                                                           Stormwater treatment planter
                                                                                                                                                    Gulf stream heavenly bamboo                                                                                                          TotalParkingLot         354956 SF
                                                                                                                                                    Phormium tenax ‘Monrovia Red’ /                 15 gal.    L                                                                         ShadePercentage             51% PER CITY OF ELK GROVE
                                                                                                                                                    Monrovia Red New Zealand Flax                                                                                                                                            50% OF PARKING LOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NEEDS TO BE SHADED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IRRIGATION SYSTEM STATEMENT
                                                                                                                                                    GROUND COVERS:
                                                                                                                                                    Cotoneaster dammeri ‘Coral Beauty’ /            1 gal.     L            The irrigation system will be a water efficient low flow, point source system
                                                                                                                                                    Coral Beauty Bearberry Cotoneaster                                      designed to provide adequate watering to support plant growth and insure
                                                                                                                                                    Lantana hyb. ‘Spreading Sunshine /              1 gal.     L            deeply rooted plant material while avoiding excess water application. The
                                                                                                                                                    Spreading Sunshine (Yellow) Lantana                                     system will be programmable, allowing operation during late night and or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            early morning hours, with multiple start times and cycles. The system will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            interface with a weather based sensor that will adjust the amount of water
                                                                                                                                                    ORNAMENTAL GRASS:                                                       applied to the plant material based on daily weather conditions. Irrigation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            materials specified for the site will be selected on the basis of durability and
                                                                                                                                                    Festuca mairei / Atlas Fescue                   1 gal.     L            ease of maintenance. Landscape irrigation will comply with the California
                                                                                                                                                    Helictotrichon sempervirens/                    5 gal.     L            Department of Water Resources Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordi-
                                                                                                                                                    Blue Oat Grass                                                          nance (MWELO).
                                                                                                                                                    Panicum virgatum 'Shenandoah'/                  5 gal.     L
              Stormwater treatment planter
                                                                                                                                                    Shenandoah Switch Grass                                                                                                                                                  0       25'        50'                100'
                                                                                                                                                    Pennisetum alopecuroides/                       5 gal.     L
                                                                                                                                                    Dwarf Fountain Grass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SCALE 1" = 50'
                                                                                                                                                    SUCCULENTS

                                                                                                                                                    Agave parryi var. truncata/ Aritchoke agave
                                                                                                                                                    Aga                                             1 gal.     L      Do not plant in high traffic pedestrain areas

                                                                                                                                                    STORMWATER TREATMENT PLANTERS
                                                                                                                                                    ST
                                                                                                                                                    Ca
                                                                                                                                                    Carpenteria  califonica/ Bush anemone           5 gal.     L
                                                                                                           Stormwater treatment planter             Deschampsia cespitosa/ Tufted Hairgrass
                                                                                                                                                    De                                              1 gal.     L
             Stormwater treatment planter
                                                                                                                                                    JJuncus patens ‘Elk Blue’ /                     1 gal.     L
                                                                                                                                                     Elk Blue Gray Rush
                                                                                                                                                     Muhlenbergia rigens/ Deer Grass                1 gal.     L
                                                                                                                                                     Rosa californica/ California Rose              5 gal.     L


                                                                                                                                                    WUCOL LEGEND                                                       EVERGREEN TREE COUNTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *Denotes Evergreen Tree
                                                                                                                                                     VL   Very Low Water Use                                           Total Trees:         340

                                                                                                                                                     L    Low Water Use                                                Required Evergreen:           102 (30%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Provided Evergreen:           276 (92%)
                                                                                                                                                    M     Medium Water Use
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DAVID BABCOCK         ASSOCIATES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ARCHITECTURE   LANDSCAPE   PLANNING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3581 MT. DIABLO BLVD. , SUITE 235
                                                                                                                                                   LANDSCAPE AREA DATA                                                   24” BOX TREE COUNTS                                                                                       LAFAYETTE, CALIFORNIA 94549
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T: 925.283.5070

                                                                                                                                                   Total Site Area:                     17.2 AC (745,570 SF)             Total Trees:          340
                                                                                                                                                   Parking Lot Area:                    354,956 SF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Required:             113 (33%)                                                                         CW 12-0100
                                                                                                                                                   Required Landscape Area:             70.991 SF (20% parking lot)      Provided:             340 (100%)                                                                        0008.P.221
                                                                                                                                                   Provided Landscape Area:             102,036 SF (28%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 January 8, 2016
                                                        Existing Street Trees   Stormwater treatment
                                                        to Remain               planters




                                                                                                                 CONCEPT LANDSCAPE PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                    12   of 17

28   ELK GROVE,      CALIFORNIA
                                                                                                                               NOTES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LEGEND




                                                                                                                                                                                                    NO.   REVISION   BY   NO.            REVISION   BY
OF
                                                  DATE




          SHEET
                                       SCALE



                  JOB NO.




                                                                                TOPOGRAPHIC SURVEY                                     k
                            DESIGNER




                                                                                                                                               KIER & WRIGHT
13 OF




                                                                                          OF THE                                           w
                                                                                                                                               CIVIL ENGINEERS & SURVEYORS, INC.
   4 17




                                                                           LAGUNA RIDGE CITY CENTER COSTCO SITE                                2850 Collier Canyon Road      Phone (925) 245-8788
    C1




                                                                                           FOR                                                 Livermore, California 94551     Fax (925) 245-8796
                                       1" = 50'




SHEETS
                                                  DEC, 2015




                  A13570
                            SMC




                                                              ELK GROVE,
                                                                            COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION          CALIFORNIA
29
30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      X




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            X




                                                                                                                                                                                              SECTION X-X




            OIL/WATER SEPARATOR DETAIL
                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                   A




                                                                                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DETAIL HEREON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SEE OIL/WATER SEPARATOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LEGEND




                                                                                                                                                                                                            NO.                             REVISION   BY   NO.            REVISION       BY
 OF
                                                               DATE




           SHEET
                                                    SCALE




                                                                               PRELIMINARY GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN
                           JOB NO.




                                                                                                                                            k
                                         DESIGNER




                                                                                                                                                    KIER & WRIGHT
 14 OF




                                                                                                       OF THE                                   w
                                                                                                                                                    CIVIL ENGINEERS & SURVEYORS, INC.
    4 17




                                                                                        LAGUNA RIDGE CITY CENTER COSTCO SITE                        2850 Collier Canyon Road      Phone (925) 245-8788
     C2




                                                                                                        FOR                                         Livermore, California 94551     Fax (925) 245-8796
 SHEETS
                                                    1" = 50'
                                                               DEC, 2015




                           A13570
                                         SMC




                                                                           ELK GROVE,
                                                                                         COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION          CALIFORNIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEGEND




                                                                                                                                                                                            NO.   REVISION   BY   NO.       REVISION   BY
OF
                                                  DATE




          SHEET
                                       SCALE




                                                                                     UTILITY PLAN
                  JOB NO.




                                                                                                                               k
                            DESIGNER




                                                                                                                                       KIER & WRIGHT
15 OF




                                                                                          OF THE                                   w
                                                                                                                                       CIVIL ENGINEERS & SURVEYORS, INC.
   4 17




                                                                           LAGUNA RIDGE CITY CENTER COSTCO SITE                        2850 Collier Canyon Road      Phone (925) 245-8788
    C3




                                                                                           FOR                                         Livermore, California 94551     Fax (925) 245-8796
SHEETS
                                       1" = 50'
                                                  DEC, 2015




                  A13570
                            SMC




                                                              ELK GROVE,
                                                                            COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION          CALIFORNIA
31
32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       X




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      X




                                                                                                                                                                                         SECTION X-X




                                                                                           TREATMENT PLANTER CALCULATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                               A




                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEGEND




                                                                                                                                                                                                       NO.   REVISION            BY   NO.   REVISION       BY
 OF
                                                   DATE




           SHEET
                                        SCALE




                                                                             STORM WATER QUALITY CONTROL PLAN
                   JOB NO.




                                                                                                                                         k
                             DESIGNER




                                                                                                                                                 KIER & WRIGHT
 16 OF




                                                                                           OF THE                                            w
                                                                                                                                                 CIVIL ENGINEERS & SURVEYORS, INC.
    4 17




                                                                            LAGUNA RIDGE CITY CENTER COSTCO SITE                                 2850 Collier Canyon Road      Phone (925) 245-8788
     C4




                                                                                                    FOR                                          Livermore, California 94551     Fax (925) 245-8796
 SHEETS
                                        1" = 50'
                                                   DEC, 2015




                   A13570
                             SMC




                                                               ELK GROVE,
                                                                             COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION                   CALIFORNIA
17 33
of   17
     Exhibit C                                                                                                      EXHIBIT C
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Conditions of Approval

                                                                                                                     Verification
                                                                                        Timing/      Enforcement/
                               Conditions of Approval                                                                (date and
                                                                                    Implementation    Monitoring
                                                                                                                     Signature)
     ON-GOING
          Development and operation of the proposed Project shall be
     1.                                                                               On-Going         Planning
          consistent with the Project Description and Project Plans as provided
          in Exhibits A and B, incorporated herein by this reference. Deviations
          from the approved plans shall be reviewed by the City for substantial
          compliance and may require amendment by the appropriate
          hearing body.
          This action does not relieve the Applicant of the obligation to comply
     2.                                                                             On-GoingOn-        Planning
          with all ordinances, statutes, regulations, and procedures.
                                                                                       Going
           The Applicant/Property Owner and any Successors in Interest
     3.                                                                               On-Going         Planning
           (hereby referred to as the “Applicant”) shall indemnify, protect,
           defend, and hold harmless the City, its officers, officials, agents,
           employees, and volunteers from and against any and all claims,
           damages, demands, liability, costs, losses or expenses including
           without limitation court costs, reasonable attorney’s fees and expert
           witness fees arising out of this Project including challenging the
           validity of this approval or any environmental or other
           documentation related to approval of this Application.
           Except as otherwise specified or provided for in the Project plans or
     4.                                                                               On-Going         Planning
           in these conditions, the Project shall conform to the development
           standards and design requirements adopted by the City of Elk
           Grove, specifically including but not limited to the following:
               • Laguna Ridge Specific Plan
               • The Elk Grove Zoning Code (Title 23 of the EGMC)
               • EGMC Chapter 19.12 (Tree Preservation and Protection)
               • EGMC        Chapter     14-10    (Water     Efficient  Landscape
                   Requirements)




     Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Page 22 of 31
34
Exhibit C
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Conditions of Approval

                                                                                                                 Verification
                                                                                     Timing/      Enforcement/
                          Conditions of Approval                                                                 (date and
                                                                                 Implementation    Monitoring
                                                                                                                 Signature)
      The Applicant shall design and construct all improvements in
5.                                                                                 On-Going         Planning
      accordance with the City of Elk Grove Improvement Standards and
      Construction Specifications, as further conditioned herein, and to the                      Engineering
      satisfaction of the City. All street improvements shall include vertical                      SCWA
      curb and gutter, except as approved by Engineering, in which case                              SASD
      street improvements shall include rolled curb and gutter. Specific                            SMUD
      locations on median(s) that require emergency vehicle access will                             PG&G
      be evaluated during review and acceptance of the Improvement
      Plans.

      Public sewer, water, and other utility infrastructure shall be designed
      and constructed with the standards of the appropriate utility.
      The Applicant shall pay all plan check fees, impact fees, or other
6.                                                                                 On-Going        Planning
      costs as required by the City, the Cosumnes Community Services
                                                                                                  Engineering
      District (CCSD), Sacramento Area Sewer District (SASD), Sacramento
                                                                                                    CCSD
      County Water Agency (SCWA), or other agencies or services
                                                                                                    SCWA
      providers as established by law.
                                                                                                     SASD
      Approval of this Project does not relieve the Applicant from the
7.                                                                                 On-Going        Planning
      requirements of subsequent permits and approvals, including but not
                                                                                                  Engineering
      limited to the following as may be applicable:
                                                                                                    Building
           • Grading Permit and Improvement Plan
                                                                                                     CCSD
           • Building Permit and Certificate of Occupancy
                                                                                                     SCWA
           • Requirements of the Sacramento Metropolitan Air Quality
                                                                                                      SASD
              Management District
           • Fire Permit




Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Page 23 of 31
                                                                                                                                35
     Exhibit C
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Conditions of Approval

                                                                                                                         Verification
                                                                                             Timing/      Enforcement/
                                Conditions of Approval                                                                   (date and
                                                                                         Implementation    Monitoring
                                                                                                                         Signature)
           The Applicant shall record or provide evidence of prior recordation
     8.                                                                                    On-Going         Planning
           of the Laguna Ridge Specific Plan Mitigation Monitoring and
           Reporting Program (MMRP) for all parcels included in this Project,
           132-2120-005, -009, and -010. Prior to issuance of any grading
           permits, comply with, record, and pay fees for the MMRP associated
           with the Project. Until the MMRP has been recorded and the
           estimated MMRP fee of $5,000 has been paid, no grading, building,
           sewer connection, water connection, or occupancy permit from the
           City will be approved.
           No building mounted signage shall be permitted along the southern
     9.                                                                                    On-Going         Planning
           building elevation facing Civic Center Drive.
           The subject project owner(s) and successors in interest thereof, shall
     10.                                                                                   On-Going          SASD
           be responsible for repair and/or replacement of all non-asphalt
           and/or enhanced surface treatments of streets and drives (such as
           stamped/colored/decorative concrete, concrete pavers, etc.)
           within these easements damaged by SASD maintenance and repair
           operations, including landscaping, channelizations, lighting, fountain
           area, sidewalk, and any other appurtenances conflicting therein. This
           requirement shall be set forth in easement grant documents and be
           a covenant running with the land, be responsibility of successors in
           interest in future land transfers and divisions and by language
           approved by SASD.
           All commercial structures shall display a street number in a prominent
     11.                                                                                   On-Going          EGPD
           position so that it is easily visible from the street. The numbers shall be
           at least six (6) inches in height, of a color contrasting to the
           background, and located so they may be clearly seen and read.
           The numbers shall be illuminated during darkness. If the structure has
           rear vehicle access, numbers should be placed there as well.
           Any building having a separate identifying factor other than the
     12.                                                                                   On-Going          EGPD
           street number shall be clearly identified. Each individual unit shall
           have a unit identifying number, letter, or combination thereof,
           prominently displayed.


     Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Page 24 of 31
36
Exhibit C
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Conditions of Approval

                                                                                                               Verification
                                                                                 Timing/       Enforcement/
                         Conditions of Approval                                                                (date and
                                                                             Implementation     Monitoring
                                                                                                               Signature)
       Maps of the complex shall be furnished to the Police and Fire
13.                                                                                On-Going       EGPD
       Departments upon completion of construction. The maps shall
       include building identification and unit identification.
       Secure fencing around the construction site with locking gates, and
14.                                                                                On-Going       EGPD
       appropriate lighting, shall be installed during construction to prevent
       trespassing and theft. During construction, the Police Department
       shall be given emergency contact information of contractors and
       Owners for any problems encountered after normal construction
       hours.
PRIOR TO OR IN CONJUNCTION WITH IMPROVEMENT AND/OR GRADING PLAN SUBMITTAL OR APPROVAL
       Connection to the SASD sewer system shall be required to the              Improvement       SASD
15.
       satisfaction of SASD. SASD Design Standards apply to any on-site and           Plans
       off-site sewer construction.
       Each parcel with a sewage source shall have a separate connection         Improvement       SASD
16.
       to the SASD public sewer system. If there is more than one building in         Plans
       any single parcel and the parcel is not proposed for split, then each
       building on that parcel shall have a separate connection to a
       private on-site sewer line or the SASD public sewer line.
       Sewer service laterals shall not be permitted to connect directly to      Improvement       SASD
17.
       the 24” diameter trunk sewer line within Civic Center Drive.                   Plans
       Sewer easements shall be required. All sewer easements shall be           Improvement       SASD
18.
       dedicated to SASD, in a form approved by the District Engineer and             Plans
       the City. All SASD sewer easements shall be at least 20 feet in width
       and ensure continuous access for installation and maintenance.
       SASD will provide maintenance only in public right-of-ways and in
       easements dedicated to SASD.
       Underground fire service water mains shall have a minimum of two          Improvement   Cosumnes Fire
19.
       points of connection to the city main.                                         Plans
       Building shall be provided with a minimum of two fire apparatus           Improvement   Cosumnes Fire
20.
       access points a minimum of 500’ apart.                                         Plans




Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Page 25 of 31
                                                                                                                              37
     Exhibit C
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Conditions of Approval

                                                                                                                        Verification
                                                                                           Timing/       Enforcement/
                                Conditions of Approval                                                                  (date and
                                                                                       Implementation     Monitoring
                                                                                                                        Signature)
           The Applicant shall prepare and submit a drainage study to the               Improvement      Engineering
     21.
           satisfaction of the City and in accordance with City of Elk Grove           Plan or Grading
           Storm Drainage Master Plan, Improvement Standards, General Plan,                Permit(s)
           and any other applicable drainage master plans or studies.                     Whichever
                                                                                         Occurs First
           The Applicant shall prepare and submit a Post-Construction                   Improvement      Engineering
     22.
           Stormwater Quality Control Plan in accordance with the City of Elk          Plan or Grading
           Grove Improvement Standards and most recent version of the                      Permit(s)
           Stormwater Quality Design Manual for the Sacramento Region. The                Whichever
           Applicant shall also submit a separate maintenance plan describing            Occurs First
           proper maintenance practices for the specific treatment controls to
           be constructed.
           The Applicant shall execute a maintenance agreement with the City            Improvement      Engineering
     23.
           for stormwater quality control treatment devices to the satisfaction of          Plans
           the City.
            The project’s most easterly driveway on Elk Grove Blvd shall be             Improvement      Engineering
     24.
           limited to right-in/right-out movements only.                                    Plans
            The Applicant shall install a traffic signal at the intersection of the     Improvement      Engineering
     25.
           Project’s main driveway, Elk Grove Blvd and Ginther Drive to the                 Plans
           satisfaction of the City.
            The Applicant shall design and install the intersection of the Project’s    Improvement      Engineering
     26.
           main driveway, Elk Grove Blvd and Ginther Drive to prohibit through              Plans
           movements to and from Ginther Drive. Ginther Drive shall be
           restricted to right-turn movements only. Intersection improvements
           shall be installed as identified in the Traffic Impact Analysis
           completed by Kittelson & Associates, Inc., dated April 2016,
           consistent with the City’s Improvement Standards, and to the
           satisfaction of the City.




     Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Page 26 of 31
38
Exhibit C
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Conditions of Approval

                                                                                                                Verification
                                                                                    Timing/      Enforcement/
                          Conditions of Approval                                                                (date and
                                                                                Implementation    Monitoring
                                                                                                                Signature)
      The Applicant shall design and construct the following improvements        Improvement     Engineering
27.
      as identified in the Traffic Impact Analysis completed by Kittelson &          Plans
      Associates, Inc., dated April 2016. Improvements shall be to the
      satisfaction of the City and in accordance with City’s Laguna Ridge
      Specific Plan; Improvement Standards; and Bicycle, Pedestrian and
      Trails Master Plan:.
           • Install multi-use trail and crossing treatments at driveways
              along Elk Grove Blvd adjacent to the Project’s frontage.
           • Modify the existing striped shoulder on Elk Grove Blvd to
              accommodate right-turn pockets and appropriate transitions
              at the Project’s driveways.
           • Extend the southbound left-turn pocket on Bruceville Road at
              Civic Center Drive to meet the required 250’ queuing
              storage.
           • Reserve parking spaces perpendicular to the easterly
              driveway, north of the first east-west drive aisle, for
              employees only through the use of signs, markings, etc.
           • Install a north-south pedestrian crossing with treatments at
              the intersection of Civic Center Drive and Babylon Drive.
      The Applicant shall design and install the shared access between           Improvement     Engineering
28.
      the Project and the adjacent APN 132-2120-008 (Dignity Health) as              Plans
      shown on Exhibit 1 below to the satisfaction of the City.
      Water supply will be provided by the Sacramento County Water               Improvement        SCWA
29.
      Agency.                                                                        Plans
      Provide public water service to each building.                             Improvement        SCWA
30.
                                                                                     Plans
      All water lines shall be located within a public right-of-way or within    Improvement        SCWA
31.
      easements dedicated to SCWA. Easements shall be reviewed and                   Plans
      approved by Sacramento County Water Agency prior to
      Improvement Plan approval or Final Map approval.




Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Page 27 of 31
                                                                                                                               39
     Exhibit C
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Conditions of Approval

                                                                                                                             Verification
                                                                                               Timing/       Enforcement/
                                 Conditions of Approval                                                                      (date and
                                                                                           Implementation     Monitoring
                                                                                                                             Signature)
           Destroy all abandoned wells on the proposed Project site in                      Improvement         SCWA
     32.
           accordance with the requirements of the Sacramento County                            Plans
           Environmental       Health     Division.         Clearly   show       all
           abandoned/destroyed wells on the improvement plans for the
           project. Prior to abandoning any existing agricultural wells, applicant
           shall use water from agricultural wells for grading and construction.
           Trees removed from the site as part of the Project shall require                 Improvement        Planning
     33.
           mitigation consistent with Chapter 19.12 (Tree Preservation and                      Plans
           Protection) of the Elk Grove Municipal Code.

     PRIOR TO OR IN CONJUNCTION WITH BUILDING PERMIT SUBMITTAL OR ISSUANCE
            Prior to issuance of a Building Permit, the Applicant shall (1) form or        Building Permit   Cosumnes Fire
     34.
            annex into an annual Mello-Roos Community Facilities District special
            tax for fire and emergency services or (2) pay an equivalent amount
            for fire and emergency services. Any costs for the approval and
            creation of such annual special tax, annexation of the property into
            a Mello-Roos Community Facilities District, or administration of the
            amount deposited to fund fire and emergency services, shall be
            paid from the annual special taxes of the Community Facilities
            District of the amount deposited with the Cosumnes Community
            Services District. The applicant shall notify all potential lot buyers prior
            to sale that this project is a part of a benefit assessment district and
            shall inform potential buyers of the special tax amount. Said
            notification shall be in a manner approved by the City. The
            applicant shall supplement these costs until sufficient revenue is
            provided by such special district. In the event the applicant fails to
            form or annex into a Community Facilities District or pay an
            equivalent amount as provided for herein for such purposes for the
            Cosumnes Community Services District, no further building permits for
            the property shall be issued.




     Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Page 28 of 31
40
Exhibit C
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Conditions of Approval

                                                                                                                  Verification
                                                                                    Timing/       Enforcement/
                          Conditions of Approval                                                                  (date and
                                                                                Implementation     Monitoring
                                                                                                                  Signature)
      The building shall be provided with a Fire Control Room.                  Building Permit   Cosumnes Fire
35.
      The Lot Line Adjustment establishing the parcel shown on the site         Building Permit    Engineering
36.
      plan shall be completed prior to the 1st Building Permit.
      The Applicant shall record a reciprocal access and parking                Building Permit    Engineering
37.
      agreement with the adjacent development to the west/north (EG-
      15-043, The Ridge) including but not limited to common area
      ownership, maintenance, drainage, joint access and parking to the
      satisfaction of the City.
      The Applicant shall record a reciprocal access agreement with the         Building Permit    Engineering
38.
      adjacent development to the east (Dignity Health) including but not
      limited to common area ownership, maintenance, drainage, and
      joint access to the satisfaction of the City.
      Any on-site traffic calming devices and locations shall be approved       Building Permit    Engineering
39.
      by the City prior to installation, including, but not limited to, speed
      bumps.
      The Applicant shall reconstruct any damaged curb, gutter, sidewalk        Building Permit    Engineering
40.
      and/or pavement caused by construction-related activities
      associated with the Project. If pavement replacement is necessary,
      as determined by the City, the Applicant may be required to grind,
      overlay, and/or slurry seal the damaged portion(s) in accordance
      with the City Improvement Standards and to the satisfaction of the
      City. The Applicant shall schedule an inspection with the City to
      document the pre-construction condition of existing surface
      infrastructure adjacent to and near the Project.
      The Applicant shall reconstruct any existing ADA compliance               Building Permit    Engineering
41.
      improvements adjacent to the Project to meet current standards.
      Prior to the issuance of building permits require water intensive         Building Permit      SCWA
42.
      commercial and industrial building permit applicants to conduct a
      water use efficiency review and submit the findings in required
      environmental documentation for the project.



Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Page 29 of 31
                                                                                                                                 41
     Exhibit C
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Conditions of Approval

                                                                                                                       Verification
                                                                                          Timing/       Enforcement/
                               Conditions of Approval                                                                  (date and
                                                                                      Implementation     Monitoring
                                                                                                                       Signature)
           The Applicant shall provide a delivery truck plan to the Planning          Building Permit     Planning
     43.
           Department prior to City issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
           identifying truck delivery routes and parking plans at the site. The
           plan shall demonstrate ability to queue delivery trucks on the Project
           site and in a location that minimizes idling of trucks (including use of
           any refrigerated trucks) near area residences to the satisfaction of
           the City. The truck plan shall also provide noise abatement strategies
           between all areas for such operations effectively reducing noise
           emissions to a level of 45 dB, as measured at the adjacent property
           line to the south.




     Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
     COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
     Page 30 of 31
42
Exhibit C
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Conditions of Approval

Exhibit 1 – Shared Driveway with Dignity Health




Planning Commission Resolution – Resolution 2016-XX | May 5, 2016
COSTCO WHOLESALE (EG-15-039)
Page 31 of 31
                                                                    43
                                                                                ATTACHMENT 2

     I am a resident of Elk Grove and I would just like to say that I look forward to a Costco in our
     community.

     What is a bio retention area (trees?) 2. Will there be a light at Babylon & Civic Center? 3.
     Will there be another light on EG Blvd to allow left turn into parking lot? 4. Can you
     clarify Costco wall lights on Civic Center - will they light up homes? 5. Will there be hour
     restrictions on delivery times? 6. Will there be hour restrictions on garbage pick up &
     parking lot cleaning?

     My name in s Lisa Aoun. I'm going to keep this short, as I guess You are very busy.
     I like the idea of a Costco nearby, however I am very concerned about the traffic this will
     produce. The area is already awful when it comes to the traffic, and there are really no ways
     around the area concerned.

     I don't know if it's too late, but I guarantee if you asked the citizens of this wonderful city, they
     would agree that this project should be moved Near Grant line Road. By the freeway.
     Easy access to everyone and not a big traffic problem.
     Please consider relocating this store.

     I’m one of the homeowners who will be affected by the proposed Costco and Costco Gas
     Station on the corner of Bruceville Rd. and Elk Grove Blvd. Since I won’t be able to attend
     the meeting tonight, I’d like to voice my opposition against this proposed development in
     the email.

     I’m against this proposed development because:

     1. The gas tanks will be too close to the neighborhood and is a threat to everyone’s safety.
     2. The increase in traffic will affect the safety of my children.
     3. The noise of unloading at night will affect the quality of our sleep and as a result affect the
     productivity during the day.
     4. Lastly and most importantly, the proposed Costco will decrease the house value of our
     neighborhood.

     As a small business owner and tax payer, I DO NOT approve the proposed Costco on the corner
     of Bruceville Rd. and Elk Grove Blvd. I understand the city needs the tax revenue, but don’t do it
     in my backyard. Please pick another site.

     Has the city and traffic engineers considered the egress routes on to elk grove blvd., the
     main corridor between hwy99 & I5. Without the ability to turn west on to elk grove blvd,
     coming out of the Costco parking lot, other intersections elk be overwhelmed with cars
     making u-turns. Also, traffic will naturally try to bypass that congestion which will result
     in additional traffic on civic center drive and congest the adjoining intersections which
     were designed primarily for residential traffic and mix with traffic from the shopping
     center traffic currently located directly across Bruceville Rd, to the west.




44
Unfortunately, I did make it to your development meeting yesterday night at City Hall at 6pm. I
have been an Elk Grove citizen since 2005 and I enjoy living in Elk Grove because of the family
community, great schools, and diverse population. Elk Grove has grown so much over the past
10 years I understand that growth is good for the city, but traffic is beginning to get worse as we
incurred more of these developments in the area, especially when the city is deciding to build a
Costco right in town where traffic is already bad. We have big stores like Target and Walmart
already close proximity to each other so do we really need another warehouse store like nearby.

Any thoughts of moving it to the highway 99 where the proposed EG Mall was being built? Just
a thought, traffic would be better and easier access in and out from the freeway.

Please do not approve the location of the Costco on Elk Grove and bruceville. The traffic is
already horrible and it will get worst. It already takes 30 minutes to get from franklin to
Hwy 99 as it is. I live near Franklin high school and hate having to drive up Elk Grove
Blvd from bruceville. Do not just approve this because the city wants the tax revenue.
Don't put greed before your residents. I do want a Costco but not in that location. All that
open land near grant line and 99 is primo real estate for the Costco and right near the
freeway

I am in favor of this development. As a resident of EG since 1988 I have been hoping for a more
upscale development for local shopping. EG has too many strip malls, poor centers like those
next to 99 at bond road. Time to step up our game. Require designs that appeal to the eys, i.e.
brick facades, distinct separate buildings, no huge walls of windows, no Kohls, Target type of
designs. Look at some store fronts in Scottsdale, Santa Barbara, Glen Ellen Illinois. Get some
style to make the visual experience more pleasing not just large.

Hello, I'm not sure where to write to. And missed the special meeting last night. I would
love to see Costco come here. First it would keep me out of that dangerous area of plight on
Stockton blvd. Next it would keep all the money it generates in our community. And
finally bring jobs to our city. And one more thing hopefully it would not be as crowded as
the Sacramento store. I hope this comes to fruition.

Thank you for the reply. I have a couple other suggestions. IF the Costco does in fact go into the
purposes location can the City Council, as part of the agreement, make Costco do the following:
- widen bruceville rd between Elk Grove Blvd and Whitlock parkway to 3 lanes

- add a dedicated right hand turn lane into the Costco parking from bruceville rd and from Elk
Grove Blvd. We do not want people slowing/stopping the flow of traffic just to pull in to the
parking lot. The dedicated lane will allow people the move over out of the way so traffic can
continue to flow.
- Put the gas pump in such an area that it will have easy in and easy out. If you look at the Costco
by Mack rd the line for the pumps ends up going out into the Main Street and the parking lot
making it impossible to navigate the parking lot. Yes it is 30 pumps versus 10 but like they say,
you build it and they will come!




                                                                                                       45
     The elevations for Costco (which are the only ones I looked at) were so drab! Folsom,
     Roseville, Rocklin get so much more out of design. Stacked stone would go a long way with
     these. Let's make it a nice project for the city and not just something drab and crappy
     looking for the neighborhood! Residents deserve nice design!

     I was not able to attend last night's meeting. Is there (or will there be) a place where I can either
     see footage, meeting minutes, displays, etc?
     Additionally, can you let me know how I can be notified of Planning Committee meetings and
     other news?

     Hi All,

     Just following up on the message I sent earlier via Facebook to share two photos of the
     driveway for the proposed Costco on the northbound lanes of Bruceville.

     One of the traffic engineers clearly stated a deceleration lane would be in addition to the
     existing lanes. Currently, there are two northbound lanes between Civic Center and Elk
     Grove Blvd. These photos taken on March 8, 2016 show sidewalk would have to be
     removed and the road widened, extending into the property to accommodate a turn lane.

     The section of Bruceville between Civic Center and Elk Grove Blvd. needs to be widened to
     three lanes.

     There are currently two northbound lanes leading up to the driveway into The Ridge.
     Immediately after the driveway, Bruceville widens, allowing two left turn lanes, three
     though lanes on northbound Bruceville, and one dedicated right turn lane. Congestion will
     increase with the addition of The Ridge shops and Costco. The traffic engineers
     acknowledged this in their Q&A at City Hall.

     I would recommend placing speed tables/humps on Civic Center between Bruceville and
     Bighorn. I walk/ride bikes with my kids on this section, and it's currently a mini-
     raceway/short cut for the Cosumnes Oaks High School traffic.

     Any stop signs/cross walks should be outfitted with flashing LED lights in sign and
     embedded in roadway. Stop signs are ignored blatantly in and around Laguna Ridge.

     I am concerned that the date of the traffic study was never clearly identified. It was asked
     how old the study was, yet none of the Costco team addressed that head on.

     If the study is more than 5 years old, it seems the data would be irrelevant given the
     construction of so many homes recently, the construction and growth of Cosumnes Oaks
     High School and Elizabeth Pinkerton Middle School in 2008, as well as the planned
     construction of a new elementary school in Laguna Ridge within the next two years which
     will quickly fill beyond capacity given the increased homebuilding.




46
Again, thank you for your time and leadership. A Costco will be a welcome addition to this
commercial space. I look forward to no longer driving to East Stockton Blvd. to shop. I
share this with you for your consideration as the project moves forward. I look forward to
more opportunities to discuss this matter at future public meetings.

Hello, I was at the meeting last night and have a clarification question. There is a traffic signal
proposed at EG Blvd. and Ginther. Will they be cutting through the median to construct this
intersection? I just can figure out how the traffic signal will work in this location. Seems way to
close to Bruceville. Thank you for your time.

I like Costco, but I'm concerned about the environmental effects of 30 gas pumps working
12+ hours a day, and cars idling in line as they wait. I can't believe that the people who live
close by would be happy about this - was there an environmental impact report? Typically,
Costcos are close to the freeways. Seems to me that Costco is bringing freeway congestion
to the middle of our neighborhood. Another big box store (such as Lowes, for example)
wouldn't encourage the same congestion as Costco. Also, where are the gas pumps on the
plans? Seems really deceptive, to NOT include them in the drawings...or can I just not see
them?

I found a couple of traffic studies online regarding Costco and also a comparison between the
traffic for a Costco, discount grocer and a traditional grocer. I think it could be helpful in
showing residents that their fears of this huge increase in traffic are unfounded. The link below is
to my website and the actual studies are linked there. I shared it on my Facebook page, Elk
Grove Laguna Forums too. There has been a lot of discussion on our page about Costco. I have
done my best to get people to understand the process and that this is a good project. I think it's
giving them a place to vent as well. There might be some concerns that can be addressed at the
PC meeting and CC meeting in the future.

Hello, I am a new resident of Elk Grove. I moved here from Fremont, CA. I would love to
see Costco in my new home town, as it brings jobs and tax revenue to the city.

I love, love Costco! But I do have grave concerns about Costco being on EG Blvd along with all
of the upcoming development including but not limited to future hospital, Civic Center complex,
aquatic center, etc etc. EG Blvd already has severe traffic issues and traffic will continue to
worsen with total gridlock. I know the City wants to grow but needs to address traffic issues so
we don't feel trapped in our homes not wanting to go out and deal with the traffic problems.

Approve! Too long waiting! Good retail. Good Sales tax Rev. Good jobs. A rare win win to
keep Elk Grove $ in Elk Grove. Thank you

Hi there,
I was unable to attend the planning meeting for the proposed Costco project and read with
interest the comments in the newspaper. I would like to voice mine as well.




                                                                                                       47
     While having a Costco in the Elk Grove area would be fantastic as I travel to Lodi currently to
     shop at Costco, I have concerns about putting a Costco with 30 fuel stations in a neighborhood.
     (Do we really need 30 fuel stations?)

     I have read the traffic study and feel that the traffic should have been measured on the weekends
     as well. On a typical Saturday, the traffic on Elk Grove Boulevard is heavy both directions at
     best. Elk Grove Blvd currently is not wide enough for current traffic levels and can't be
     expanded. A Costco would also produce more large trucks on Elk Grove Blvd creating additional
     slowing of traffic. Adding a Costco will create gridlock, not to mention the air pollution
     associated with it. Speaking of pollution, I reside in the Glenbrooke neighborhood and at night, I
     see the light pollution from the Auto Mall, and the Walmart. With the huge Costco proposal,
     there will be no chance to see stars at night.

     It does not make logical sense to put a Costco in the middle of a neighborhood. What about
     resale values? Who wants to look out of their window onto a Costco and hear the semi trucks
     loading and unloading merchandise, and hear the garbage trucks in the early morning or the
     middle of the night? (who would buy a house there?) I believe that putting the Costco in a
     neighborhood devalues those of us that have invested in Elk Grove as a "livable" community. I
     don't believe consideration has been given to the residents in this case.

     Why not build the Costco at the Grantline interchange? The access is great, the infrastructure is
     there and it may even encourage the mall development. It would help to alleviate the eyesore that
     the decrepit mall is right now. It would also make more sense to have the 30 fuel stations with
     better access to the freeway than in a neighborhood.

     Thank you so much for hearing my viewpoint.

     We live on Darley Way, approximately three blocks from the proposed Costco. While it
     was initially exciting to think that we would not have to battle the parking lot problem at
     Costco's So. Sacramento location, we learned that the E. Stockton Blvd. Costco will be
     closing to "the public" within a year. (The site is to become a pick-up for merchants
     ordering online, we were told by an employee of that store.) Then we realized that all the
     traffic at E. Stockton Blvd. would be OUR traffic, but without a nearby freeway exit, thus
     making Elk Grove Blvd., Bruceville, and even Civic Center Drive unnavigable during
     daylight hours. This is, in fact, a terrible location for a store engendering the traffic that
     Costco does in the So. Sacramento County area. Additionally, there are multiple middle
     and high schools in the area, with pedestrians, bicyclists, and skateboarders using
     Bruceville and Big Horn Blvd. twice daily to attend school; this is a population not known
     to be particularly heedful of traffic. While we understand Costco's hesitancy about being
     the only big-box store at the previous mall site, we are certain that the Bruceville/Elk
     Grove Blvd location for Costco is a mistake Elk Grove City Council will regret for decades,
     if it is allow to go forward. Please forward our dissent to the Council members.

     Just wanted to drop you an email to say that we are highly in favor of the new Costco and the
     Ridge Shopping Center on the corner of Bruceville and Elk Grove Blvd. It will not bring any
     more crime or traffic to the area that is already here. It definitely will bring much needed tax




48
revenue into Elk Grove as people from Elk Grove will no longer go to the Stockton Blvd,
Sunrise or Cal Expo Costco! People don’t go to a specific area to commit a crime they commit
by convenience. I would bet that if we were able to check the crime that happens at a Costco it is
very low. Their parking lots are patrolled so that is an added bonus!

Will this effect property values in a negative or positive way or any effect at all? I do leave
in the area that the project is planning to be build.

WE NEED MORE RETAIL IN ELK GROVE. COSTCO AND THE RIDGE SHOPPING CENTER
THERE AT BRUCEVILLE WOULD BE GREAT. MY FAMILY CAN'T WAIT FOR NEW OPTIONS
AND STORES TO CHOOSE FROM.

The traffic patterns and traffic is getting worse with all the housing, now more large commercial in
the heart of what is a very busy roadways and intersection. All I can say, I hope the planning takes
into consideration the traffic this will create and start planning how to reduce traffic on busy roads,
not add to it.

Should there be gas pumps next to a medical facility?

I thoroughly support the Costco project. I live two blocks from the proposed site and look forward
to it and the revenue it will bring to Elk Grove.

Hello-- I have lived in Elk Grove for nearly nine years, purchasing a home in the Madeira neighborhood
near Civic Center Drive and Bruceville. Just want to provide two comments to the planning department
and I hope these comments will reach that division. First, congratulations on the new directional signs
that have been going up around town. They are great! It helps us to be a welcoming city. Second, just
want to express my support for the proposed Costco at the corner of Bruceville and Elk Grove. Costco
will bring in good jobs for hundreds of people, provide affordable food and goods and additional sales tax
dollars to the city. While I know that not all residents support this project, given what the zoning in that
area, there is not a better option and the City should ensure that the Costco be built. It will be a great
addition to the City. Thank you for all that you do to make our City great! I love living here.




                                                                                                               49
50
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Bruceville Rd -- Elk Grove Blvd                                                                                       QC JOB #: 13590422
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                       DATE: Thu, Sep 24 2015
                     1236          1133                            Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  1.0        0.8

                     259 690 287
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                                  1.2 0.3 2.4


       1565   393                         235    1808
                                                                                                                     1.0   0.3                      1.7      1.0
              1137          0.96          1154
                                                                                                                           1.1                      1.0
       1651   121                         419    1558
                                                                                                                     0.8   0.0                      0.5      1.6

                     136 476 179
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.8 3.4

                     1230          791
                                                                                                                                  0.3        1.3



                             8                                                                                                     0    1    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

              4                             3                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                             1                                                                                                     0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                          NA




              NA                           NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                Bruceville Rd                      Bruceville Rd               Elk Grove Blvd            Elk Grove Blvd                Total      Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left           Thru Right     U           Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM     17            18     14     0            23      37     16     2       26    85     12      0    19    83     14    0              366
    4:05 PM     11            53     14     0             8      51     25     3       33    51      6      1    41    61     14    0              372
    4:10 PM     11            12     19     0            13      33     14     8       19   107      9      3    27   109     18    0              402
    4:15 PM     15            49     12     0            27      79     25     5       13    49      6      2    30    58     16    1              387
    4:20 PM      9            19     15     0            17      25     18     5       30    86     10      2    40    89     12    1              378
    4:25 PM     11            33     13     0            12      76     24     4       29    52     10      3    35    82      9    0              393
    4:30 PM      8            21      9     0            20      46     13     4        9   101     18      1    19   115     12    0              396
    4:35 PM      7            41     16     0            12      66     21     1       27    56      6      1    40    71     12    0              377
    4:40 PM      5            28     16     0            21      33     17     6       22    97     17      1    22    97     26    0              408
    4:45 PM      5            52     14     0             8      65     16     4       28    63     11      2    34    73     17    0              392
    4:50 PM     14            36     15     1            19      33     23     7       27    93     13      0    48    81     19    0              429
    4:55 PM     14            42     13     1            16      61     19     6       30    80     13      0    26    58     11    0              390            4690
    5:00 PM     14            31     13     0            28      44     24     2       27    66     11      3    24   106     27    0              420            4744
    5:05 PM      8            50     18     0            15      58     23     6       29    90     17      2    43    96     20    0              475            4847
    5:10 PM     10            37      9     0            20      39     21     4       24   131      8      0    22    96     19    0              440            4885
    5:15 PM     13            60     13     0            18      65     17     3       34    89      9      0    30    67     21    1              440            4938
    5:20 PM      9            35      7     1            15      54     10     7       34   130     12      2    32   106     19    0              473            5033
    5:25 PM     11            45     23     0            18      84     24     4       38    72      5      2    35    83     15    0              459            5099
    5:30 PM     20            20     10     0            22      39     16     6       28   115      9      1    32   114     23    0              455            5158
    5:35 PM      7            60     14     0            24      65     19     1       34    58      7      0    60    95     20    0              464            5245
    5:40 PM     12            31     20     0            26      54     26     7       27   123     16      1    24   123     22    0              512            5349
    5:45 PM      8            35     20     0            22      60     30     0       40    74      5      3    32    73     17    0              419            5376
    5:50 PM     15            35     17     0            21      61     27     4       28    83      9      0    35   109     17    0              461            5408
    5:55 PM      8            37     15     0            12      67     22     2       33   106     13      3    49    86     15    0              468            5486
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                         Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left          Thru Right     U           Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                     Total
  All Vehicles 156          444     176     0           288     632    244   56       356 1184     128      8   464 1328     260    0                     5724
 Heavy Trucks    0             8      8                  12       0      0              4    20      0            4     8      4                           68
  Pedestrians                  4                                 12                           4                         4                                  24
    Bicycles     0             0      0                   0       0      0              0     0      0            0     0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                             SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                                                                                                                         97
     Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
      LOCATION: Wymark Dr -- Elk Grove Blvd                                                                                            QC JOB #: 13590423
      CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                              90          138                            Peak-Hour: 4:55 PM -- 5:55 PM                                  0.0        0.7

                              15    10    65
                                                                        Peak 15-Min: 4:55 PM -- 5:10 PM
                                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0


            1735   19                            116   1826
                                                                                                                           0.8   0.0                      0.9      0.8
                   1320            0.96         1687
                                                                                                                                 1.4                      0.8
            1383   44                             23   1427
                                                                                                                           1.3   0.0                      0.0      1.3

                              29    7     40
                                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0

                              75          76
                                                                                                                                        0.0        0.0



                                    0                                                                                                    0    0    0



                                                                                                                                 0                          0

                   0                               3                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                                 0                          0

                                    1                                                                                                    1    0    0




                                   NA                                                                                                         NA




                   NA                            NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                                   NA                                                                                                         NA



      5-Min Count                   Wymark Dr                         Wymark Dr                   Elk Grove Blvd            Elk Grove Blvd               Total      Hourly
          Period                   (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                            Totals
      Beginning At      Left        Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
         4:00 PM         2            0      2     0            6       3      2     0         3   115      2      1     6   115      6    0             263
         4:05 PM         5            1      5     0            3       0      1     0         1   116      1      0     1   143      7    0             284
         4:10 PM         1            1      3     0            2       1      1     0         0    84      4      0     8   145      6    0             256
         4:15 PM         0            2      5     0            0       1      1     0         0   115      6      0     4   156      4    0             294
         4:20 PM         2            0      0     0            3       1      0     0         4    89      3      0     3   102      4    0             211
         4:25 PM         0            0      4     0            4       1      0     0         1    94      1      0     4   129      7    0             245
         4:30 PM         1            0      7     0            8       0      2     0         0   110      4      0     2   128      7    0             269
         4:35 PM         2            0      4     0            4       0      0     0         0   101      1      1     0   162      9    1             285
         4:40 PM         4            0      2     0            8       1      0     0         2    94      2      0     3   109      8    1             234
         4:45 PM         1            1      4     0            6       1      0     0         1   117      6      0     0   153      8    0             298
         4:50 PM         1            1      9     0           10       1      1     0         3    69      4      1     4   133     10    0             247
         4:55 PM         0            0      4     0            3       0      1     0         0   117      4      0     2   177     14    0             322            3208
         5:00 PM         7            0      4     0            6       0      1     0         2    87      2      1     2   112      9    0             233            3178
         5:05 PM         4            1      7     0            3       2      1     0         1   118      3      0     1   164     15    0             320            3214
         5:10 PM         2            3      2     0            7       0      1     0         1   119      2      0     2   123      6    0             268            3226
         5:15 PM         3            1      7     0            4       0      2     0         1    98      4      0     0   123      6    0             249            3181
         5:20 PM         0            0      2     0           10       0      1     0         1   110      3      1     2   147     12    0             289            3259
         5:25 PM         1            0      3     0            6       1      2     0         0   100      8      0     2   157     10    0             290            3304
         5:30 PM         3            0      2     0            6       2      0     0         1    87      5      0     3   127     10    1             247            3282
         5:35 PM         4            1      2     0            1       0      1     0         0   121      4      0     1   147     12    1             295            3292
         5:40 PM         4            0      3     0            6       3      0     0         4    73      1      1     2   120      6    0             223            3281
         5:45 PM         0            0      2     0            9       1      2     0         3   142      7      1     4   174      9    0             354            3337
         5:50 PM         1            1      2     0            4       1      3     0         1   148      1      0     0   116      7    0             285            3375
         5:55 PM         1            2      2     0            7       0      2     0         1   107      5      1     1   141      6    0             276            3329
      Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                        Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
        Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                    Total
       All Vehicles      44           4     60     0           48       8     12     0        12 1288      36      4    20 1812     152    0                    3500
      Heavy Trucks        0           0      0                  0       0      0               0    16      0            0    20      0                          36
       Pedestrians                    0                                 0                            0                         4                                  4
         Bicycles         1           0      0                 0        0      0               0     0      0            0     0      0                           1
        Railroad
     Stopped Buses
      Comments:
     Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

98
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Big Horn Blvd -- Elk Grove Blvd                                                                                     QC JOB #: 13590424
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                     726          557                            Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  0.3        0.9

                     242 322 162
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:45 PM -- 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.6 0.0


       1844   232                        193   1950
                                                                                                                   0.8   0.9                      0.0      0.7
              1107         0.96         1449
                                                                                                                         1.7                      0.9
       1430   91                         308   1432
                                                                                                                   1.5   0.0                      0.0      1.4

                     84 195 158
                                                                                                                                1.2 1.5 0.6

                     710          437
                                                                                                                                0.3        1.1



                            3                                                                                                    0    1    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

              3                            0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                            5                                                                                                    0    2    0




                           NA                                                                                                         NA




              NA                         NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count               Big Horn Blvd                     Big Horn Blvd               Elk Grove Blvd            Elk Grove Blvd                Total      Hourly
     Period                (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left          Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM      4           11     16     0            8      26     22     0       23    51      9     8     19    91     25     3             316
    4:05 PM      8           28     11     0           13      20     14     2       11   123      8     5     18   131     20     0             412
    4:10 PM      5           10     12     0           12      20     34     0       12    69      4     4     22   116     14     0             334
    4:15 PM      6           13     18     0           14      23     26     0        7    95      8     4      9   121     19     1             364
    4:20 PM      6           15     11     0           13      20     12     0       15    92      4     8     22    96     13     1             328
    4:25 PM      7           12     11     0           19      26     23     1       13    55      1     3     11   108     12     0             302
    4:30 PM      2           18     10     0            7      19     16     0       19   107      6     5     19   113     19     3             363
    4:35 PM     10           15     11     0           21      18     26     0        9    74     10     4     16   133     18     1             366
    4:40 PM      7           17     12     0           13      26     11     0       22    93      2     5     27   113     18     1             367
    4:45 PM      6           13     16     0           23      21     26     1       12   108      5     3     14   118     23     0             389
    4:50 PM      4           10     13     0            6      14     17     0       11    73      3     4     25   138     15     0             333
    4:55 PM      6           20     20     0           15      21     23     0       13    77      2     4     13   147     14     0             375            4249
    5:00 PM      8            9     12     0            7      27     26     0       13    95      8     8     25   107     14     3             362            4295
    5:05 PM      6           21     11     0           15      19     24     1       15    90      9     1     15   129     17     0             373            4256
    5:10 PM      2           10      8     0           14      25     14     0       23   104      6     4     37   118     10     0             375            4297
    5:15 PM     10           14     11     0           20      33     19     1       10    94      8     4      9   102     21     1             357            4290
    5:20 PM      5           14      9     0           18      37     23     0       14    75      5     6     32   138     18     2             396            4358
    5:25 PM      7           18     13     0           14      22     21     1       13    93      7     4     23   128     22     0             386            4442
    5:30 PM      3            7     12     0            7      34     14     1       15    85      3    10     32   134     17     2             376            4455
    5:35 PM      9           12     14     0           16      21     27     1       10    88     11     4     21   106     17     0             357            4446
    5:40 PM      9           24     14     0            7      32     14     0       16    67      6     5     41   124     16     0             375            4454
    5:45 PM      8           13     16     0           14      24     20     0       11    91      8     6     19   148     14     1             393            4458
    5:50 PM      8           31     25     0           13      27     22     0       16   118      9    10     22    95     19     1             416            4541
    5:55 PM      9           22     13     0           11      21     18     1        7   107     11     7     21   120      8     1             377            4543
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                        Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left         Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles 100         264     216     0          152     288    240     4      136 1264     112    92    248 1452     164    12                    4744
 Heavy Trucks    0            0      0                  0       4      0              0    16      0            0     4      0                           24
  Pedestrians                 4                                 4                           4                         0                                  12
    Bicycles     0            2      0                  0       0      0              0     0      0            0     0      0                            2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                                                                                                                       99
  Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
   LOCATION: Laguna Springs Dr -- Elk Grove Blvd                                                                                QC JOB #: 13590425
   CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                       314          225                            Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                 1.6        0.9

                       117 73 124
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 4.0


         1961   94                          87   1978
                                                                                                                    0.6   1.1                      1.1      0.6
                1286         0.94         1752
                                                                                                                          1.4                      0.6
         1421   41                         139   1558
                                                                                                                    1.3   0.0                      0.0      1.7

                        79    57 148
                                                                                                                                 2.5 0.0 2.0

                       253          284
                                                                                                                                 0.0        1.8



                              0                                                                                                   0    1    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

                12                           0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          1

                              2                                                                                                   0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                        NA




                NA                         NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                        NA



   5-Min Count           Laguna Springs Dr                  Laguna Springs Dr              Elk Grove Blvd            Elk Grove Blvd               Total      Hourly
       Period              (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                            Totals
   Beginning At      Left Thru Right       U            Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
      4:00 PM         11     6     14      0             14      8      9     0         6    68      4      1     6   143      9    2             301
      4:05 PM          6     9      7      0             10      5      7     0        15   106      0      0    18   113      7    1             304
      4:10 PM          8     2     10      0             11      7     10     0         4   104      1      0     7   163      7    0             334
      4:15 PM          4     5     16      0              6      7     11     0         8   110      5      3     8   110      6    0             299
      4:20 PM          4     4      9      0             12      4      7     0         8    95      4      3     1   150      6    0             307
      4:25 PM          4     3     10      0              7      7     12     0         7    84      2      1    10   133      7    0             287
      4:30 PM          4     5     15      0              8      2      5     0         6   108      1      0     3   127      9    0             293
      4:35 PM          5    10     13      0             15      8     12     0        10   107      2      5     8   140      7    0             342
      4:40 PM          6     5     13      0             20      4     12     0         9    99      4      2    12   154     10    2             352
      4:45 PM          7    10      6      0             13      6      7     0         8   126      2      5     9   131      7    0             337
      4:50 PM          5     6     12      0              9      5      9     0         4    97      1      1     6   194      7    0             356
      4:55 PM          5     8      9      0              9      7      9     0         8    84      3      1     9   120      5    2             279            3791
      5:00 PM          8     5      7      0              4      0     15     0         6   108      3      0     2   141      5    0             304            3794
      5:05 PM          8     1     10      0             16      7     10     0         5   119      2      1     8   129      6    0             322            3812
      5:10 PM          3     6     15      0             11      1     16     0         6   114      3      1     7   132      6    0             321            3799
      5:15 PM         12     9     13      0             19      5     11     0         8    86      2      1    15   154      9    0             344            3844
      5:20 PM          3     3     12      0             11      7      7     0         5   117      2      0     8   186      8    0             369            3906
      5:25 PM          2     7     11      0              9     10     14     0         7   119      4      1    10   144     11    0             349            3968
      5:30 PM         14     4     10      0             15      6      9     0         7    76      2      0     8   139      5    0             295            3970
      5:35 PM          7     4     12      0              7     15      7     0         5    92      3      2    24   132      9    0             319            3947
      5:40 PM          9     5     15      0              6      4      5     0         8    98      4      1    13   165     10    0             343            3938
      5:45 PM          2     3     15      0              9      9      8     0         8   106      4      2    17   156      4    0             343            3944
      5:50 PM          7     4     18      0              7      3      8     0         7   130     10      1    11   142      6    0             354            3942
      5:55 PM          4     6     10      0             10      6      7     0         9   121      2      3    16   132      8    0             334            3997
   Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                          Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
     Flowrates       Left Thru Right       U            Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                    Total
    All Vehicles      68    76    144      0            156     88    128     0        80 1288      32      8   132 1936     112    0                    4248
   Heavy Trucks        0     0      0                     0      0      0               0    16      0            0    12      4                          32
    Pedestrians              4                                   0                            0                         0                                  4
      Bicycles         0     0      0                     0      0      0               0     0      0            0     0      0                           0
     Railroad
  Stopped Buses
   Comments:
  Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

100
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Bruceville Rd -- Civic Center Dr/Backer Ranch Rd                                                               QC JOB #: 13590426
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                    1077          730                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                 0.4        0.7

                       63 971 43
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.4 0.0


       201   42                         53   187
                                                                                                              0.5   2.4                     0.0   1.1
             55            0.94         61
                                                                                                                    0.0                     0.0
       182   85                         73   131
                                                                                                              0.5   0.0                     2.7   0.0

                       94 619 49
                                                                                                                           1.1 0.6 0.0

                    1146          762
                                                                                                                           0.5        0.7



                            2                                                                                               0    1    0



                                                                                                                    0                        0

             3                           1                                                                          0                        0

                                                                                                                    1                        0

                            0                                                                                               0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                         NA                                                                          NA                      NA




                           NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count               Bruceville Rd                Bruceville Rd     Civic Center Dr/Backer RanchCivic
                                                                                                       Rd Center Dr/Backer Ranch RdTotal      Hourly
     Period                (Northbound)                 (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                      Totals
 Beginning At     Left      Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM         4        55      3     1         5    74      0     0      4      6      5     0       1    4      4     0     166
    4:05 PM         8        52      6     1         3    81      4     0      4      0      4     0       2    6      0     0     171
    4:10 PM         6        31      1     3         3    78      5     1      2      2      6     0       4   10      3     0     155
    4:15 PM         6        52      6     2         2    81      3     3      3      4      7     0       5    5      3     0     182
    4:20 PM         8        45      4     2         3    63      4     1      3      5      3     0       6    5      2     0     154
    4:25 PM         1        48      5     0         2    72      3     1      4      3     10     0       1    3      2     0     155
    4:30 PM         2        53      6     1         1    72      8     2      5      6      7     0       8    5      1     0     177
    4:35 PM         8        61      5     0         0    83      8     6      1      5      7     0       3    1      3     0     191
    4:40 PM         4        49      3     0         1    73      3     0      4      2      6     0       5   15      4     0     169
    4:45 PM         5        59      4     1         6    89      4     1      2      4      7     0       3    3      3     0     191
    4:50 PM        10        51      9     4         0    58      0     4      8      2      8     0       8    4      4     0     170
    4:55 PM         8        62      5     1         4    80      5     0      4      5      3     0       1    7      2     0     187         2068
    5:00 PM         3        41      4     0         1    78     11     1      3      4      6     0       6    9      5     0     172         2074
    5:05 PM         8        63      4     2         4    75      5     0      4      9      8     0       8    0      6     0     196         2099
    5:10 PM         7        51      2     0         2   111      3     0      2      8      9     0       3    2      3     0     203         2147
    5:15 PM         5        48      4     1         2    85      6     2      5      6      7     0       8    5      5     0     189         2154
    5:20 PM         8        44      1     1         0    72      3     1      3      4      7     0       6    4      5     0     159         2159
    5:25 PM         6        47      6     2         4    82      6     3      1      5      6     0       4    6      5     0     183         2187
    5:30 PM         2        46      3     1         0    75      6     2      3      3      9     0      11   14      5     0     180         2190
    5:35 PM        11        65      4     3         3    57      3     1      4      4     10     0       4    4      4     0     177         2176
    5:40 PM         4        42      3     1         1   109     11     1      3      1      5     0      11    3      6     0     201         2208
    5:45 PM         7        50      1     2         2    90      2     2      3      3      4     0       1    7      5     0     179         2196
    5:50 PM         7        59      3     0         4    69      5     0      5      2     10     0       5    3      4     0     176         2202
    5:55 PM         4        41      4     1         4    74      6     1      4      4      8     0       3    8      2     0     164         2179
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                   Southbound                 Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left      Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right     U           Total
  All Vehicles     80      648      40   12         32 1084      56     8     44     92     96     0      76   28     56     0          2352
 Heavy Trucks       0         4      0               0     0      0            0      0      0             0    0      0                  4
  Pedestrians                 0                            0                          0                         0                         0
    Bicycles       0          0      0               0     0      0            0      0      0             0    0      0                  0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                                                                                                        101
  Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
   LOCATION: Babylon Dr -- Civic Center Dr                                                                                       QC JOB #: 13590428
   CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                           0          0                           Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                   0.0        0.0

                           0    0     0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 5:25 PM -- 5:40 PM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0


         188   0                             0   200
                                                                                                                     0.5   0.0                      0.0       0.5
               112             0.92        164
                                                                                                                           0.0                      0.6
         132   20                           36   130
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         24     0     18
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0

                         56           42
                                                                                                                                  0.0        0.0



                                0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

               1                             0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          1

                                1                                                                                                  0    0    0




                               NA                                                                                                       NA




               NA                          NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                               NA                                                                                                       NA



   5-Min Count                  Babylon Dr                     Babylon Dr                  Civic Center Dr            Civic Center Dr              Total       Hourly
       Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Totals
   Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U
      4:00 PM        2            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0     12       0      0     1     8       0    0             24
      4:05 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0      9       2      0     6     8       0    0             25
      4:10 PM        2            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0      5       1      0     0    14       0    0             24
      4:15 PM        1            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0     10       1      0     3    12       0    0             28
      4:20 PM        1            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0      9       4      0     3    12       0    0             30
      4:25 PM        1            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0      8       2      0     4     5       0    0             23
      4:30 PM        1            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0     13       1      0     2    13       0    0             30
      4:35 PM        1            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0      8       2      0     1     9       0    0             22
      4:40 PM        3            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0      4       1      0     3    18       0    0             31
      4:45 PM        1            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0     12       2      0     5     9       0    0             29
      4:50 PM        2            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0     11       0      0     4    14       0    0             32
      4:55 PM        0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0     13       2      0     2     9       0    0             28              326
      5:00 PM        2            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0      7       2      0     3    20       0    0             34              336
      5:05 PM        1            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0     15       2      0     1    11       0    0             31              342
      5:10 PM        2            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0      6       4      0     4    13       0    0             31              349
      5:15 PM        3            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0     13       1      0     2    14       0    0             36              357
      5:20 PM        0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0      4       1      0     2     9       0    0             18              345
      5:25 PM        2            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0     11       4      0     4    21       0    0             43              365
      5:30 PM        3            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0      4       1      0     1    18       0    0             29              364
      5:35 PM        2            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0     11       0      0     4    13       0    0             30              372
      5:40 PM        6            0      4     0        0        0      0     0        0      5       1      0     4    13       0    0             33              374
      5:45 PM        1            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0      4       2      0     1    17       0    0             26              371
      5:50 PM        1            0      5     0        0        0      0     0        0      7       1      0     2     6       0    0             22              361
      5:55 PM        1            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0      9       0      0     2    12       0    0             24              357
   Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
     Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U                    Total
    All Vehicles     28           0     12     0        0        0      0     0        0    104     20       0    36   208       0    0                    408
   Heavy Trucks       0           0      0              0        0      0              0      0       0            0     0       0                          0
    Pedestrians                   0                              0                            4                          0                                  4
      Bicycles       0            0      0              0        0      0              0      0       0            1     0       0                          1
     Railroad
  Stopped Buses
   Comments:
  Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

102
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Wymark Dr -- Civic Center Dr                                                                                       QC JOB #: 13590430
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                       83          31                          Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                   0.0        0.0

                       19    40    24
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:25 PM -- 5:40 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       199   9                            3   188
                                                                                                                  0.5   0.0                      0.0       0.5
             104            0.88        163
                                                                                                                        0.0                      0.6
       130   17                          22   140
                                                                                                                  0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                       17    19    12
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                       79          48
                                                                                                                               0.0        0.0



                             1                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

             1                            0                                                                             0                          1

                                                                                                                        0                          0

                             1                                                                                                  0    1    0




                            NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                         NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                 Wymark Dr                      Wymark Dr                   Civic Center Dr            Civic Center Dr              Total       Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM        1           1      2     0        1        4      2     0        0     10       1      0     0     6       0    0             28
    4:05 PM        1           1      0     0        1        0      2     0        1      7       3      0     3    11       1    0             31
    4:10 PM        1           3      0     0        0        5      1     0        0      8       0      0     0    12       0    0             30
    4:15 PM        0           1      1     0        2        5      3     0        2      5       1      0     0    12       0    0             32
    4:20 PM        2           0      1     0        2        2      1     0        0      8       1      0     3    11       0    0             31
    4:25 PM        1           0      2     0        0        2      3     0        1     12       1      0     2     6       1    0             31
    4:30 PM        0           0      2     0        1        2      2     0        1      7       1      0     3    12       0    0             31
    4:35 PM        2           2      3     0        1        2      0     0        0     11       1      0     1    10       1    0             34
    4:40 PM        1           1      3     0        0        2      0     0        0      6       1      0     1    19       0    0             34
    4:45 PM        0           3      0     0        2        4      5     0        0      9       1      0     2    10       0    0             36
    4:50 PM        1           0      0     0        2        3      2     0        2     12       0      0     2    15       0    0             39
    4:55 PM        1           0      1     0        0        3      0     0        2      9       3      0     1     9       0    0             29              386
    5:00 PM        2           2      1     0        2        4      2     0        0      4       2      0     1    18       0    0             38              396
    5:05 PM        3           3      1     0        4        3      3     0        0     14       2      0     0     7       1    0             41              406
    5:10 PM        1           2      2     0        2        2      2     0        0      7       3      0     4    14       0    0             39              415
    5:15 PM        1           2      1     0        2        2      0     0        2     11       1      0     0    15       0    0             37              420
    5:20 PM        0           0      2     0        0        2      1     0        1      6       1      0     3    10       1    0             27              416
    5:25 PM        3           1      0     0        4        5      1     0        0     10       0      0     2    21       0    0             47              432
    5:30 PM        1           1      2     0        1        7      0     0        0      8       1      0     4    18       1    0             44              445
    5:35 PM        2           5      0     0        4        1      2     0        0      8       1      0     1    13       0    0             37              448
    5:40 PM        2           0      2     0        1        4      1     0        2      6       2      0     2    13       0    0             35              449
    5:45 PM        1           1      0     0        1        6      1     0        0      5       0      0     5    16       0    0             36              449
    5:50 PM        1           1      2     0        1        3      2     0        1      8       1      0     0     6       1    0             27              437
    5:55 PM        2           1      2     0        1        2      0     0        0      8       0      0     1    12       1    0             30              438
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles     24         28      8     0        36      52     12     0        0    104       8      0    28   208       4    0                    512
 Heavy Trucks       0          0      0               0       0      0              0      0       0            0     0       0                          0
  Pedestrians                  0                              0                            0                          0                                  0
    Bicycles       0           0      0              0        0      0              0      0       0            0     1       0                          1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                                                                                                                       103
  Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
   LOCATION: Big Horn Blvd -- Civic Center Dr                                                                                QC JOB #: 13590432
   CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                      710          440                        Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                   0.0        0.7

                      133 563 14
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:40 PM -- 5:55 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0


         214   59                         9   66
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
               44           0.90         53
                                                                                                                       0.0                      0.0
         132   29                         4   66
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                         28 372    8
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.8 0.0

                      596          408
                                                                                                                              0.0        0.7



                             0                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                       0                          0

               4                          6                                                                            0                          1

                                                                                                                       1                          0

                             1                                                                                                 0    2    0




                            NA                                                                                                      NA




               NA                        NA                                                                            NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                      NA



   5-Min Count              Big Horn Blvd                 Big Horn Blvd                Civic Center Dr            Civic Center Dr              Total      Hourly
       Period               (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                            Totals
   Beginning At     Left     Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U
      4:00 PM        1        29      1     0       1       41      6     1         7     3       2      0    0      3       2    0             97
      4:05 PM        0        41      1     0       2       41     11     0         4     3       1      0    1      3       0    0            108
      4:10 PM        0        19      0     0       2       33      7     0         4     3       1      0    0      6       1    0             76
      4:15 PM        0        36      0     0       4       31      4     0         4     2       0      0    0      5       1    0             87
      4:20 PM        0        22      0     0       1       37     14     0         9     1       0      0    0      5       1    0             90
      4:25 PM        1        23      0     0       0       27      7     0         5     4       4      0    0      2       1    0             74
      4:30 PM        0        21      1     0       1       37     14     0         7     6       0      0    1      3       0    0             91
      4:35 PM        1        23      1     0       1       33      7     0         9     5       2      0    1      3       1    0             87
      4:40 PM        2        34      1     0       0       38     20     0         6     4       0      0    0      4       1    0            110
      4:45 PM        1        26      0     0       2       26      5     0         5     2       3      0    0      1       1    0             72
      4:50 PM        3        22      1     0       0       23     11     1         8     5       3      0    0      2       0    0             79
      4:55 PM        2        30      0     0       1       35      5     0         9     1       1      0    0      3       0    0             87            1058
      5:00 PM        7        28      0     0       0       56     10     0         3     3       1      0    0      2       3    0            113            1074
      5:05 PM        0        28      0     0       3       30      5     0         7     8       3      0    0      4       0    0             88            1054
      5:10 PM        0        22      2     0       1       53     16     0         5     3       4      0    0      3       0    0            109            1087
      5:15 PM        1        23      0     0       2       35     12     0         6     6       2      0    0      5       0    0             92            1092
      5:20 PM        4        25      2     0       0       60     16     0         1     3       2      0    0      4       2    0            119            1121
      5:25 PM        3        29      1     0       1       43     10     0         5     4       6      0    0      8       1    0            111            1158
      5:30 PM        2        26      0     0       0       49     15     0         6     3       2      0    2      4       0    0            109            1176
      5:35 PM        1        29      0     0       1       43      9     0         3     3       3      0    0      6       1    0             99            1188
      5:40 PM        1        45      1     0       2       54     14     0         5     1       1      0    0      6       1    0            131            1209
      5:45 PM        3        30      1     0       2       48     12     0         5     3       1      0    1      7       1    0            114            1251
      5:50 PM        2        50      0     0       1       46      7     0         5     5       3      0    1      1       0    0            121            1293
      5:55 PM        4        37      1     0       1       46      7     0         8     2       1      0    0      3       0    0            110            1316
   Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
     Flowrates      Left     Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U                   Total
    All Vehicles     24     500       8     0       20     592    132     0        60    36     20       0    8     56       8    0                   1464
   Heavy Trucks       0        4      0              0       0      0               0     0       0           0      0       0                          4
    Pedestrians                4                             0                            4                          8                                 16
      Bicycles       0         1      0             0        0      0               0     0       0           0      0       0                          1
     Railroad
  Stopped Buses
   Comments:
  Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:58 AM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

104
