ORENCO WOODS NATURE PARK
Hillsboro Parks & Recreation | Metro

draft MASTER PLAN REPORT OCTOBER 23, 2013




                                            LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE	   URBAN DESIGN	   PLANNING
Acknowledgments:

Citizens Advisory Committee:
	        Aisha Willits
	        Gwynne Pitts
	        Ted Vacek
	        Tom Wolf
	        Rick Shipley
	        Bonnie Kooken
	        Jean Rosenbalm
	        Rachel Wrege
	        James Duncans
	


City of Hillsboro Parks & Recreation:
	        Mary Ordal, Project Manager
	        Lisa Goorjian, Development Manager


Metro:
	      Rod Wojtanik, Senior Regional Planner, Sustainability Center
	      Brian Vaughn, Senior Natural Resource Scientist


Walker   | Macy:
	          Michael W. Zilis, Principal
	          Tim Clemen, Project Manager, Landscape Architect
	          Andrea Kuns, Landscape Architect


Pacific Habitat Services:
	        John Van Staveren, President, Senior Scientist
Cardno:
	        Matt Lewis, Senior Project Manager


Opsis:
	      Jim Kalvelage, Architect
Table of Contents

Introduction					11
Project Background
History
Public Involvement
	
Site Assessment and Analysis			 17
Regional & Recreational Context
Land Use
Existing Conditions
Traffic & Access
Natural Systems & Climate
Soils & Topography
Vegetation
Opportunities & Constraints
Special Places


Master Plan 					29
Goals & Objectives
Initial Concepts
Master Plan Recommendations
Access & Parking
Trails & Bridges
Environmental Stations
Restrooms & Picnic Shelters
Nature Play & Adventure Play
Open Space
Habitat Restoration
Phasing & Next Steps


Appendix					55
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Orenco Woods Nature Park


Executive summary

The Orenco Woods Nature Park site was purchased             The planning process was guided by Hillsboro Parks
for use as a nature park in December 2011, a joint          and Recreation (HP&R), Metro and a citizen advisory
effort of Metro and Hillsboro in preserving one of the      committee (CAC) comprised of local residents. The
largest remaining open spaces along the Rock Creek          master plan establishes the overall vision and
Greenway corridor. The site was formerly a rustic golf      programming for Orenco Woods Nature Park. The
course, with a scenic mix of open and wooded areas.         master plan will guide the development of the Nature
It is located north of Quatama Road, and west of            Park. During the master plan process, the team
Cornelius Pass Road, and is within the 65 square mile       analyzed existing site conditions and established the
Rock Creek Watershed that drains into the Tualatin          program to inform the master plan. Early stages in
River at Rood Bridge Park.                                  the planning process identified five goals used to
                                                            guide the planning process:
The jointly purchased 42-acre property adjoins an
11-acre parcel in the southwest corner of the site          1. Utilize context sensitive design to balance
previously purchased by the City of Hillsboro (COH)         recreational opportunities with habitat protection,
for a neighborhood park. Approximately 10-acres of          restoration and enhancement of the site’s natural
the jointly purchased tract will be sold to assist with     areas.
planning and development costs for the park. The
                                                            2. Create a unique park that honors and respects the
sale area is open, level land without significant habitat
                                                            site’s natural, cultural and historical attributes and
values and is adjacent to two major streets. This
                                                            setting.
master plan addresses both the previously purchased
property owned by the COH and the jointly purchased         3. Provide for nature-related recreation experiences
property as a single park.                                  compatible with the Nature Park, and neighborhood
                                                            park elements as appropriate.
The existing site consists of rolling hills with rows of
mature conifers and forested areas adjacent to Rock         4. Provide welcoming park access that accommodates
Creek. Rock Creek enters the site at the northeast          both community and neighborhood uses.
corner and meanders through the property before
exiting at the southwest corner of the site.        The     5. Incorporate sustainable, low impact development
site has been largely unused since the golf course          principles into the park plan.
closed, and has become habitat for a variety of birds
                                                            The planning effort examined alternatives for internal
and wildlife. Within the region, many sites like this
                                                            trail alignments as well as the Rock Creek Regional
have been lost to urban development, fragmented
                                                            Trail, vehicular access and parking, viewpoints, nature
into narrow greenway corridors that have lost much
                                                            play areas, picnic areas, and habitat restoration. A
of their habitat value. The size and variety of terrain
                                                            focus was paid to determining places for education,
at Orenco Woods results in a unique opportunity
                                                            interpretation and passive recreational enjoyment.
to provide close to home experiences with nature,
                                                            Based on the site analysis, and CAC and public input,
balancing protection of habitat areas for wildlife with
                                                            opportunities and constraints were identified for the
appropriate recreational opportunities for people.
                                                            site and used to develop alternatives.
The Orenco Woods Nature Park will provide a living
environmental legacy that can be enjoyed today and
by future generations.




6        Executive Summary
                              Orenco Woods Nature Park




Environmental Station 1




Environmental Station 2




Forest Canopy Bridge

                          Executive summary         7
Orenco Woods Nature Park


The plan envisions vehicular access and a 30-car          Nature Park.
parking lot in the northwest corner of the site at
                                                          The internal park circulation is a network of looped
the intersection of Birch St. and NW 225th Avenue.
                                                          trails that weave their way through the site providing
There is potential to expand the parking lot in the
                                                          users with a variety of experiences. Located along
future if there is a need. On street parking is also
                                                          the trails are a series of scenic viewpoints and
proposed within the future neighborhood adjacent to
                                                          environmental stations that provide educational
Cornelius Pass Road. The picnic shelter, restrooms
                                                          opportunities about the restored habitat and wildlife
and nature play elements are sited on relatively flat
                                                          found in the area. Three trail bridges are planned for
topography in close proximity to the parking lot. This
                                                          the site. Two of the proposed bridges will cross Rock
area is envisioned to provide a neighborhood park like
                                                          Creek, including the primary bridge serving the Rock
setting with lawn to accommodate more active day use
                                                          Creek Regional Trail and a secondary bridge on the
and small gatherings. The historic McDonald House
                                                          east side of the park to provide a looped trail network.
located within the site has been purchased by the city
                                                          A forest canopy bridge will cross the tributary to Rock
and is anticipated to be utilized for public use. A
                                                          Creek toward the north end of the site. Three primary
separate planning process will develop the site plan
                                                          habitat types (oak savannah, mixed conifer hardwood
and programming for this important resource; a time
                                                          forest and riparian forest) will be restored based on
frame for this effort has not been established. The
                                                          the site’s characteristics and target conservation
majority of the park is comprised of restored habitats,
                                                          species. The park will provide neighborhood park and
trails, nature play opportunities, environmental
                                                          nature based recreational opportunities. The nature
learning stations and places for passive enjoyment of
                                                          park will be a valuable community resource and a
this unique environment. The Rock Creek Regional
                                                          true gem in Hillsboro as well as Metro’s regional park
Trail is proposed along the northern boundary of the
                                                          system.
sale parcel and crosses Rock Creek at the southeast
corner of the site. The trail traverses restored forest
habitat and oak savannah before exiting the site at
NW Dogwood Street. Future planning studies will
determine the trail alignment west of Orenco Woods




8        Executive Summary
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Orenco Woods Nature Park




          ENTRY GATE


                                            MA
                                               XL
 NE BIRCH ST                                      INE




   ON-STREET PARKING
            (11 CARS)
                                                                                                PARK STORAGE
                                                                                                / MAINTENANCE




                                             PARKING
                                               LOT
                                            (30 CARS)



                                                                        ACCESS
                                                                        GATE
                                                                                                                          MIXED CONIFER
                                                                                                                          HARDWOOD
                                                                                                                                                          FOREST
                                                                                                                          FOREST
                                                             RESTROOM                                                                                     CANOPY
                                                                                                MCDONALD                                                  BRIDGE
                                                                                                 HOUSE
                                   PICNIC
                                   TABLE,
                        NW 225TH




                                                        NATURE
                                   TYP.                                   IRRIGATED
                                                        PLAY
                                                                          LAWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        XL
                                                                          PICNIC                                                                                                                                            INE
                                                                          SHELTER #1


 NW DOGWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                OAK
                                                                                                                                                                                SAVANNAH




                                                                                                                                                          TRIB
                                                                                                                   PICNIC




                                                                                                                                                           UTAR
                                                                                                                   SHELTER #2




                                                                                                                                                               Y
                                                                 OAK
                                                                 SAVANNAH
                                                                                                                                                                   ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                                                        STATION #3
                                                                                                ROCK CREEK TRAIL




 NW ELM                                                                                                                                                                                                 WETLAND




                                                                            POTENTIAL                                                     POND
                                                                         ADVENTURE PLAY                                                                                    ROCK CREEK
                                                                              AREA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PARKING
                                                                                                                                                 ENVIRONMENTAL                                       TRAIL
                                                                                                                                                 STATION #2                                  CREEK
                                                                                                                                                                                        ROCK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NW CORNELIUS PASS RD
                                                                 ENVIRONMENTAL                                         RIPARIAN FOREST
                                      ROCK CREEK                                                                                                                                                             RESIDENTIAL PARCEL
                                                                      STATION #1
                                                                                                                                                                                                             The location of future public
                                                                                      WETLAND                                                                                                                access for pedestrian, bicycle
                                                                                                                                                                                                             and non-motorized uses across
                                                                                                                                                                                                             the Residential Parcel to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rock Creek Regional Trail will
                                                                                                                                                                                                             be determined prior to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                             development of this property.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Potential access opportunities
                                                                                                                                                                                                             may include sidewalks, streets or
                                                                                                                                                                                                             paths which may be constructed
                                                                                                                                                                                                             as part of that development.




                                                                                                                        NW QUATAMA RD




 Figure 1 - Orenco Woods Nature Park Master Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0   40   80     160ft




                                                                                                                                                                                                        DRAFT
                                                                                                                                                                                            Executive Summary                                    MASTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9    PLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        APRIL 2

ORENCO WOODS NATURE PARK
INTRODUCTION
Orenco Woods Nature Park


Project Background

Surrounded by urban development, the Orenco Woods         preserves and enhances habitat and provides passive
site is a significant regional property because of its    recreational opportunities for visitors. The plan
accessibility and natural features. It will provide       establishes a long term development strategy that will
restorative opportunities and be a welcome refuge from    be implemented as funding becomes available. The
the urbanized environment for both people and wildlife.   first phase of park development is anticipated to begin
The site was jointly acquired in 2011 by Hillsboro        in 2013/2014 with a variety of habitat restoration
Parks & Recreation (HP&R) and Metro to develop a          projects and removal of dilapidated structures.
nature park. The existing site is a rolling landscape
with both forested areas and open meadows. Two
streams meander through the site, Rock Creek and an
unnamed tributary. The site shows signs of its past
as a golf course use with expansive linear views down
former fairways that are framed by rows of mature
trees. Since the closure of the golf course, the site
has remained open and not maintained, attracting
wildlife and some informal public use.

The master plan establishes a long-term vision for the
site and will guide the future development of the park.
The plan proposes an overall layout for the desired
elements and habitat restoration areas as determined
by the citizens advisory committee (CAC), HP&R and
Metro based on their compatibility to the overall goals
for the park development.

Proposed Park elements:

• Vehicular and Pedestrian Access and Parking

• Network of Trails & Bridges

• Viewpoints/Environmental Stations

• Restrooms and Picnic Shelters

• Nature Based Play Experiences and Adventure Play

• Open Space

• Habitat Restoration Areas

The master plan for the Orenco Woods Nature Park




12       Introduction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Orenco Woods Nature Park




                                        NE STONEWATER ST
                       NE 70TH AVE




                                                                                                                   VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NW CHERRY LN




                                                                                                                                             VE
                                                                                                                 DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LN




                                                                                                                                           DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RY




                                                                                                               72N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ER




                                                                                                                                        73R
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CH




                                                                                                              NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NW




                                                                                                                                       NE
                                 NE ROCKY BROOK

                                            MA
                                              XL
                                                INE

     NE BIRCH ST
                                                                                                                STONEY BROOK ST
                                                    NW 225TH AVE




                                ORENCO
                              ELEMENTARY
                                SCHOOL




                                                                                                              MCDONALD
                                                                                                              HOUSE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NS S
   NW DOGWOOD ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W        ILKI
                                                                                      CITY OF HILLSBORO/METRO PARCEL                                                                                                                                                     NW
        NW 226TH AVE




                                     NW 225TH AVE




                                                                                                  (42-ACRES)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      XL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        INE



  NW ELM ST

                                                                   CITY OF HILLSBORO PARCEL                                                                  ROCK CREEK
                                                                           (11-ACRES)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NW CORNELIUS PASS RD


                                                                                                                                                                            SALE PARCEL
                                                                                                                                                                       (PRELIMINARY BOUNDARY SHOWN)




                                                                                                                                                  ELKS
                                                                                                                                                 LODGE

                                                                                           NE ROCKRIDGE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NW QUATAMA RD
                                                                      NE AUTUMNWOOD




                                                                                             NE DANBURY AVE




                                                                                                                                       NE KALAHANI


                                                                                                                                                         NE 75TH AVE




                                                                                                                                                                                            NE 76TH AVE
                                                                                                                         NE 74TH AVE




                                                                                                                                                                                                               ANDOVER ST




     NE WILLOWGROVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N


Figure 2 - 2011 site aerial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EXISTING SITE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0    50   100      200ft




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Introduction                           13
Orenco Woods Nature Park
Master Plan                                                                                                                            CITY OF HILLSBORO Parks & Recreation | METRO | WALKER MACY
Orenco Woods Nature Park


History

The site was first developed by Malcolm McDonald in                The southeast 10-acres are slated for development to
1912. McDonald, co-founder of the Oregon Nursery                   assist with funding the construction of the park. After
Company (Orenco), built his house on the property in               the sale, the total park acreage will be approximately
1912. The house and surrounding property were later                42-acres.
acquired by the Hillsboro Elks Lodge which operated
                                                                   The historic McDonald House is located on a 0.7-acre
a 9-hole golf course on the property from 1953 until
                                                                   parcel located inside the boundaries of the park site.
2006, when the land was sold for development.
                                                                   The house is a significant historic site in Hillsboro.
Venture Properties acquired the property from the Elks             The City of Hillsboro purchased the house from the
Lodge and planned a single family subdivision on the               Elks in May, 2013. The master plan recognizes the
property. The planned neighborhood was expected to                 future of the McDonald House as a publicly accessible
add approximately 250 homes to the area. In 2007,                  facility within the park. The planning process for
Hillsboro purchased 11-acres from the developer to                 specific restoration and uses of the McDonald house
provide a neighborhood park. After years of delay,                 will be conducted separately from this master plan.
the development plan was abandoned during an
economic downturn and the property returned to bank
ownership. The City of Hillsboro & Metro purchased
the remaining 42-acre property in 2011 with the intent
of developing the site as a nature park.

This master plan incorporates both the Hillsboro owned
site and the jointly purchased large site as one park.




Historic McDonald House located within the Orenco Woods Nature Park site




14        Introduction
                                                                                          Orenco Woods Nature Park



Public Involvement

In addition to the project goals and objectives            Metro and Hillsboro utilized an RFP process to select
developed by HP&R and Metro, the CAC was formed to         a purchaser for the southeast sale parcel during
help guide the master plan as well as ensure citizen       the park planning process to ensure the future
involvement throughout the planning process. The           development would be compatible with the park and
CAC was comprised of a diverse group of citizens from      regional trail. The prospective purchaser attended
the Hillsboro area.                                        several public meetings and met with the CAC to
                                                           discuss preliminary plans.       Community feedback
The role of the CAC was to work with HP&R, Metro           requested that the development provide access to the
and the Walker Macy team to help guide the master          park and trail through the future subdivision, including
planning process. The CAC assisted with determining        public parking to serve park and trail users, and visual
the program elements that were appropriate for the         access / views into the park through orientation of
park as well as provided feedback on the conceptual        streets and homes.
design alternatives. They reviewed preliminary plan
drafts, participated in community outreach efforts         The master plan was approved by the Hillsboro Parks &
and served as a sounding board for community input.        Recreation Commission in June, 2013. Metro Council
The committee ultimately recommended the preferred         adopted the Orenco Woods Nature Park master plan
master plan to the Hillsboro Parks & Recreation            on XXXX, XX, 2013.
Commission and Metro Council for approval and
adoption.

In addition to the CAC meetings, three open houses
were held for community input. The first open house
was held on-site and included a site tour and a
presentation of existing conditions of the site. At the
second open house, the community was shown four
conceptual design alternatives for the park. Based on
responses and suggestions, a draft master plan was
developed incorporating aspects of prior alternatives
and presented to the public at the final open house.
After each open house, comments were received and
                                                           Open house presentation
incorporated into the planning process. At the final
open house there was significant public support for
the master plan.

Information on the park planning process was posted
digitally to the project website located on the HP&R
website. Over the course of the planning, a contact list
of more than 150 interested persons was developed
and used to keep people informed of meetings, web
site updates and progress on the park plan. A public
comment period followed each open house. Comments
are summarized in the appendix.

                                                           Open house site walk


                                                                                            Introduction        15
SITE ASSESSMENT AND ANALYSIS
Orenco Woods Nature Park


Regional and Recreational Context                          Land Use

The site is located in Hillsboro, Oregon and will be       The surrounding land use includes educational
part of a network of natural areas within the Portland     and residential use.      The western edge of the
metropolitan area. Within the Hillsboro Parks system       property is adjacent to the historic Orenco Townsite
there are 24 city parks, 3 of which are within a           neighborhood. Orenco Elementary School is at the
2-mile radius of the Orenco Woods site. The 20-acre        eastern edge of the neighborhood. The south edge
Orchard Park is located approximately 1.75-miles to        of the site is adjacent to a single family residential
the northeast and the 37-acre Noble Woods Park is          neighborhood and the Hillsboro Elks Lodge. The sale
located approximately 1.5-miles to the southwest.          parcel located in the SE corner of the site is planned
Both parks are located along Rock Creek, feature           to be a single family residential neighborhood. The
natural areas including trails and are part of the Rock    eastern edge of the property is bound by Cornelius
Creek greenway corridor. Orchard Park also has a disc      Pass Rd. Across Cornelius Pass Rd, the adjacent
golf course, play area and some picnic opportunities.      parcels are zoned Station Community - Industrial. The
Noble Woods Park is primarily a nature park with           north edge is bound by the MAX light rail tracks with
looped trails, viewpoints, a small picnic shelter and      primarily medium density residential directly north of
restrooms, but no developed play areas. In addition,       the tracks.
53rd Avenue Community Park is approximately 2-miles
west of Orenco Woods and has developed park                Existing Conditions
features including two artificial turf sports fields for
                                                           The site is comprised of rolling hills with expansive
soccer and lacrosse, a playground and large splash
                                                           views framed with long tree rows reminiscent of the
pad. Future expansion of 53rd Avenue Park will include
                                                           past golf course. Rock Creek enters the site at the
a recreation center, picnicking and a large play area.
                                                           northeast corner and meanders through the site
Other nature parks and natural areas nearby include
                                                           before exiting at the southwest corner of the property.
the Tualatin Hills Nature Park and the Jackson Bottom
                                                           The stream is forested along the edges with adjacent
Wetlands Preserve; both sites are about 6 miles away
                                                           wetlands located within the floodplain. The former club
from Orenco Woods Nature Park.
                                                           house for the golf course is located in the northwest
Orenco Woods Nature Park is immediately adjacent to        corner of the site. Remnant cart paths from the golf
the Orenco Elementary School, a 12-acre site serving       course are evident throughout the site and have been
up to 650 students. The school has a playground            used by residents to navigate the property. In addition
for children age 5-12 years, covered hard court area,      there were seven bridges that cross Rock Creek and
and large grass playfields including softball and          its tributary, four of which have been removed. The
soccer areas. Outdoor school facilities are available      condition of the remaining bridges varies. A weir
for public use when not in use by the school or other      within Rock Creek’s main channel routes water to
scheduled activities.                                      a man-made pond which was once used as a water
                                                           source for golf course irrigation.




18       Site Assessment and Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Orenco Woods Nature Park




                                                                               QUATAMA
                                                                               ELEMENTARY
                                                                               SCHOOL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ORCHARD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PARK



                                                                                                                                                                                                              INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                                  NE CHERRY DR




                                                                                                             RESIDENTIAL




                                                                                                                                                                         NW CORNELIUS PASS RD
                                                                                 MA                          MEDIUM                                       COUNTY
                                                                                   XL                        DENSITY
                                                                                     INE
                                                            NE BIRCH ST
 NW 231ST AVE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TRA ROCK
                                             NW 228TH AVE




                                                                                            NW 225TH AVE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IL
                                                              ORENCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                  RESIDENTIAL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CREISTING
                                                              ELEMENTARY
                                                              SCHOOL                                                                                                                              MEDIUM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EK
                                                                                                                                                                                                  DENSITY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EX
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NW WILKINS ST
                                                        NW DOGWOOD ST                                                    MCDONALD HOUSE
                                                         RESIDENTIAL
                                                         ORENCO TOWNSITE                                                    CITY/METRO                                                          MA
                                                         CONSERVATION                                                          PARCEL                                                             XL
                                                                                                                                                                                                    INE
                                                        NW ELM ST
                                                                NW 227TH AVE




                                                                                                           CITY PARCEL              SALE PARCEL
                                                                                                                                 (PRELIMINAR Y BOUNDARY SHOWN)



                                                                                                                                                                                                INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                                             ELKS LODGE
                                                                                RECENT
                                                                                ANNEXATION                                   COMMERCIAL

                                                                                                              NW QUATAMA RD
                                                                                                                                                                         RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                                                                                         RESIDENTIAL




                                                                                                                                                                         MEDIUM
                                                                                                            SINGLE FAMILY                                                DENSITY
                                                                                                                                                         DUPLEX




                                                                                                            RESIDENTIAL




                WB
                  ASE
    NOBLE             LIN
                           ER                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
    WOODS                     D
    PARK
LEGEND                                                                                                                                                                                                        ADJOINING USES
                 Existing Rock Creek Trail                                                                                                                                                                                       0   100   200       400ft   N


                 Key Intersections



Figure 3 - Zoning Diagram



Orenco Woods Nature Park
Master Plan                                                                                                                    CITY OF HILLSBORO Parks & Recreation | METRO | WALKER MACY




                                                                                                                                                                       Site Assessment and Analysis                                                    19
Orenco Woods Nature Park


Traffic and Access                                         Natural Systems & Climate

The primary vehicular access to the site is from Birch     Within the site there are 3 environmentally
Street. The road leads the visitor to an asphalt parking   regulated zones: the vegetated corridor regulated
area and continues as a gravel road to the McDonald        by Clean Water Services, the 100-year floodplain
house. Currently there is no formal pedestrian access      and delineated wetlands which are regulated by the
on the site.                                               Oregon Department of State Lands (DSL) and Army
                                                           Core of Engineers (ACOE). The vegetated corridor is
A traffic analysis for the proposed development was
                                                           intended as a buffer along Rock Creek with limited
completed in July, 2013. The analysis examined
                                                           development allowed within the boundaries. Trails,
key intersections located adjacent to the Orenco
                                                           stream crossings, and viewpoints are permitted, but
Woods site and found that the proposed nature park
                                                           mitigation and enhancement are required. Within the
development would generate approximately 991 trips
                                                           100-year floodplain, proposed developments are to be
per day and that all study intersections would operate
                                                           modeled with the Hydrologic Engineering Centers River
at acceptable levels. Additional off-site improvements
                                                           Analysis System (HEC-RAS) to indicate that a zero
at the study intersections are not recommended.
                                                           net flood level rise has occurred. Several delineated
                                                           wetlands are located within the vegetated corridor.
                                                           The master plan does not propose any development
                                                           within the designated wetlands

                                                           The site features large open meadows which have good
                                                           solar exposure with south facing slopes. Prevailing
                                                           summer winds are from the northwest.




20       Site Assessment and Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Orenco Woods Nature Park

 Spring & Summer
 Prevailing Winds NE STONEWATER ST
 (NNW)




                                                                                                             VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NW CHERRY LN



                        NE 70TH AVE




                                                                                                                                                      VE
                                                                                                           DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LN




                                                                                                                                                    DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RR




                                                                                                         72N




                                                                                                                                               73R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                              CH




                                                                                                        NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NW




                                                                                                                                            NE
                                               NE ROCKY BROOK
       SUNSET                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SUNRISE
                                             MA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SUMMER
                                               XL
                                                     INE

      NE BIRCH ST
                                                                                                          STONEY BROOK ST
                                                      NW 225TH AVE




                                                                      CITY/METRO
                                                                        PARCEL                          MCDONALD
                                                                                                        HOUSE                                                                                                                                                        K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R   OC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NS S
    NW DOGWOOD ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W      ILKI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NW
         NW 226TH AVE




                                      NW 225TH AVE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  XL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          INE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CULV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ERT

   NW ELM ST
                                                                     CITY PARCEL



                                                                                                                                         DAM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NW CORNELIUS PASS RD
                                                                                                                                                                              SALE PARCEL
                                                                                                                                                                         (PRELIMINARY BOUNDARY SHOWN)




                               ROCK CREEK



                                                                                      NE ROCKRIDGE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NW QUATAMA RD
                                                                      NE AUTUMNWOOD




                                                                                       NE DANBURY AVE




       SUNSET                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SUNRISE
                                                                                                                                             NE KALAHANI


                                                                                                                                                           NE 75TH AVE




                                                                                                                                                                                           NE 76TH AVE
                                                                                                                   NE 74TH AVE




Autumn & Winter                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WINTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ANDOVER ST




Prevailing Winds
(SSW)


LEGEND                                                                                                                                                                               EXISTING NATURAL SYSTEMS
             Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor                                                                             Access & Utility Easements                                                                                                                      0   50   100     200ft   N
             100 Year Floodplain                                                                                                 Golf Course Creek Crossing
             Significant Natural Resource Overlay - 75’ Impact Area

             Significant Natural Resource Overlay - 25’ Upland Area

             Existing Pond

             Existing Wetland

Figure 4 - Natural Systems Diagram
Orenco Woods Nature Park
Master Plan                                                                                                                                                 Site
                                                                                                                                            CITY OF HILLSBORO    Assessment
                                                                                                                                                              Parks & Recreationand  Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                                 | METRO           21
                                                                                                                                                                                         | WALKER MACY
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                                        Soils & Topography

                                        There are four different types of soils found on the
                                        site varying from poorly drained to moderately drained
                                        soils. The Wapato Silty Clay Loam soils are found
                                        adjacent to Rock Creek and are indicative of areas
                                        within a flood plain. The soils are poorly drained with
                                        moderately slow permeability. The on-site soils most
                                        conducive for development are the Quatama Loam
                                        soils which are located in the northwest area of the
                                        site. These soils have better drainage and faster
                                        permeability than the soils found in the floodplain
                                        adjacent to Rock Creek.

                                        The steepest slopes on the site, greater than 10%, are
                                        located adjacent to Rock Creek and its tributary and
                                        follow the 100-year flood plain. Slopes greater than
                                        10% provide grading challenges for proposed trails
                                        and are not conducive for proposed structures. The
                                        site generally slopes from north to south toward Rock
                                        Creek.




22       Site Assessment and Analysis
                                                                          Orenco Woods Nature Park




                                        METRO/CITY PARCEL




Figure 5 - Soils & Topography Diagram


                                                            Site Assessment and Analysis       23
Orenco Woods Nature Park


Vegetation                                               Opportunities and Constraints

The existing vegetation on site is a mix of forested     Based on the analysis of the existing site conditions,
areas and open meadows. The majority of the              opportunities and constraints were determined. The
forested area on site is located along the banks of      site was divided into three zones and designated
Rock Creek and its tributary. The areas of the site      graphically with yellow, green and blue. The yellow
that were previously used for golf course fairways are   zone is the northwest portion of the property and is
open meadows with un-irrigated grasses separated         characterized with vast open space, adjacency to a
by rows of mature conifer trees. Invasive species,       public street, has existing framed views, slopes less
such as Himalayan Blackberry and English Ivy, have       than 5%, contains the McDonald House and is outside
established on the site. During the master planning      of the regulated vegetated corridor. Within this zone
process Metro and City of Hillsboro natural resource     there is an opportunity for the following program
staff managed the site for the removal of invasive       elements to occur:
species. Metro and Hillsboro natural resource staff
                                                         • parking and access, restrooms, picnic shelter, trails,
also began a process of planning the site restoration
                                                         viewpoints, nature play, interpretive opportunities and
and improvements to meet Clean Water Services
                                                         open space for unstructured play.
regulated Vegetated Corridor. Native tree and shrub
plantings are planned for 2014 - 2016.                   The green zone has many of the same attributes as
                                                         the yellow zone, but is isolated and not adjacent to
                                                         a public street. For this reason, the only program
                                                         elements that are suitable for this area are trails and
                                                         viewpoints.

                                                         The blue zone includes a variety of natural features that
                                                         shape the character of this area: slopes up to 10%,
                                                         forested areas, existing wetlands and the regulated
                                                         vegetated corridor. The topography and forest canopy
                                                         create a sense of enclosure, a delightful contrast to
                                                         the wide open spaces of the yellow zone. The program
                                                         elements suitable in this zone are:

                                                         • habitat restoration, trails, viewpoints, interpretive
                                                         opportunities and nature play.

                                                         The organization for the park elements are based on
                                                         the opportunities and constraints identified for the
                                                         site.




24       Site Assessment and Analysis
                                                                                                 Orenco Woods Nature Park




                                            METRO/CITY PARCEL




                                                                      OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS

Orenco Woods Nature Park
Master Plan                                                     CITY OF HILLSBORO Parks & Recreation | METRO | WALKER MACY




 Figure 5 - Opportunities and Constraints

                                                                                 Site Assessment and Analysis           25
Orenco Woods Nature Park


Special Places

The opportunities and constraints identified                  • Sledding Hill – Many of the residents spoke fondly of
quantifiable characteristics of the site. In order to         the steep hill that transitions from the open meadow
assess qualitative characteristics, a series of special       to the riparian area. They reported using this hill to
places were identified. The following special places          toboggan down during snow events.
were accounted for in the final master plan:
                                                              • Open Water – An irrigation pond that was built
• Open Meadow - This area is in the northwest portion         for the golf course in an old meander bend of Rock
of the site and is a large open area with long views          Creek remains on site. The pond is potential habitat
framed by rows of mature evergreen trees.                     for native species. Children living in the adjacent
                                                              neighborhoods reported this pond as a common
• Closed Transition, meadow to riparian – as one
                                                              destination of their site visits.
leaves the open meadow a trail leads downhill into a
closed forest condition.                                      • Riparian Area 2 – The second riparian area is also
                                                              located adjacent to Rock Creek and is in a low area
• Riparian Area 1 – Adjacent to Rock Creek is a lowland
                                                              of the site. From this vantage point visitors have
area that is surrounded by forested areas. In contrast
                                                              glimpses of the rolling hills of the Open Meadow and
to the open meadow which feels expansive, this area
                                                              of the McDonald House.
provides a sense of enclosure.




Open Meadow                   Closed Transition           Riparian Area 1               Sledding Hill


Special Places


26       Site Assessment and Analysis
                                                                                     Orenco Woods Nature Park




• Open Meadow 2 – Perched on a high point in the
site, this meadow is in a more secluded area of the
site and provides more expansive views towards the
south.

• McDonald House – Historic house built by Malcolm
McDonald in 1912. The City of Hillsboro acquired the
property in 2013 for future public use.




Open Water                  Riparian Area 2            Open Meadow 2              McDonald House




                                                                       Site Assessment and Analysis       27
MASTER PLAN
Orenco Woods Nature Park


Goals & Objectives

Metro and HP&R, with feedback from the CAC and                 6. Provide for nature based play experiences that
the public, developed goals and objectives for the             engage children in interactions with the natural world
future nature park early in the planning process. The          and with each other.
goals are defined as the overall purpose and general
                                                               7. Provide for interpretive and educational opportunities
intention for the park. The objectives are more specific
                                                               at the site related to the site’s natural, historic and
and measurable characteristics that are desired.
                                                               cultural heritage. In particular, anticipate the use
Goals:                                                         of the nature park by elementary school children for
                                                               outdoor, educational purposes.
1. Utilize context sensitive design to balance
recreational opportunities with habitat protection,            8. Provide support facilities for the nature park
restoration and enhancement of the site’s natural              including restrooms, picnic areas / picnic shelter,
areas.                                                         access and parking.

2. Create a unique park that honors and respects the           9. Protect water quality by improving native tree
site’s natural, cultural and historical attributes and         and shrub buffers along stream and wetlands, and
setting.                                                       improving connectivity of the stream to the floodplain.

3. Provide for nature-related recreation experiences           10. Conserve natural habitats, with an emphasis on
compatible with the Nature Park, and neighborhood              the riparian and Oregon white oak savanna habitats,
park elements as appropriate.                                  reflecting habitat Conservation targets for the site.

4. Provide welcoming park access that accommodates             11. Provide improved habitat for native birds, fish and
both community and neighborhood uses.                          turtles, reflecting species Conservation targets for the
                                                               site.
5. Incorporate sustainable, low impact development
principles into the park plan.                                 12. Ensure access to the McDonald House is maintained.

                                                               13. Provide a context for the McDonald House within
                                                               the park, preserving its sense of history and setting
Objectives:
                                                               within, yet apart, from the Nature Park.
1. Provide for an extension of the Rock Creek Regional
                                                               14. If the McDonald House is acquired for public
Trail through the park
                                                               purposes, provide space for support facilities such as
2. Preserve and enhance the variety of views and vistas        access, parking, and open lawn for possible outdoor
of the site to create diverse experiences                      gatherings, events or programs.

3. Provide for a variety of trails, including looped trails,   15. If McDonald House is acquired for public purposes,
with viewpoints and seating areas where appropriate.           provide for a landscape that reflects its historic and
                                                               cultural context.
4. Provide park access from a variety of neighborhood
locations with an emphasis on encouraging pedestrian
and bicycle access.

5. Provide open area for informal play or gatherings




30        Master Plan
                                                                                           Orenco Woods Nature Park


                                                             Initial Concepts

                                                             The overall intent for the Orenco Woods Nature Park
                                                             master plan is to preserve and enhance nature and
                                                             to provide passive recreational opportunities where
                                                             appropriate. The master plan calls for a network of
                                                             looped trails, restored habitat areas, viewpoints, and
                                                             neighborhood park elements including nature based
                                                             play area(s), picnic shelter, and limited irrigated
                                                             lawn areas for open play. Based on the goals and
                                                             objectives four concept plans were developed to
                                                             illustrate options for the Nature Park. The concepts
                                                             were presented to the CAC and to the public for input.

                                                             All four concepts provide pedestrian and vehicular
                                                             access with limited on-site parking to encourage
                                                             walking and biking to the park, nature play elements
                                                             in lieu of traditional playground equipment, the
                                                             Rock Creek Regional Trail, looped park trails (both
                                                             paved and soft surface), educational and interpretive
                                                             opportunities, and habitat restoration.




Ideas for the nature park - Orenco woods elementary school
student drawings




                                                                                             Master Plan        31
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                           Concept A

                           Summary of Elements:

                           • Parking and vehicular access located from NW
                           Dogwood St.

                           • Rock Creek Regional Trail enters the site from
                           Cornelius Pass Rd and exits the site at NW Dogwood
                           St.

                           • Restrooms and picnic shelter are located adjacent
                           to the parking area in the central portion of the park.

                           • Two paved looped trails are located around the oak
                           savannah habitats

                           • Soft surface trail through the riparian habitat and
                           adjacent to the existing pond.

                           • Nature play nodes are located along the paved trail

                           • Three viewpoints are located in key areas of interest




32       Master Plan
                                                                                                            Orenco Woods Nature Park




    MA
       XL
          INE


NE BIRCH ST




                               MCDONALD
                               HOUSE
                NW 225TH




NW DOGWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                             MA
                                                                                                                                                                 XL
                                                                                                                                                                          INE




NW ELM ST




                                                                                                                            NW CORNELIUS PASS RD
                                                                              SALE PARCEL
                                                                     The location of future public access for pedestrian,
                                                                     bicycle and non-motorized uses across the
                                                                     Residential Parcel to the Rock Creek Regional Trail
                                                                     will be determined prior to the development of
                                                                     this property. Potential access opportunities may
                                                                     include sidewalks, streets or paths which may be
                                                                     constructed as part of that development.




                                          NW QUATAMA RD




Figure 6 - Initial Concept A                                                                                                                       0   40   80    160ft
                                                                                                                                                                            N

                                                                                                                            CONCEPT A

Orenco Woods Nature Park                                                                                           Master Plan                                       33
Master Plan                                           CITY OF HILLSBORO Parks & Recreation | METRO | WALKER MACY
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                           Concept B

                           Summary of Elements:

                           • Parking and vehicular access is from NE Birch St.

                           • The Rock Creek Regional Trail enters the site from
                           Cornelius Pass Rd and loops around the park, with
                           three narrower paved trails exiting the site at NW
                           Dogwood St., NW Elm St., and NW 225th Ave.

                           • Restrooms and picnic shelter are located adjacent
                           to the parking area in the northern portion of the park

                           • A paved trail provides ADA access to the oak
                           savannah knoll across the Rock Creek tributary

                           • Soft surface trail meanders through the riparian
                           area, around the existing pond, and up to the oak
                           savannah knoll where it connects to the paved trail.

                           • Nature Play nodes are located at the terminus of
                           NW Dogwood St., NW Elm St., and off NW 225th Ave.

                           • Four viewpoints are located at key areas of interest




34       Master Plan
                                                                                                            Orenco Woods Nature Park




    MA
       XL
          INE


NE BIRCH ST




                               MCDONALD
                               HOUSE
                NW 225TH




NW DOGWOOD ST

                                                                                                                                                             MA
                                                                                                                                                                 XL
                                                                                                                                                                          INE




NW ELM ST




                                                                                                                            NW CORNELIUS PASS RD
                                                                              SALE PARCEL
                                                                     The location of future public access for pedestrian,
                                                                     bicycle and non-motorized uses across the
                                                                     Residential Parcel to the Rock Creek Regional Trail
                                                                     will be determined prior to the development of
                                                                     this property. Potential access opportunities may
                                                                     include sidewalks, streets or paths which may be
                                                                     constructed as part of that development.




                                          NW QUATAMA RD




Figure 7 - Initial Concept B                                                                                                                       0   40   80    160ft
                                                                                                                                                                            N

                                                                                                                            CONCEPT B

Orenco Woods Nature Park                                                                                           Master Plan                                       35
Master Plan                                           CITY OF HILLSBORO Parks & Recreation | METRO | WALKER MACY
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                           Concept C

                           Summary of Elements:

                           • Parking and vehicular access are from NE Birch St.

                           • The Rock Creek Regional Trail enters the site from
                           Cornelius Pass Rd. and exits the site at NE Birch St.

                           • Restrooms and picnic shelter are located adjacent
                           to the parking area in the northern portion of the park

                           • A paved trail leaves the parking area heading south
                           through the restored oak savannah where it becomes
                           a soft surface trail through the riparian area, crossing
                           Rock Creek twice, before heading up the hill to the oak
                           savannah knoll.

                           • A second paved trail loops around the oak savannah
                           knoll, crosses the Rock Creek tributary and adjoins
                           with the Rock Creek Regional Trail

                           • Three nature play nodes are located along the edge
                           between the restored oak savannah and the restored
                           hardwood forest

                           • Three viewpoints are located in key areas of interest




36       Master Plan
                                                                                                            Orenco Woods Nature Park




    MA
       XL
          INE


NE BIRCH ST




                               MCDONALD
                               HOUSE
                NW 225TH




NW DOGWOOD ST

                                                                                                                                                             MA
                                                                                                                                                                 XL
                                                                                                                                                                          INE




NW ELM ST




                                                                                                                            NW CORNELIUS PASS RD
                                                                              SALE PARCEL
                                                                     The location of future public access for pedestrian,
                                                                     bicycle and non-motorized uses across the
                                                                     Residential Parcel to the Rock Creek Regional Trail
                                                                     will be determined prior to the development of
                                                                     this property. Potential access opportunities may
                                                                     include sidewalks, streets or paths which may be
                                                                     constructed as part of that development.




                                          NW QUATAMA RD




Figure 8 - Initial Concept C                                                                                                                       0   40   80    160ft
                                                                                                                                                                            N

                                                                                                                            CONCEPT C

Orenco Woods Nature Park                                                                                           Master Plan                                       37
Master Plan                                           CITY OF HILLSBORO Parks & Recreation | METRO | WALKER MACY
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                           Concept D

                           Summary of Elements:

                           • Parking and vehicular access are located off of NW
                           Dogwood St.

                           • The Rock Creek Regional Trail enters the site from
                           Cornelius Pass Rd. and exits the site at NW Elm St.

                           • Restrooms and the picnic shelter are located
                           adjacent to the parking area between NW Dogwood
                           and NW Elm St.

                           • Two paved trails loop around the upland portion of
                           the park

                           • Two soft surface trails loop through the riparian
                           habitat, and cross Rock Creek twice.

                           • Viewpoints are located in key areas of interest




38       Master Plan
                                                                                                            Orenco Woods Nature Park




    MA
       XL
          INE


NE BIRCH ST




                               MCDONALD
                               HOUSE
                NW 225TH




NW DOGWOOD ST

                                                                                                                                                             MA
                                                                                                                                                                 XL
                                                                                                                                                                          INE




NW ELM




                                                                                                                            NW CORNELIUS PASS RD
                                                                              SALE PARCEL
                                                                     The location of future public access for pedestrian,
                                                                     bicycle and non-motorized uses across the
                                                                     Residential Parcel to the Rock Creek Regional Trail
                                                                     will be determined prior to the development of
                                                                     this property. Potential access opportunities may
                                                                     include sidewalks, streets or paths which may be
                                                                     constructed as part of that development.




                                          NW QUATAMA RD




Figure 9 - Initial Concept D                                                                                                                       0   40   80    160ft
                                                                                                                                                                            N

                                                                                                                            CONCEPT D

Orenco Woods Nature Park                                                                                           Master Plan                                       39
Master Plan                                           CITY OF HILLSBORO Parks & Recreation | METRO | WALKER MACY
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                           Master Plan

                           Through the public open house process and meetings
                           with the CAC, HP&R and Metro staff, the master plan
                           for the Orenco Woods Nature Park was developed. It is
                           based on the key attributes of the initial concepts and
                           includes park improvements and habitat restoration
                           that are designed to enhance the sites natural areas
                           as well as provide passive recreational opportunities.

                           Within the region, many sites with similar size and
                           character have been lost to urban development,
                           fragmented into narrow greenway corridors which
                           have lost much of their habitat value. The size and
                           variety of terrain at Orenco Woods results in a unique
                           opportunity to provide close to home experiences
                           with nature, balancing protection of habitat areas for
                           wildlife with appropriate recreational opportunities for
                           people. The Orenco Woods Nature Park will provide a
                           living environmental legacy that can be enjoyed today
                           and by future generations.

                           The plan is comprised of 9 elements:

                           •	 vehicular and pedestrian access

                           •	 parking

                           •	 looped trail network

                           •	 bridges

                           •	 viewpoints

                           •	 structures (restrooms,      picnic   shelters,   and
                              maintenance buildings)

                           •	 nature and adventure based play

                           •	 open space

                           •	 habitat restoration




40       Master Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Orenco Woods Nature Park




          ENTRY GATE


                                            MA
                                               XL
 NE BIRCH ST                                      INE




   ON-STREET PARKING
            (11 CARS)
                                                                                                PARK STORAGE
                                                                                                / MAINTENANCE




                                             PARKING
                                               LOT
                                            (30 CARS)



                                                                        ACCESS
                                                                        GATE
                                                                                                                          MIXED CONIFER
                                                                                                                          HARDWOOD
                                                                                                                                                          FOREST
                                                                                                                          FOREST
                                                             RESTROOM                                                                                     CANOPY
                                                                                                MCDONALD                                                  BRIDGE
                                                                                                 HOUSE
                                   PICNIC
                                   TABLE,
                        NW 225TH




                                                        NATURE
                                   TYP.                                   IRRIGATED
                                                        PLAY
                                                                          LAWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        XL
                                                                          PICNIC                                                                                                                                            INE
                                                                          SHELTER #1


 NW DOGWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                OAK
                                                                                                                                                                                SAVANNAH




                                                                                                                                                          TRIB
                                                                                                                   PICNIC




                                                                                                                                                           UTAR
                                                                                                                   SHELTER #2




                                                                                                                                                               Y
                                                                 OAK
                                                                 SAVANNAH
                                                                                                                                                                   ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                                                        STATION #3
                                                                                                ROCK CREEK TRAIL




 NW ELM                                                                                                                                                                                                 WETLAND




                                                                            POTENTIAL                                                     POND
                                                                         ADVENTURE PLAY                                                                                    ROCK CREEK
                                                                              AREA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PARKING
                                                                                                                                                 ENVIRONMENTAL                                       TRAIL
                                                                                                                                                 STATION #2                                  CREEK
                                                                                                                                                                                        ROCK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NW CORNELIUS PASS RD
                                                                 ENVIRONMENTAL                                         RIPARIAN FOREST
                                      ROCK CREEK
                                                                      STATION #1
                                                                                                                                                                                                             RESIDENTIAL PARCEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                             The location of future public
                                                                                      WETLAND                                                                                                                access for pedestrian, bicycle
                                                                                                                                                                                                             and non-motorized uses across
                                                                                                                                                                                                             the Residential Parcel to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rock Creek Regional Trail will
                                                                                                                                                                                                             be determined prior to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                             development of this property.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Potential access opportunities
                                                                                                                                                                                                             may include sidewalks, streets or
                                                                                                                                                                                                             paths which may be constructed
                                                                                                                                                                                                             as part of that development.




                                                                                                                        NW QUATAMA RD




 Figure 10 - Orenco Woods Master Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0   40   80     160ft




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DRAFT
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Master Plan                         MASTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  41    PLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       APRIL 2

ORENCO WOODS NATURE PARK
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                           Access & Parking

                           The vehicular access and parking lot is accessed from
                           NE Birch St. The driveway alignment has been designed
                           to provide a sense of arrival as one enters the park. An
                           entrance gate and sign will demarcate the entrance to the
                           park. The driveway meanders between the forest canopies
                           before orienting the visitor to the long open view down the
                           restored oak savannah meadow. A 30-car parking lot loop
                           with two bus parking spaces is located southwest of the
                           entry drive. The parking lot is screened from the entry drive
                           by a buffer of mixed conifer and hardwood forest plantings.
                           An additional 11 on-street parking spaces are proposed
                           along NW 225th Ave and additional parking is proposed
                           within the sale-parcel development to the Southeast. A
                           modest number of parking spaces are provided within the
                           park boundary to encourage walking and biking to the park.
                           The plan reserves space for overflow parking should it be
                           deemed necessary in the future. Additionally, for larger
                           events held outside of school hours there is potential to
                           share parking with the Orenco Elementary School located
                           directly across NW 225th Avenue




42       Master Plan
                                                                                               Orenco Woods Nature Park




  NE BIRCH ST
                        NW 225TH




PROPOSED ON-STREET
  PARKING (11 CARS)




 EXISTING ON-STREET                     PARKING
  PARKING (16 CARS)                       LOT
                                       (30 CARS)                                    MA
                                                                                      XL
                                                                                         INE

  ORENCO ELEMENTARY
  SCHOOL PARKING LOT
 POTENTIAL/SEASONAL
  POTENTIAL/SEASONAL
  OVERFLOW PARKING                                 McDonald House
   OVERFLOW   PARKING
      (69 SPACES)
       (69 SPACES)




 NW DOGWOOD ST




  NW ELM




                                                                                                                               PROPOSED ON-
                                                                                                                              STREET PARKING
Figure 11 - Parking Diagram


                                   ROCK CREEK
                                                                                                                RESIDENTIAL PARCEL
                                                                                                                The location of future public
                                                                                                                access for pedestrian, bicycle
                                                                                                                and non-motorized uses across
                                                                                                                the Residential Parcel to the
                                                                                                                Rock Creek Regional Trail will
                                                                                                                be determined prior to the
                                                                                                                development of this property.
                                                                                                                Potential access opportunities
                                                                                                                may include sidewalks, streets or
                                                                                                                paths which may be constructed
                                                                                                                as part of that development.




                                                                                                 Master Plan          43


                                                                    NW QUATAMA RD
Orenco Woods Nature Park


Trails and Bridges

There is a hierarchy of trails proposed for the nature      The forest canopy bridge crosses the Rock Creek
park which will help to separate users and avoid            Tributary at the north end of the site. The bridge is
conflicts. The Rock Creek Regional Trail is proposed        intended to give the user the experience of walking in
to parallel the southeastern boundary of the site           the canopy of the trees over the tributary ravine. The
between the park and the proposed development               bridge will be approximately 20’ above the tributary
parcel and cross Rock Creek as it heads northwest into      and ADA accessible. The bridge provides pedestrian
the site. The proposed bridge will span the 100-year        access to the oak savanna knoll on the northeast
flood plain to allow for year-round use. After crossing     portion of the site. Paved park trails approach the
Rock Creek, the trail meanders up the hill navigating       bridge on either side. Motorized use of the bridges
restored Oak Savannah habitat before exiting the site       is not intended with the exception of small park
at NW Dogwood St. The trail will be a 10’ wide asphalt      maintenance vehicles such as a Gator or lawn mower.
trail with 2’ gravel shoulders.

The interior park trails, also known as local trails,
are divided into two groups; paved and soft surface.
The paved trails are 6’-8’ wide asphalt trails that are
primarily located in the upland portion of the site.
These trails are ADA accessible and provide users
access to the majority of the park. All of the trails
that are located within the vegetated corridor are 5’-
6’ wide gravel or wood chip soft surface trails. These
trails are intended for individuals with greater mobility
and provide users access to the riparian portion of the
site with minimal environmental impact.

There are three trail bridges proposed in the master
plan. The primary bridge spans Rock Creek for the           Soft surface trail

Rock Creek Regional Trail. It is designed to be above
the 100-year flood plain elevation and allow water to
flow beneath the bridge during a flood event, and will
provide dramatic views of the riparian corridor. The
bridge will be designed for pedestrian and bicycle use.
The soft surface trail leading to the pond crosses
beneath this trail bridge; a minimum 12’ clearance
will be required at this point along the trail. On the
east side of the park an existing bridge originally
built for the golf course will be replaced to provide
a looped trail connection. This bridge is intended
for pedestrian use only and will be narrower than the
regional trail bridge.



                                                            Paved park trail


44       Master Plan
                                                              Orenco Woods Nature Park




                                       FOREST CANOPY BRIDGE




                                                                           CREEK CROSSING
                                                                           BRIDGE




                            REGIONAL TRAIL
                            BRIDGE




Figure 12 - Trail Diagram




Forest Canopy Bridge


                                                                Master Plan          45
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                           Environmental Stations

                           There are five viewpoints located throughout the
                           park, three of which are designated environmental
                           stations. These locations take advantage of existing
                           views on the site. They provide a place along the trail
                           for pause, interpretation and reflection. The design
                           concept for the viewpoints is a semi-circular form with
                           a low concrete or stone seat wall. The viewpoints are
                           located directly adjacent to the trails.

                           The environmental stations are located in the three
                           primary habitat types and are intended for visitors
                           to pause, observe their surroundings and possibly
                           see wildlife. Environmental station 1 is located in
                           the riparian habitat adjacent to an existing wetland.
                           Environmental station 2 is a platform that provides
                           access to the existing pond on the site. The pond
                           provides habitat for amphibians and is a destination
                           for environmental education classes to visit and learn
                           about aquatic habitats. Environmental station 3 is
                           located on the knoll in the oak savannah habitat. From
                           this location the visitor will enjoy expansive views of
                           the site overlooking the riparian habitat.




                                                                             Environmental
                                                                             Station 3




                                                                  Environmental
                                                                  Station 2




                                                  Environmental
                                                  Station 1




                           Vignette key plan

46       Master Plan
                          Orenco Woods Nature Park




Environmental Station 1




Environmental Station 2




Environmental Station 3

                            Master Plan        47
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                           Restrooms and Picnic Shelters

                           One permanent restroom building is located in the site
                           adjacent to the proposed parking area. The restroom
                           is sited next to a small entry plaza that will function
                           as a gateway into the park. Seating and bike racks
                           are also proposed in this space. The architectural
                           character of the restroom building should reflect the
                           agrarian history of the site and be designed to blend
                           with the site environment.

                           There are two picnic shelters proposed for the site.
                           A large reservable shelter that can accommodate 50-
                           people is proposed in close proximity to the parking
                           and restrooms and adjacent to the nature play area.
                           A second smaller shelter that would be used on a first-
                           come first-serve basis is sited in the southeast corner
                           of the lawn area nestled amidst the trees. Both
                           shelters are located in areas where there are clear site
                           lines from the entrance drive and parking area to the
                           shelters to minimize safety concerns. The shelters
                           are accessed from ADA accessible paved paths.
                           There may be opportunities to re-use timbers from the
                           golf course club house within the park structures or
                           furnishings as a remembrance of the previous use.

                           Nature Play and Adventure Play

                           The new nature park is located directly across NW
                           225th from the Orenco Woods Elementary School.
                           There is traditional playground equipment available
                           for use at the school site during non school hours.
                           In order to not duplicate functions in close proximity
                           and given that the site is designated a nature park,
                           nature play features and nature themed play items are
                           proposed in lieu of traditional playground equipment.
                           The nature play area is sited between the restroom
                           and the picnic table adjacent to the paved trail. The
                           area is surrounded by lawn and a mixture of existing
                           large evergreen trees and proposed shade trees. The
                           nature play elements will be designed in keeping with
                           the qualities of the Orenco Woods site and provide
                           play opportunities for a variety of age groups.
Precedent nature play




48        Master Plan
                                                                                               Orenco Woods Nature Park




In addition to the nature based play area, there is also
potential for adventure play features. The adventure
play is proposed in the vicinity of the existing sledding
hill. The adventure play is intended to use the site
in interesting ways such as an at-grade slide that
traverses the hillside or raised platforms for play. The
potential for adventure play at this location will be
explored further in the detailed design phase.

Open Space

Open space for unstructured play is also a valuable
attribute of the plan. The park provides two primary
types of open space, lawn and meadow. In the                Open space for unstructured play
northwest portion of the site there is an area of
lawn that will be maintained for unstructured play.
Picnic tables are located throughout the lawn area to
provide informal picnic spots. The neighborhood park
elements are also located within this area.

There are large areas of oak savannah habitat which
is a meadow environment with scattered Oregon White
Oak Trees planted at 25-trees per acre. The meadow
will also be available to visitors for unstructured play.
The maintenance regime will vary significantly from
the lawn and will only be mown a few times per year.
The open meadows provide for delightful vistas as well
as opportunity to enjoy birds, butterflies and other
wildlife, and provide contrast to the forested portions
of the site.




                                                                                                 Master Plan        49
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                                           Habitat Restoration

                                           Metro and Hillsboro natural resource staff are in the
                                           process of developing a site conservation plan for the
                                           Orenco Woods Nature Park site. This plan will further
                                           define the conservation targets, strategic restoration
                                           actions and ecological monitoring at the site.

                                           The site includes three primary habitat types to be
                                           restored; Oregon white oak savanna, mixed conifer
                                           hardwood forest, and riparian forest. The desired future
                                           conditions of these habitat types were determined
                                           based on topography and historical ranges. The
Example of oak savanna habitat             riparian forest is located adjacent to Rock Creek in
                                           the lowest elevations of the site. The riparian forest
                                           transitions into the mixed conifer hardwood forest
                                           moving higher in elevation and out of the 100-year
                                           flood plain. The upland portions of the site are oak
                                           savannah meadows.

                                           In addition to the habitat conservation targets, native
                                           fish have been identified as a species conservation
                                           target for the site. Rock Creek provides important
                                           native fish habitat for pacific and brook lamprey,
                                           cutthroat trout and steelhead. The riparian forest is
                                           a buffer between the adjacent developed areas and
                                           Rock Creek which helps protect the creek from run-off
                                           and improves the fish habitat.



Example of mixed-conifer hardwood forest




Example of healthy riparian forest


50        Master Plan
                                                        Orenco Woods Nature Park




Figure 13 - Desired Future Conditions Habitat Diagram




                                                          Master Plan        51
Orenco Woods Nature Park


                           Phasing & Next Steps

                           Metro began site preparation work for habitat
                           restoration within the vegetated corridor in 2012,
                           beginning with removal of invasive plants. Restoration
                           plantings will begin in early 2014. Removal of invasive
                           species and restoration plantings will be an on-going
                           management process.

                           The design and development of the park will begin
                           following the completion of the sale of the southeast
                           parcel. It is intended that the design and permitting
                           process will begin in 2013/2014. The park may be
                           developed in phases, depending on funding availability.

                           Cost estimates for park development have not yet
                           been prepared, and will be developed during the design
                           development phase. Very preliminary assessments
                           of site development costs range from $3 million - $4
                           million.

                           The McDonald House was purchased in 2013 by the
                           City of Hillsboro. A separate planning process will
                           be initiated for the site design and program for the
                           house and property. A timeline for the planning for
                           the McDonald House has not yet been determined.




52       Master Plan
Orenco Woods Nature Park




  Master Plan        53
APPENDIX
                                                                                                                                          In         Out




                                                                                                                        HV 5.4%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                       PHF 0.76
                                                                                                                                         260         648
                                                                                                                                         17    210    33
                                                                                                                                                                            HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                           PHF 0.60
                                                                                                                                               25

                                                                                                                31                                                         35
                    Clay Carney                                                                Out 28                                                                                 36 In




                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                   3                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                            0
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                                In   46                                                                               37 Out
                                                                                                                12                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                           HV 2.2%
NW 231st Ave & NW Alder St                                                                                PHF 0.64




                                                                                                                                                                 HV 2.9%
                                                                                                                                                                PHF 0.81
                                                                                                                                         10    582    1
Thursday, June 13, 2013                                                                                                                  Out           In
                                                                                                                                         222          593
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
                                                                                                                            Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                            7:15 AM to 8:15 AM
5-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Alder St                     NW Alder St                       Interval               Crosswalk
   Time       L       T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R                Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM      0       43     0     0        2      6      1     0       4      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0         56            4      0      0           3
 7:05 AM      0       39     0     0        1      7      1     0       2      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0         50            0      0      0           0
 7:10 AM      0       37     0     1        0      4      1     1       2      0      1        0          0    0      0                  0         45            2      0      0           3
 7:15 AM      0       43     0     0        2      7      1     0       3      1      4        0          0    0      2                  0         63            0      0      0           3
 7:20 AM      0       55     0     0        3     17      1     0       4      0      1        0          0    0      1                  0          82           4      0      0           3
 7:25 AM      0       51     0     0        3     18      1     0       2      1      2        0          0    0      4                  0          82           3      0      0           1
 7:30 AM      1       39     0     0        4     20      0     1       4      0      1        0          0    0      3                  0          72           1      0      0           1
 7:35 AM      0       42     0     0        4     16      1     0       3      0      1        0          0    0      4                  0          71           5      0      0           2
 7:40 AM      1       42     0     0        5     14      3     0       2      0      0        1          0    0      0                  0          67           6      0      0           5
 7:45 AM      0       58     0     1        4     22      1     0       3      0      0        0          0    0      6                  0          94           1      0      0           0
 7:50 AM      2       52     0     0        4     15      4     0       4      1      0        0          0    0      4                  1          86           0      0      0           1
 7:55 AM      2       61     1     1        2     31      3     0       3      0      0        0          0    0      5                  0         108           1      0      0           1
 8:00 AM      2       62     0     1        2     23      2     0       2      0      0        0          0    1      2                  0          96           1      0      0           0
 8:05 AM      1       45     0     2        0     15      0     0       0      0      2        0          0    0      4                  0          67           3      0      0           0
 8:10 AM      1       32     0     0        0     12      0     0       1      0      1        0          0    0      0                  0          47           0      0      0           1
 8:15 AM      0       34     0     0        1     20      1     0       1      0      1        0          0    0      1                  0          59           1      0      0           1
 8:20 AM      0       32     0     0        0     13      0     0       4      0      1        0          0    0      1                  0          51           0      0      0           0
 8:25 AM      0       27     0     0        1      9      0     0       3      0      0        0          0    0      1                  0         41            0      0      0           2
 8:30 AM      2       44     0     0        3     18      0     0       2      0      2        0          0    0      0                  0          71           0      0      0           3
 8:35 AM      0       33     0     0        1     15      0     0       1      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0          50           1      0      0           0
 8:40 AM      0       29     0     1        2     10      3     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0          44           1      0      0           2
 8:45 AM      0       36     0     0        1     12      4     0       4      0      0        0          0    0      2                  0          59           0      0      1           1
 8:50 AM      1       45     0     0        3     22      1     0       4      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0          76           0      0      0           0
 8:55 AM      1       31     0     0        4     12      3     0       1      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0          52           1      0      0           0
   Total
             14     1,012     1      7      52    358    32      2      59     3      17       1          0    1          40            1           1,589        35             0     1       33
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Alder St                     NW Alder St                       Interval               Crosswalk
   Time       L       T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R                Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM      0      119     0     1        3     17      3     1       8      0      1        0          0    0      0                  0         151           6      0      0           6
 7:15 AM      0      149     0     0        8     42      3     0       9      2      7        0          0    0      7                  0         227           7      0      0           7
 7:30 AM      2      123     0     0        13    50      4     1       9      0      2        1          0    0      7                  0         210           12     0      0           8
 7:45 AM      4      171     1     2        10    68      8     0       10     1      0        0          0    0     15                  1         288            2     0      0           2
 8:00 AM      4      139     0     3        2     50      2     0       3      0      3        0          0    1      6                  0         210           4      0      0           1
 8:15 AM      0       93     0     0        2     42      1     0       8      0      2        0          0    0      3                  0         151           1      0      0           3
 8:30 AM      2      106     0     1        6     43      3     0       3      0      2        0          0    0      0                  0         165           2      0      0           5
 8:45 AM      2      112     0     0        8     46      8     0       9      0      0        0          0    0      2                  0         187           1      0      1           1
   Total
             14     1,012     1      7      52    358    32      2      59     3      17       1          0    1          40            1           1,589        35             0     1       33
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
7:15 AM to 8:15 AM
                     Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Alder St                     NW Alder St                           Total              Crosswalk
Approach
              In     Out   Total Bikes      In    Out   Total Bikes     In    Out    Total   Bikes    In      Out    Total             Bikes                    North South East          West
 Volume      593     222    815    5       260    648    908    1       46     28      74      1      36       37      73                1           935         25     0      0           18
  %HV                   2.9%                         5.4%                         2.2%                            0.0%                              3.4%
  PHF                   0.81                         0.76                         0.64                            0.60                              0.81

                   Northbound                   Southbound                     Eastbound                      Westbound
   By
                  NW 231st Ave                  NW 231st Ave                  NW Alder St                     NW Alder St                           Total
Movement
               L    T      R       Total     L    T      R     Total     L      T     R      Total     L        T     R            Total
 Volume       10   582      1      593      33   210    17     260      31      3     12     46        0        1    35            36                935
  %HV       10.0% 2.6% #####       2.9%    0.0% 6.7% 0.0%      5.4%    0.0%   0.0% 8.3%      2.2%    0.0%     0.0% 0.0%            0.0%             3.4%
  PHF        0.42  0.83   0.25     0.81    0.63  0.76  0.47    0.76    0.78   0.38   0.43    0.64    0.00     0.25  0.58           0.60             0.81


Rolling Hour Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Alder St                     NW Alder St                       Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R                Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM      6      562     1     3        34    177    18     2       36     3     10        1          0    0     29                  1         876           27     0      0           23
 7:15 AM     10      582     1     5        33    210    17     1       31     3     12        1          0    1     35                  1         935           25     0      0           18
 7:30 AM     10      526     1     5        27    210    15     1       30     1      7        1          0    1     31                  1         859           19     0      0           14
 7:45 AM     10      509     1     6        20    203    14     0       24     1      7        0          0    1     24                  1         814            9     0      0           11
 8:00 AM      8      450     0     4        18    181    14     0       23     0      7        0          0    1     11                  0         713            8     0      1           10
                                                                                                                                         In          Out




                                                                                                                        HV 0.3%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                       PHF 0.89
                                                                                                                                        730          313
                                                                                                                                        50     661    19
                                                                                                                                                                            HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                           PHF 0.68
                                                                                                                                                3

                                                                                                                22                                                         19
                    Clay Carney                                                                Out 57                                                                                 19 In
                                                                                                                   1                                                       0




                                                                                                                                  9




                                                                                                                                                            3
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                                In   34                                                                               21 Out
                                                                                                                11                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                           HV 0.0%
NW 231st Ave & NW Alder St                                                                                PHF 0.61




                                                                                                                                                                 HV 0.7%
                                                                                                                                                                PHF 0.93
                                                                                                                                           7   272    1
Wednesday, June 12, 2013                                                                                                                Out            In
                                                                                                                                        672           280
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                            Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                            4:55 PM to 5:55 PM
5-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Alder St                     NW Alder St                       Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R               Bikes       Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     0        19     0     0        2     42      2     0       2      0      0        0          0    0      1                 0           68           3      0      0           0
 4:05 PM     0        15     0     1        2     34      1     0       1      0      0        0          0    0      2                 0           55           0      0      0           0
 4:10 PM     0        25     0     0        1     46      2     2       1      0      0        1          0    0      1                 0           76           0      0      0           1
 4:15 PM     1        27     0     0        2     55      2     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      1                 0           89           6      0      0           4
 4:20 PM     0        25     1     0        1     46      6     0       1      0      0        0          0    1      1                 0           82           0      0      0           0
 4:25 PM     0        26     0     0        0     57      2     1       2      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0           87           0      0      0           2
 4:30 PM     0        20     0     0        3     52      1     2       4      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0           80           2      0      0           1
 4:35 PM     3        23     0     0        0     61      0     0       2      0      0        0          1    0      0                 0           90           0      0      0           0
 4:40 PM     1        25     2     0        1     56      4     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      1                 0           91           0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM     0        27     0     0        3     45      3     1       2      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0           80           1      0      0           3
 4:50 PM     0        14     0     1        1     42      5     1       2      0      1        0          1    0      1                 0           67           0      0      0           0
 4:55 PM     0        22     0     1        0     51      6     0       2      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0           81           0      0      0           1
 5:00 PM     0        26     0     0        4     53      2     0       3      0      2        0          0    0      0                 0           90           0      0      0           0
 5:05 PM     1        20     1     0        2     54      2     0       3      0      2        0          0    0      2                 0           87           0      0      0           1
 5:10 PM     0        27     0     0        2     55      3     1       1      0      3        0          0    0      0                 0           91           0      0      1           0
 5:15 PM     2        19     0     0        0     50      4     1       1      0      1        0          0    0      2                 0           79           0      0      0           0
 5:20 PM     1        22     0     0        1     43      5     0       2      0      0        0          0    0      2                 0           76           0      0      0           3
 5:25 PM     2        21     0     0        1     66      5     1       3      0      1        0          0    0      2                 0          101           1      0      0           1
 5:30 PM     1        25     0     0        2     50      7     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      3                 0           89           0      0      0           0
 5:35 PM     0        19     0     0        2     68      3     2       4      0      0        0          0    0      2                 0           98           2      0      0           0
 5:40 PM     0        26     0     0        1     58      3     1       0      1      0        0          0    0      0                 0           89           0      0      0           0
 5:45 PM     0        18     0     0        2     55      4     2       1      0      1        0          0    0      3                 0           84           0      0      1           1
 5:50 PM     0        27     0     0        2     58      6     0       2      0      0        0          0    0      3                 0           98           0      0      1           2
 5:55 PM     0        19     0     1        0     52      3     3       3      0      0        0          0    0      2                 0           79           0      0      0           0
   Total
             12      537      4      4      35   1,249   81      18     42     1      14       1          2    1          29           0            2,007        15             0     3       20
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Alder St                     NW Alder St                       Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R               Bikes       Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     0        59     0     1        5     122     5     2       4      0      0        1          0    0      4                 0          199           3      0      0           1
 4:15 PM     1        78     1     0        3     158    10     1       3      0      1        0          0    1      2                 0          258           6      0      0           6
 4:30 PM     4        68     2     0        4     169     5     2       6      0      1        0          1    0      1                 0          261           2      0      0           1
 4:45 PM     0        63     0     2        4     138    14     2       6      0      1        0          1    0      1                 0          228           1      0      0           4
 5:00 PM     1        73     1     0        8     162     7     1       7      0      7        0          0    0      2                 0          268           0      0      1           1
 5:15 PM     5        62     0     0        2     159    14     2       6      0      2        0          0    0      6                 0          256           1      0      0           4
 5:30 PM     1        70     0     0        5     176    13     3       4      1      1        0          0    0      5                 0          276           2      0      0           0
 5:45 PM     0        64     0     1        4     165    13     5       6      0      1        0          0    0      8                 0          261           0      0      2           3
   Total
             12      537      4      4      35   1,249   81      18     42     1      14       1          2    1          29           0            2,007        15             0     3       20
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
4:55 PM to 5:55 PM
                     Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Alder St                     NW Alder St                           Total              Crosswalk
Approach
             In      Out   Total Bikes      In    Out   Total Bikes     In    Out    Total   Bikes    In      Out    Total            Bikes                     North South East          West
 Volume     280      672    952    1       730    313 1,043     8       34     57      91      0      19       21      40               0           1,063        3      0      3           9
  %HV                   0.7%                         0.3%                         0.0%                            0.0%                              0.4%
  PHF                   0.93                         0.89                         0.61                            0.68                              0.92

                  Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                      Westbound
   By
                 NW 231st Ave                   NW 231st Ave                  NW Alder St                     NW Alder St                           Total
Movement
              L    T      R        Total     L    T      R     Total     L      T     R      Total     L        T     R           Total
 Volume       7   272      1       280      19   661    50     730      22      1     11     34        0        0    19           19                1,063
  %HV       0.0% 0.7% 0.0%         0.7%    0.0% 0.3% 0.0%      0.3%    0.0%   0.0% 0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0% 0.0%           0.0%              0.4%
  PHF       0.35  0.93   0.25      0.93    0.59  0.90  0.74    0.89    0.69   0.25   0.39    0.61    0.00     0.00  0.68          0.68               0.92


Rolling Hour Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Alder St                     NW Alder St                       Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R               Bikes       Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM      5      268     3     3        16    587    34     7       19     0      3        1          2    1      8                 0          946           12     0      0           12
 4:15 PM     6       282     4     2        19    627    36     6       22     0     10        0          2    1      6                 0        1,015           9      0      1           12
 4:30 PM     10      266     3     2        18    628    40     7       25     0     11        0          2    0     10                 0        1,013            4     0      1           10
 4:45 PM      7      268     1     2        19    635    48     8       23     1     11        0          1    0     14                 0        1,028            4     0      1            9
 5:00 PM      7      269     1     1        19    662    47    11       23     1     11        0          0    0     21                 0        1,061            3     0      3            8
                                                                                                                                          In          Out




                                                                                                                        HV 5.9%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                       PHF 0.79
                                                                                                                                         236          590
                                                                                                                                            5   219    12
                                                                                                                                                                             HV 4.5%
                                                                                                                                                                            PHF 0.39
                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                34                                                          18
                    Clay Carney                                                                Out 16                                                                                  22 In




                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                   1                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                             2
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                                In   55                                                                                30 Out
                                                                                                                20                                                          3

                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                           HV 3.6%
NW 231st Ave & NW Birch St                                                                                PHF 0.60




                                                                                                                                                                  HV 3.2%
                                                                                                                                                                 PHF 0.80
                                                                                                                                         10     538    17
Thursday, June 13, 2013                                                                                                                  Out            In
                                                                                                                                         242           565
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
                                                                                                                            Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                            7:20 AM to 8:20 AM
5-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                                Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                        Interval               Crosswalk
   Time       L       T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R                Bikes       Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM      0       39     0     1        1      6      0     0       0      0      1        0          2    0      0                  0          49            0      0      0           2
 7:05 AM      0       39     0     0        0      7      1     0       3      0      0        0          0    0      1                  0          51            0      0      0           0
 7:10 AM      0       31     0     1        1      3      0     1       6      0      1        0          0    0      0                  0          42            0      0      0           0
 7:15 AM      0       38     0     0        0     10      0     0       3      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0           51           0      1      0           2
 7:20 AM      0       53     0     0        1     17      1     0       2      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0           74           0      2      0           1
 7:25 AM      2       48     0     0        0     14      1     0       4      0      0        0          0    0      1                  0           70           0      0      0           0
 7:30 AM      1       39     1     0        2     23      1     0       2      0      1        0          0    0      0                  0           70           0      1      1           0
 7:35 AM      0       37     1     0        0     19      0     1       2      1      1        0          0    0      2                  0           63           0      0      0           3
 7:40 AM      0       39     1     0        3     12      0     0       2      0      3        0          1    0      1                  0           62           0      0      0           4
 7:45 AM      0       50     5     1        1     18      0     0       3      0      1        0          0    0      3                  0           81           0      0      0           0
 7:50 AM      2       52     4     0        1     18      0     0       6      0      3        0          1    1      2                  0           90           0      1      0           0
 7:55 AM      1       51     2     1        2     27      0     0       3      0      2        0          1    0      6                  0           95           0      0      0           1
 8:00 AM      1       62     2     2        2     23      2     0       6      0      3        0          0    0      2                  0          103           0      0      0           1
 8:05 AM      0       43     0     1        0     15      0     0       2      0      2        0          0    0      1                  0           63           0      0      1           1
 8:10 AM      2       36     1     1        0     13      0     0       1      0      1        0          0    0      0                  0           54           0      0      0           0
 8:15 AM      1       28     0     0        0     20      0     0       1      0      3        0          0    0      0                  0           53           0      1      0           1
 8:20 AM      1       32     0     0        0     15      0     0       2      0      2        0          1    0      0                  0           53           0      0      0           0
 8:25 AM      1       29     0     0        0      9      0     0       2      0      4        0          0    0      0                  0          45            0      1      0           4
 8:30 AM      0       37     1     0        0     15      1     0       3      1      4        0          0    0      0                  0           62           0      0      0           0
 8:35 AM      1       31     0     0        0     18      1     0       3      0      1        0          0    0      0                  0           55           0      0      0           1
 8:40 AM      0       23     1     1        0      5      0     0       3      0      0        0          1    0      1                  0          34            0      0      0           1
 8:45 AM      0       32     0     0        0     13      1     0       5      0      1        0          0    0      1                  0           53           0      0      1           1
 8:50 AM      1       43     0     0        2     22      0     0       3      0      1        0          0    0      0                  0           72           0      0      0           2
 8:55 AM      0       31     1     0        0     11      2     0       1      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0           46           0      0      0           0
   Total
             14      943     20      9      16    353    11      2      68     2      35       0          7    1          21            0            1,491         0             7     3       25
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                                Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                        Interval               Crosswalk
   Time       L       T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R                Bikes       Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM      0      109     0     2        2     16      1     1       9      0      2        0          2    0      1                  0          142           0      0      0           2
 7:15 AM      2      139     0     0        1     41      2     0       9      0      0        0          0    0      1                  0          195           0      3      0           3
 7:30 AM      1      115     3     0        5     54      1     1       6      1      5        0          1    0      3                  0          195           0      1      1           7
 7:45 AM      3      153    11     2        4     63      0     0       12     0      6        0          2    1     11                  0          266           0      1      0           1
 8:00 AM      3      141     3     4        2     51      2     0       9      0      6        0          0    0      3                  0          220           0      0      1           2
 8:15 AM      3       89     0     0        0     44      0     0       5      0      9        0          1    0      0                  0          151           0      2      0           5
 8:30 AM      1       91     2     1        0     38      2     0       9      1      5        0          1    0      1                  0          151           0      0      0           2
 8:45 AM      1      106     1     0        2     46      3     0       9      0      2        0          0    0      1                  0          171           0      0      1           3
   Total
             14      943     20      9      16    353    11      2      68     2      35       0          7    1          21            0            1,491         0             7     3       25
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
7:20 AM to 8:20 AM
                     Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                                Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                            Total              Crosswalk
Approach
              In     Out   Total Bikes      In    Out   Total Bikes     In    Out    Total   Bikes    In      Out    Total             Bikes                     North South East          West
 Volume      565     242    807    6       236    590    826    1       55     16      71      0      22       30      52                0            878         0      5      2           12
  %HV                   3.2%                         5.9%                         3.6%                            4.5%                               4.0%
  PHF                   0.80                         0.79                         0.60                            0.39                               0.76

                   Northbound                   Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   By
                  NW 231st Ave                  NW 231st Ave                  NW Birch St                  NW Birch St                               Total
Movement
               L    T      R       Total     L    T      R     Total     L      T     R      Total      L    T     R               Total
 Volume       10   538     17      565      12   219     5     236      34      1     20     55         3    1     18              22                 878
  %HV       10.0% 3.0% 5.9%        3.2%    0.0% 6.4% 0.0%      5.9%    5.9%   0.0% 0.0%      3.6%    33.3% 0.0% 0.0%               4.5%              4.0%
  PHF        0.63  0.82   0.39     0.80    0.60  0.81  0.42    0.79    0.57   0.25   0.63    0.60     0.38 0.25   0.41             0.39              0.76


Rolling Hour Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                                Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                        Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R                Bikes       Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM      6      516    14     4        12    174     4     2       36     1     13        0          5    1     16                  0          798           0      5      1           13
 7:15 AM      9      548    17     6        12    209     5     1       36     1     17        0          3    1     18                  0          876           0      5      2           13
 7:30 AM     10      498    17     6        11    212     3     1       32     1     26        0          4    1     17                  0          832           0      4      2           15
 7:45 AM     10      474    16     7        6     196     4     0       35     1     26        0          4    1     15                  0          788           0      3      1           10
 8:00 AM     8       427     6     5        4     179     7     0       32     1     22        0          2    0      5                  0          693           0      2      2           12
                                                                                                                                         In         Out




                                                                                                                        HV 0.3%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                       PHF 0.92
                                                                                                                                        669         299
                                                                                                                                        38    626    5
                                                                                                                                                                           HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                          PHF 0.75
                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                13                                                        2
                    Clay Carney                                                                Out 49                                                                                3 In
                                                                                                                   0                                                      0




                                                                                                                                  5




                                                                                                                                                           3
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                                In   20                                                                              7 Out
                                                                                                                   7                                                      1

                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                           HV 0.0%
NW 231st Ave & NW Birch St                                                                                PHF 0.63




                                                                                                                                                                HV 0.7%
                                                                                                                                                               PHF 0.88
                                                                                                                                        11    284    2
Wednesday, June 12, 2013                                                                                                                Out           In
                                                                                                                                        634          297
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                            Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                            5:00 PM to 6:00 PM
5-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     3        16     0     0        0     36      1     0       1      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0         57            0      0      0           0
 4:05 PM     1        14     0     1        1     38      1     0       1      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0         56            0      0      0           0
 4:10 PM     0        19     0     0        0     33      2     1       0      0      0        0          0    0      1                 0         55            0      0      0           0
 4:15 PM     0        23     0     0        0     62      2     0       0      0      1        1          0    0      0                 0         88            0      0      0           2
 4:20 PM     0        26     0     0        0     53      2     0       3      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0         84            0      0      0           0
 4:25 PM     1        22     0     0        0     51      4     1       2      0      2        0          0    0      0                 0         82            0      0      0           2
 4:30 PM     1        17     0     0        0     41      5     1       1      0      0        0          0    0      1                 0         66            0      0      0           2
 4:35 PM     0        22     0     0        1     57      2     2       1      0      0        0          1    0      0                 0         84            0      0      0           0
 4:40 PM     0        22     1     0        1     59      3     0       1      0      4        0          0    0      1                 0         92            0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM     1        27     0     0        0     45      1     0       1      0      0        0          1    0      0                 0         76            0      0      0           1
 4:50 PM     2        13     0     1        0     46      3     1       0      0      0        1          0    0      0                 0         64            0      0      0           1
 4:55 PM     1        16     0     1        3     42      3     0       1      0      0        0          1    0      0                 0         67            0      0      0           2
 5:00 PM     2        27     0     0        0     40      4     0       2      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0         75            0      0      0           0
 5:05 PM     1        22     1     0        1     58      7     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      1                 0         91            0      0      0           1
 5:10 PM     1        30     0     0        0     52      3     1       0      0      1        0          0    0      0                 0         87            0      0      1           0
 5:15 PM     1        21     0     0        0     55      1     1       1      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0         79            0      0      0           0
 5:20 PM     1        25     0     0        0     36      3     0       1      0      2        0          0    0      0                 0         68            0      0      0           2
 5:25 PM     0        26     0     0        0     55      3     1       1      0      0        0          1    0      0                 0         86            0      0      0           1
 5:30 PM     1        27     0     0        1     62      2     0       2      0      2        0          0    0      0                 0         97            0      0      0           0
 5:35 PM     2        17     0     0        0     59      0     2       2      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0         80            0      0      0           0
 5:40 PM     1        21     0     0        1     54      2     1       1      0      1        0          0    0      1                 0         82            0      0      0           0
 5:45 PM     0        23     0     0        0     42      5     2       0      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0         70            0      0      1           1
 5:50 PM     1        21     0     0        1     60      5     0       3      0      1        0          0    0      0                 0         92            0      0      1           0
 5:55 PM     0        24     1     1        1     53      3     3       0      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0         82            0      0      0           0
   Total
             21      521      3      4      11   1,189   67      17     25     0      14       2          4    0           5           0           1,860         0            0      3      15
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     4        49     0     1        1     107     4     1       2      0      0        0          0    0      1                 0         168           0      0      0           0
 4:15 PM     1        71     0     0        0     166     8     1       5      0      3        1          0    0      0                 0         254           0      0      0           4
 4:30 PM     1        61     1     0        2     157    10     3       3      0      4        0          1    0      2                 0         242           0      0      0           2
 4:45 PM     4        56     0     2        3     133     7     1       2      0      0        1          2    0      0                 0         207           0      0      0           4
 5:00 PM     4        79     1     0        1     150    14     1       2      0      1        0          0    0      1                 0         253           0      0      1           1
 5:15 PM     2        72     0     0        0     146     7     2       3      0      2        0          1    0      0                 0         233           0      0      0           3
 5:30 PM     4        65     0     0        2     175     4     3       5      0      3        0          0    0      1                 0         259           0      0      0           0
 5:45 PM     1        68     1     1        2     155    13     5       3      0      1        0          0    0      0                 0         244           0      0      2           1
   Total
             21      521      3      4      11   1,189   67      17     25     0      14       2          4    0           5           0           1,860         0            0      3      15
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
5:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                     Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                          Total              Crosswalk
Approach
             In      Out   Total Bikes      In    Out   Total Bikes     In    Out    Total   Bikes    In      Out   Total             Bikes                    North South East          West
 Volume     297      634    931    1       669    299    968   11       20     49      69      0      3        7      10                0           989         0      0      3           5
  %HV                   0.7%                         0.3%                         0.0%                           0.0%                              0.4%
  PHF                   0.88                         0.92                         0.63                           0.75                              0.94

                  Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                      Westbound
   By
                 NW 231st Ave                   NW 231st Ave                  NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                          Total
Movement
              L    T      R        Total     L    T      R     Total     L      T     R      Total     L        T     R           Total
 Volume      11   284      2       297       5   626    38     669      13      0      7     20        1        0      2          3                 989
  %HV       0.0% 0.7% 0.0%         0.7%    0.0% 0.3% 0.0%      0.3%    0.0%   0.0% 0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0% 0.0%           0.0%             0.4%
  PHF       0.69  0.90   0.50      0.88    0.63  0.89  0.68    0.92    0.65   0.00   0.44    0.63    0.25     0.00   0.50         0.75             0.94


Rolling Hour Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     10      237     1     3        6     563    29     6       12     0      7        2          3    0      3                 0         871           0      0      0           10
 4:15 PM     10      267     2     2        6     606    39     6       12     0      8        2          3    0      3                 0         956           0      0      1           11
 4:30 PM     11      268     2     2        6     586    38     7       10     0      7        1          4    0      3                 0         935           0      0      1           10
 4:45 PM     14      272     1     2        6     604    32     7       12     0      6        1          3    0      2                 0         952           0      0      1           8
 5:00 PM     11      284     2     1        5     626    38    11       13     0      7        0          1    0      2                 0         989           0      0      3           5
                                                                                                                                        In         Out




                                                                                                                         HV 6.3%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                        PHF 0.80
                                                                                                                                       238         540
                                                                                                                                       13    215    10
                                                                                                                                                                          HV 4.0%
                                                                                                                                                                         PHF 0.60
                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                30                                                       55
                    Clay Carney                                                               Out 39                                                                                99 In
                                                                                                                    2                                                    11




                                                                                                                                   9




                                                                                                                                                          1
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                               In   63                                                                              62 Out
                                                                                                                31                                                       33

                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                          HV 6.3%
NW 231st Ave & NW Dogwood St                                                                             PHF 0.56




                                                                                                                                                               HV 4.2%
                                                                                                                                                              PHF 0.83
                                                                                                                                       15    455    50
Thursday, June 13, 2013                                                                                                                Out           In
                                                                                                                                       279          520
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
                                                                                                                             Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                             7:20 AM to 8:20 AM
5-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                   Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                             Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                  NW 231st Ave                NW Dogwood St                  NW Dogwood St                    Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes       L      T      R   Bikes     L      T     R     Bikes        L     T     R     Bikes                Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM     0        35     0     0         0      8      0     0       0      0     2       0          0     0     3       0                   48            0      0      0           1
 7:05 AM     0        25     0     1         0      7      0     0       3      0     0       0          0     0     2       0                   37            0      0      0           1
 7:10 AM     0        36     2     0         0      6      0     1       2      0     2       0          2     0     1       0                   51            0      0      0           2
 7:15 AM     2        42     0     0         1      7      0     0       2      0     2       0          1     0     0       0                   57            0      0      0           1
 7:20 AM     0        45     3     0         0     17      0     0       0      0     3       0          1     0     5       0                    74           0      0      0           0
 7:25 AM     0        37     1     0         1     14      1     0       4      0     3       0          0     0     3       0                    64           0      0      0           1
 7:30 AM     1        40     8     0         1     22      1     0       0      0     2       0          0     0     1       0                    76           0      0      0           1
 7:35 AM     2        40     8     0         0     19      1     1       2      1     0       0          2     0     0       0                    75           0      0      0           1
 7:40 AM     0        29    10     0         1     14      0     0       2      0     3       0          3     1     7       0                    70           0      0      0           3
 7:45 AM     1        42     4     0         0     18      2     0       8      0     3       0          5     0     8       0                    91           0      0      0           1
 7:50 AM     2        45     6     0         1     15      4     0       4      1     7       0          6     3     5       1                    99           0      0      0           0
 7:55 AM     4        47     5     1         2     27      2     0       2      0     1       0          4     2     8       0                   104           0      0      0           0
 8:00 AM     1        46     1     0         1     21      1     0       1      0     4       0          6     0     5       1                    87           0      0      0           0
 8:05 AM     1        32     1     1         1     14      0     0       3      0     1       0          3     2     5       0                    63           0      0      1           1
 8:10 AM     2        24     1     0         1     13      0     0       2      0     2       0          2     3     2       0                    52           0      1      0           1
 8:15 AM     1        28     2     0         1     21      1     0       2      0     2       0          1     0     6       0                    65           0      0      0           0
 8:20 AM     0        24     1     0         3     13      1     0       1      0     1       0          1     0     6       0                    51           0      0      0           0
 8:25 AM     0        25     0     0         2     11      0     0       7      0     3       0          1     0     2       0                    51           0      0      0           2
 8:30 AM     0        31     3     0         1     19      0     0       1      1     0       0          1     0     3       0                    60           0      0      0           0
 8:35 AM     0        24     4     1         1     15      2     0       0      1     1       0          3     0     6       0                    57           0      0      0           1
 8:40 AM     1        21     0     0         0      7      1     0       1      0     0       0          0     1     2       0                   34            0      0      1           0
 8:45 AM     1        27     0     0         1     11      0     0       1      0     3       0          2     1     1       0                    48           0      0      0           1
 8:50 AM     3        37     4     0         1     19      1     0       5      0     1       0          1     0     3       0                    75           0      0      0           2
 8:55 AM     2        27     0     0         2      9      1     0       2      0     5       0          1     0     2       0                   51            0      0      0           0
   Total
             24      809     64      4      22     347    19      2      55      4     51     0      46        13          86          2          1,540         0             1     2       20
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                   Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                             Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                  NW 231st Ave                NW Dogwood St                  NW Dogwood St                    Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes       L      T      R   Bikes     L      T     R     Bikes    L         T     R     Bikes                Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM     0        96     2     1         0     21      0     1       5      0     4       0      2         0     6       0                   136           0      0      0           4
 7:15 AM     2       124     4     0         2     38      1     0       6      0     8       0       2        0     8       0                   195           0      0      0           2
 7:30 AM     3       109    26     0         2     55      2     1        4     1     5       0       5        1      8      0                   221           0      0      0           5
 7:45 AM     7       134    15     1         3     60      8     0       14     1     11      0      15        5     21      1                   294           0      0      0           1
 8:00 AM     4       102     3     1         3     48      1     0       6      0     7       0      11        5     12      1                   202           0      1      1           2
 8:15 AM     1        77     3     0         6     45      2     0       10     0     6       0       3        0     14      0                   167           0      0      0           2
 8:30 AM     1        76     7     1         2     41      3     0       2      2     1       0      4         1     11      0                   151           0      0      1           1
 8:45 AM     6        91     4     0         4     39      2     0       8      0     9       0      4         1     6       0                   174           0      0      0           3
   Total
             24      809     64      4      22     347    19      2      55      4     51     0      46        13          86          2          1,540         0             1     2       20
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
7:20 AM to 8:20 AM
                     Northbound                   Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound                                                  Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 231st Ave                  NW 231st Ave              NW Dogwood St               NW Dogwood St                             Total              Crosswalk
Approach
             In      Out   Total Bikes       In    Out   Total Bikes     In  Out    Total Bikes      In  Out    Total Bikes                                   North South East          West
 Volume     520      279    799    2        238    540    778    1       63   39     102    0        99   62     161    2                          920         0      1      1           9
  %HV                   4.2%                          6.3%                       6.3%                        4.0%                                 4.9%
  PHF                   0.83                          0.80                       0.56                        0.60                                 0.78

                  Northbound                     Southbound                   Eastbound                   Westbound
   By
                 NW 231st Ave                    NW 231st Ave                NW Dogwood St               NW Dogwood St                            Total
Movement
              L    T      R        Total      L    T      R     Total     L    T     R    Total       L    T     R    Total
 Volume      15   455     50       520       10   215    13     238      30     2    31 63           33    11    55 99                             920
  %HV       6.7% 2.9% 16.0%        4.2%    10.0% 6.0% 7.7%      6.3%    6.7% 0.0% 6.5% 6.3%         3.0% 0.0% 5.5% 4.0%                           4.9%
  PHF       0.54  0.82   0.48      0.83     0.63  0.85  0.41    0.80    0.54  0.50  0.60 0.56       0.52  0.55  0.65 0.60                         0.78


Rolling Hour Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                   Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                             Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                  NW 231st Ave                NW Dogwood St                  NW Dogwood St                    Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L       T      R   Bikes     L      T     R     Bikes    L         T     R     Bikes                Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM     12      463    47     2         7     174    11     2       29     2     28      0      24         6    43      1                   846           0      0      0           12
 7:15 AM     16      469    48     2        10     201    12     1       30     2     31      0      33        11    49      2                   912           0      1      1           10
 7:30 AM     15      422    47     2        14     208    13     1       34     2     29      0      34        11    55      2                   884           0      1      1           10
 7:45 AM     13      389    28     3        14     194    14     0       32     3     25      0      33        11    58      2                   814           0      1      2            6
 8:00 AM     12      346    17     2        15     173     8     0       26     2     23      0      22        7     43      1                   694           0      1      2            8
                                                                                                                                       In         Out




                                                                                                                        HV 0.3%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                       PHF 0.84
                                                                                                                                      618         274
                                                                                                                                      16    560    42
                                                                                                                                                                         HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                        PHF 0.82
                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                               11                                                       22
                    Clay Carney                                                              Out 42                                                                                46 In
                                                                                                                   8                                                    4




                                                                                                                                  6




                                                                                                                                                         2
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                              In   41                                                                              75 Out
                                                                                                               22                                                       20

                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                         HV 0.0%
NW 231st Ave & NW Dogwood St                                                                            PHF 0.68




                                                                                                                                                              HV 0.7%
                                                                                                                                                             PHF 0.91
                                                                                                                                      22    241    25
Wednesday, June 12, 2013                                                                                                              Out           In
                                                                                                                                      602          288
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                            Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                            4:55 PM to 5:55 PM
5-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                             Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                NW Dogwood St                  NW Dogwood St                    Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T     R     Bikes        L     T     R     Bikes                Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     1        17     1     1        1     37      1     0       0      0     4       0          1     1     1       0                   65            0      0      0           0
 4:05 PM     1        17     1     0        1     35      1     0       0      1     1       0          0     0     5       0                   63            0      0      1           0
 4:10 PM     1        16     0     0        3     37      1     1       1      1     0       0          2     0     3       0                   65            0      0      0           0
 4:15 PM     0        21     2     0        2     48      4     0       0      0     0       0          4     0     3       0                   84            0      0      0           2
 4:20 PM     1        20     1     0        2     42      0     0       0      0     2       0          3     0     3       2                   74            0      0      0           0
 4:25 PM     1        24     3     0        1     50      2     1       0      0     1       0          3     0     2       0                   87            0      0      1           0
 4:30 PM     1        18     5     0        3     39      2     1       1      1     2       1          1     0     2       0                   75            0      0      0           1
 4:35 PM     1        20     1     0        4     53      0     1       0      0     1       0          2     0     0       0                   82            0      0      0           1
 4:40 PM     1        24     1     0        0     58      0     0       2      1     4       0          1     0     2       0                   94            0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM     1        22     2     0        3     38      1     0       0      1     1       0          2     0     4       0                   75            0      0      0           1
 4:50 PM     0        14     2     0        3     37      3     1       0      0     5       0          0     0     0       0                   64            0      0      0           2
 4:55 PM     3        23     4     1        4     37      1     0       1      0     4       0          0     0     4       0                   81            0      0      0           1
 5:00 PM     2        17     1     0        3     40      1     0       2      0     3       0          2     0     1       0                   72            0      0      0           1
 5:05 PM     3        23     3     0        1     53      1     0       0      1     0       0          1     2     3       0                   91            0      0      0           0
 5:10 PM     1        20     4     0        4     49      1     1       1      1     2       0          1     0     0       0                   84            0      0      1           0
 5:15 PM     1        18     1     0        1     48      0     1       1      0     2       0          1     0     4       0                   77            0      0      0           1
 5:20 PM     2        18     2     0        1     34      0     0       0      0     4       0          3     0     1       0                   65            0      0      0           1
 5:25 PM     2        15     1     0        4     63      2     0       0      1     2       0          0     0     3       0                   93            0      0      0           1
 5:30 PM     2        21     0     0        4     47      1     0       1      3     4       0          1     1     2       0                   87            0      0      0           0
 5:35 PM     1        22     5     0        10    53      0     2       1      1     0       0          5     0     1       0                   99            0      0      0           0
 5:40 PM     2        25     0     0        5     49      3     1       0      1     1       0          1     1     1       0                   89            0      0      1           0
 5:45 PM     0        17     0     0        1     39      3     2       1      0     0       0          4     0     1       0                   66            0      0      0           1
 5:50 PM     3        22     4     1        4     48      3     0       3      0     0       0          1     0     1       0                   89            0      0      0           0
 5:55 PM     1        17     2     0        4     38      4     3       1      1     0       0          0     1     1       0                   70            0      0      1           0
   Total
             32      471     46      3      69   1,072   35      15     16     14     43     1      39         6          48          2          1,891         0             0     5       13
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                             Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave                NW Dogwood St                  NW Dogwood St                    Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L      T     R     Bikes    L         T     R     Bikes                Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     3        50     2     1        5     109     3     1       1      2     5       0       3        1     9       0                   193           0      0      1           0
 4:15 PM     2        65     6     0        5     140     6     1       0      0     3       0      10        0     8       2                   245           0      0      1           2
 4:30 PM     3        62     7     0        7     150     2     2       3      2     7       1       4        0     4       0                   251           0      0      0           2
 4:45 PM     4        59     8     1        10    112     5     1       1      1     10      0       2        0     8       0                   220           0      0      0           4
 5:00 PM     6        60     8     0        8     142     3     1       3      2     5       0       4        2     4       0                   247           0      0      1           1
 5:15 PM     5        51     4     0        6     145     2     1       1      1     8       0       4        0     8       0                   235           0      0      0           3
 5:30 PM     5        68     5     0        19    149     4     3       2      5     5       0       7        2     4       0                   275           0      0      1           0
 5:45 PM     4        56     6     1        9     125    10     5       5      1     0       0       5        1     3       0                   225           0      0      1           1
   Total
             32      471     46      3      69   1,072   35      15     16     14     43     1      39         6          48          2          1,891         0             0     5       13
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
4:55 PM to 5:55 PM
                     Northbound                  Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound                                                  Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave              NW Dogwood St               NW Dogwood St                             Total              Crosswalk
Approach
             In      Out   Total Bikes      In    Out   Total Bikes     In  Out    Total Bikes      In  Out    Total Bikes                                   North South East          West
 Volume     288      602    890    2       618    274    892    7       41   42      83    0        46   75     121    0                          993         0      0      2           6
  %HV                   0.7%                         0.3%                       0.0%                        0.0%                                 0.4%
  PHF                   0.91                         0.84                       0.68                        0.82                                 0.89

                  Northbound                    Southbound                   Eastbound                   Westbound
   By
                 NW 231st Ave                   NW 231st Ave                NW Dogwood St               NW Dogwood St                            Total
Movement
              L    T      R        Total     L    T      R     Total     L    T     R    Total       L    T     R    Total
 Volume      22   241     25       288      42   560    16     618      11     8    22 41           20     4    22 46                             993
  %HV       0.0% 0.8% 0.0%         0.7%    0.0% 0.4% 0.0%      0.3%    0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%         0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%                           0.4%
  PHF       0.69  0.89   0.78      0.91    0.55  0.86  0.44    0.84    0.69  0.40  0.55 0.68       0.50  0.50  0.69 0.82                         0.89


Rolling Hour Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                 Eastbound                        Westbound                                             Pedestrians
   Start            NW 231st Ave                 NW 231st Ave              NW Dogwood St                    NW Dogwood St                    Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T      R   Bikes     L    T     R     Bikes      L         T     R     Bikes                Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     12      236    23     2        27    511    16     5       5    5     25      1        19        1     29      2                   909           0      0      2           8
 4:15 PM     15      246    29     1        30    544    16     5       7    5     25      1        20        2     24      2                   963           0      0      2           9
 4:30 PM     18      232    27     1        31    549    12     5        8   6     30      1        14        2     24      0                   953           0      0      1           10
 4:45 PM     20      238    25     1        43    548    14     6       7    9     28      0        17        4     24      0                   977           0      0      2           8
 5:00 PM     20      235    23     1        42    561    19    10       11   9     18      0        20        5     19      0                   982           0      0      3           5
                                                                                                                                         In          Out




                                                                                                                         HV 2.7%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                        PHF 0.62
                                                                                                                                         37          34
                                                                                                                                            0   4     33
                                                                                                                                                                            HV 2.1%
                                                                                                                                                                           PHF 0.44
                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                    1                                                      24
                    Clay Carney                                                                Out 20                                                                                 48 In
                                                                                                                28                                                         19




                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                            0
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                                In   31                                                                              111 Out
                                                                                                                    2                                                      5

                                                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                           HV 3.2%
NW 228th Ave & NW Birch St                                                                                PHF 0.48




                                                                                                                                                                 HV 1.7%
                                                                                                                                                                PHF 0.38
                                                                                                                                            1   9     50
Thursday, June 13, 2013                                                                                                                  Out          In
                                                                                                                                         11           60
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
                                                                                                                             Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                             7:05 AM to 8:05 AM
5-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start            NW 228th Ave                 NW 228th Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                       Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R                Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM     0        0      0     0        1      0      0     0       0      1      0        0          0    1      0                  0          3            0      0      0           0
 7:05 AM     0        0      0     0        2      0      0     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      0                  0          3            0      0      0           0
 7:10 AM     0        0      1     0        0      0      0     0       0      1      0        0          0    0      0                  0          2            0      0      0           0
 7:15 AM     0        1      0     0        1      0      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      1                  0          3            0      0      0           0
 7:20 AM     0        1      2     0        3      0      0     0       0      1      1        0          0    1      0                  0          9            0      0      0           0
 7:25 AM     0        1      1     0        1      2      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      2                  0          7            0      1      0           0
 7:30 AM     0        0      0     0        3      0      0     0       0      2      0        0          0    0      2                  0          7            0      1      0           0
 7:35 AM     0        1      6     0        5      1      0     0       0      1      0        0          0    1      3                  0         18            0      0      0           0
 7:40 AM     0        0      2     0        1      0      0     0       0      5      0        0          0    2      1                  0         11            0      0      0           0
 7:45 AM     0        0     11     0        5      0      0     0       0      5      0        0          1    3      5                  0         30            0      6      0           0
 7:50 AM     0        2      6     0        6      0      0     0       0      6      0        0          0    4      3                  0         27            0      1      0           0
 7:55 AM     1        3     17     0        4      0      0     0       0      3      0        0          1    6      4                  0         39            0      0      0           0
 8:00 AM     0        0      4     0        2      1      0     0       1      4      0        0          3    2      3                  0         20            0      0      0           0
 8:05 AM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      3                  0          3            0      0      0           0
 8:10 AM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0          0            0      1      0           0
 8:15 AM     0        2      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      0                  0          2            0      0      0           0
 8:20 AM     0        0      0     0        1      0      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      1                  0          2            0      0      0           0
 8:25 AM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      1                  0          2            0      0      0           0
 8:30 AM     0        0      1     0        0      2      0     0       0      1      0        0          0    0      0                  0          4            0      0      1           0
 8:35 AM     0        1      0     0        2      0      0     0       0      1      0        0          1    0      0                  0          5            0      0      0           0
 8:40 AM     0        0      0     1        0      0      0     0       1      0      0        0          1    1      0                  0          3            0      0      0           0
 8:45 AM     0        0      0     0        2      0      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      2                  0          4            0      0      0           0
 8:50 AM     0        0      0     0        1      0      0     0       0      1      0        0          0    0      0                  0          2            0      0      0           0
 8:55 AM     0        0      1     0        3      1      0     0       0      2      0        0          0    0      0                  0          7            0      0      0           0
   Total
             1        12     52      1      43     7     0       0      2      34      3       0          7    21          31           0           213           0             10    1        0
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start            NW 228th Ave                 NW 228th Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                       Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R                Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM     0        0      1     0        3      0      0     0       0      2      1        0          0    1      0                  0          8            0      0      0           0
 7:15 AM     0        3      3     0        5      2      0     0       0      1      1        0          0    1      3                  0         19            0      1      0           0
 7:30 AM     0        1      8     0        9      1      0     0       0      8      0        0          0    3      6                  0         36            0      1      0           0
 7:45 AM     1        5     34     0        15     0      0     0       0      14     0        0          2    13    12                  0         96            0      7      0           0
 8:00 AM     0        0      4     0        2      1      0     0       1      4      0        0          3    2      6                  0         23            0      1      0           0
 8:15 AM     0        2      0     0        1      0      0     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      2                  0          6            0      0      0           0
 8:30 AM     0        1      1     1        2      2      0     0       1      2      0        0          2    1      0                  0         12            0      0      1           0
 8:45 AM     0        0      1     0        6      1      0     0       0      3      0        0          0    0      2                  0         13            0      0      0           0
   Total
             1        12     52      1      43     7     0       0      2      34      3       0          7    21          31           0           213           0             10    1        0
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
7:05 AM to 8:05 AM
                     Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 228th Ave                 NW 228th Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                           Total              Crosswalk
Approach
             In      Out    Total Bikes     In    Out   Total Bikes     In    Out    Total   Bikes    In      Out   Total              Bikes                    North South East          West
 Volume      60       11      71    0       37    34      71    0       31     20      51      0      48      111    159                 0           176         0      9      0           0
  %HV                    1.7%                        2.7%                         3.2%                           2.1%                               2.3%
  PHF                    0.38                        0.62                         0.48                           0.44                               0.46

                  Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                      Westbound
   By
                 NW 228th Ave                   NW 228th Ave                  NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                           Total
Movement
              L    T      R        Total     L    T     R      Total     L      T     R      Total     L        T     R            Total
 Volume       1     9     50       60       33     4     0     37        1     28      2     31        5       19     24           48                176
  %HV       0.0% 0.0% 2.0%         1.7%    0.0% 25.0% 0.0%     2.7%    0.0%   3.6% 0.0%      3.2%    0.0%     5.3% 0.0%            2.1%             2.3%
  PHF       0.25  0.45   0.37      0.38    0.55  0.33  0.00    0.62    0.25   0.44   0.50    0.48    0.31     0.37   0.50          0.44             0.46


Rolling Hour Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start            NW 228th Ave                 NW 228th Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                       Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R                Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM     1        9     46     0        32     3      0     0       0      25     2        0          2    18    21                  0         159           0      9      0           0
 7:15 AM     1        9     49     0        31     4      0     0       1      27     1        0          5    19    27                  0         174           0     10      0           0
 7:30 AM     1        8     46     0        27     2      0     0       1      26     1        0          5    18    26                  0         161           0      9      0           0
 7:45 AM     1        8     39     1        20     3      0     0       2      20     1        0          7    16    20                  0         137           0      8      1           0
 8:00 AM     0        3      6     1        11     4      0     0       2      9      1        0          5    3     10                  0         54            0      1      1           0
                                                                                                                                       In          Out




                                                                                                                       HV 0.0%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                      PHF 0.43
                                                                                                                                       12          17
                                                                                                                                          0   5     7
                                                                                                                                                                          HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                         PHF 0.67
                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                  0                                                      11
                    Clay Carney                                                               Out 4                                                                                 16 In
                                                                                                                  3                                                      4




                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                          0
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                               In   4                                                                               11 Out
                                                                                                                  1                                                      1

                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                          HV 0.0%
NW 228th Ave & NW Birch St                                                                               PHF 0.33




                                                                                                                                                               HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                              PHF 0.35
                                                                                                                                          0   6     1
Wednesday, June 12, 2013                                                                                                               Out           In
                                                                                                                                        7            7
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                           Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                           5:00 PM to 6:00 PM
5-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 228th Ave                 NW 228th Ave                 NW Birch St                    NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R     Bikes       L     T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      1      0           0
 4:05 PM     0        0      0     0        1      0      0     0       0      1      0       0         0     0      1                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 4:10 PM     0        1      0     0        0      1      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          2            1      0      0           0
 4:15 PM     0        0      0     0        1      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     1      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 4:20 PM     0        0      0     0        1      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         1     0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 4:25 PM     0        0      1     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           1
 4:30 PM     0        0      0     0        0      2      1     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 4:35 PM     0        0      1     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     2      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 4:40 PM     0        0      0     0        1      0      0     0       0      1      0       0         0     0      1                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM     0        0      0     0        0      3      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     1      0                 0          4            0      0      0           0
 4:50 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      1                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 4:55 PM     0        0      0     0        0      1      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 5:00 PM     0        0      0     0        2      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      1                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 5:05 PM     0        0      0     0        1      2      0     0       0      1      0       0         0     1      1                 0          6            0      0      0           0
 5:10 PM     0        0      0     0        1      1      0     0       0      1      1       0         0     0      0                 0          4            0      0      0           0
 5:15 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     1      1                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 5:20 PM     0        1      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 5:25 PM     0        1      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     1      1                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 5:30 PM     0        2      0     0        2      0      0     0       0      0      0       1         1     0      0                 0          5            0      0      0           0
 5:35 PM     0        2      0     0        0      1      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      1                 0          4            0      0      0           0
 5:40 PM     0        0      0     0        0      1      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     1      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 5:45 PM     0        0      0     0        1      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      1                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 5:50 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      3                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 5:55 PM     0        0      1     0        0      0      0     0       0      1      0       0         0     0      2                 0          4            0      0      0           0
   Total
             0        7       3      0      11    12     1       0      0      5      2       1         2     8          14           0            65           1             1     0        1
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 228th Ave                 NW 228th Ave                 NW Birch St                    NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R     Bikes       L     T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     0        1      0     0        1      1      0     0       0      1      0       0         0     0      1                 0          5            1      1      0           0
 4:15 PM     0        0      1     0        2      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         1     1      0                 0          5            0      0      0           1
 4:30 PM     0        0      1     0        1      2      1     0       0      1      0       0         0     2      1                 0          9            0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM     0        0      0     0        0      4      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     1      1                 0          7            0      0      0           0
 5:00 PM     0        0      0     0        4      3      0     0       0      2      1       0         0     1      2                 0         13            0      0      0           0
 5:15 PM     0        2      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     2      2                 0          6            0      0      0           0
 5:30 PM     0        4      0     0        2      2      0     0       0      0      0       1         1     1      1                 0         11            0      0      0           0
 5:45 PM     0        0      1     0        1      0      0     0       0      1      0       0         0     0      6                 0          9            0      0      0           0
   Total
             0        7       3      0      11    12     1       0      0      5      2       1         2     8          14           0            65           1             1     0        1
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
5:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                     Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 228th Ave                 NW 228th Ave                 NW Birch St                    NW Birch St                          Total              Crosswalk
Approach
             In      Out   Total Bikes      In    Out   Total Bikes     In    Out   Total   Bikes       In   Out    Total            Bikes                    North South East          West
 Volume       7       7      14    0        12    17      29    0       4      4      8       1         16    11      27               0           39          0      0      0           0
  %HV                   0.0%                         0.0%                        0.0%                            0.0%                             0.0%
  PHF                   0.35                         0.43                        0.33                            0.67                             0.75

                  Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                     Westbound
   By
                 NW 228th Ave                   NW 228th Ave                  NW Birch St                    NW Birch St                          Total
Movement
              L    T      R        Total     L    T     R      Total     L      T     R     Total     L        T     R           Total
 Volume       0     6      1       7         7     5     0     12        0      3      1    4         1        4     11          16                39
  %HV       0.0% 0.0% 0.0%         0.0%    0.0% 0.0% 0.0%      0.0%    0.0%   0.0% 0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0% 0.0%           0.0%             0.0%
  PHF       0.00  0.30   0.25      0.35    0.44  0.42  0.00    0.43    0.00   0.38   0.25   0.33    0.25     0.50   0.46         0.67             0.75


Rolling Hour Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 228th Ave                 NW 228th Ave                 NW Birch St                    NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R     Bikes       L     T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     0        1      2     0        4      7      1     0       0      2      1       0         1     4      3                 0         26            1      1      0           1
 4:15 PM     0        0      2     0        7      9      1     0       0      3      2       0         1     5      4                 0         34            0      0      0           1
 4:30 PM     0        2      1     0        5      9      1     0       0      3      2       0         0     6      6                 0         35            0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM     0        6      0     0        6      9      0     0       0      2      2       1         1     5      6                 0         37            0      0      0           0
 5:00 PM     0        6      1     0        7      5      0     0       0      3      1       1         1     4     11                 0         39            0      0      0           0
                                                                                                                                        In          Out




                                                                                                                        HV 0.0%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                       PHF 0.00
                                                                                                                                        0            0
                                                                                                                                           0   0     0
                                                                                                                                                                           HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                          PHF 0.00
                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                   0                                                      0
                    Clay Carney                                                                Out 42                                                                                0 In
                                                                                                                   0                                                      0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                           0
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                                In   99                                                                              0 Out
                                                                                                                99                                                        0

                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                           HV 2.0%
NW 225th Ave & NW Birch St                                                                                PHF 0.39




                                                                                                                                                                HV 2.4%
                                                                                                                                                               PHF 0.44
                                                                                                                                        42     0     0
Thursday, June 13, 2013                                                                                                                 Out          In
                                                                                                                                        99           42
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
                                                                                                                            Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                            7:15 AM to 8:15 AM
5-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 225th Ave                 NW 225th Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM      0       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 7:05 AM      0       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 7:10 AM      0       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 7:15 AM      1       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      2        0          0    0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 7:20 AM      2       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      4        0          0    0      0                 0          6            0      0      0           0
 7:25 AM      1       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      3        0          0    0      0                 0          4            0      0      0           0
 7:30 AM      2       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      4        0          0    0      0                 0          6            0      0      0           0
 7:35 AM      5       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      7        0          0    0      0                 0         12            0      0      0           0
 7:40 AM      5       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     10        0          0    0      0                 0         15            0      0      0           0
 7:45 AM      7       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     20        0          0    0      0                 0         27            0      0      0           0
 7:50 AM     12       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     21        0          0    0      0                 0         33            0      0      0           0
 7:55 AM      5       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     22        0          0    0      0                 0         27            0      0      0           0
 8:00 AM      2       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      3        0          0    0      0                 0          5            0      0      0           0
 8:05 AM      0       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      2        0          0    0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 8:10 AM      0       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 8:15 AM      1       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 8:20 AM      0       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 8:25 AM      1       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0        0          0    0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 8:30 AM      2       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 8:35 AM      1       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      6        0          0    0      0                 0          7            0      0      0           0
 8:40 AM      0       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      3        0          0    0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 8:45 AM      0       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      2        0          0    0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 8:50 AM      1       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      4        0          0    0      0                 0          5            0      0      0           0
 8:55 AM      0       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      3        0          0    0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
   Total
             48       0       0      0      0      0     0       0      0      0     120       0          0    0           0           0           168           0            0      0       0
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 225th Ave                 NW 225th Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM      0       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 7:15 AM      4       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      9        0          0    0      0                 0         13            0      0      0           0
 7:30 AM     12       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     21        0          0    0      0                 0         33            0      0      0           0
 7:45 AM     24       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     63        0          0    0      0                 0         87            0      0      0           0
 8:00 AM      2       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      6        0          0    0      0                 0          8            0      0      0           0
 8:15 AM      2       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1        0          0    0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 8:30 AM      3       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     10        0          0    0      0                 0         13            0      0      0           0
 8:45 AM      1       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      9        0          0    0      0                 0         10            0      0      0           0
   Total
             48       0       0      0      0      0     0       0      0      0     120       0          0    0           0           0           168           0            0      0       0
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
7:15 AM to 8:15 AM
                     Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 225th Ave                 NW 225th Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                          Total              Crosswalk
Approach
             In      Out    Total Bikes     In    Out   Total Bikes     In    Out    Total   Bikes    In      Out   Total             Bikes                    North South East          West
 Volume      42       99     141    0       0      0      0     0       99     42     141      0      0        0      0                 0           141         0      0      0           0
  %HV                    2.4%                        0.0%                         2.0%                           0.0%                              2.1%
  PHF                    0.44                        0.00                         0.39                           0.00                              0.41

                  Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                      Westbound
   By
                 NW 225th Ave                   NW 225th Ave                  NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                          Total
Movement
              L    T      R        Total     L    T     R      Total     L      T     R      Total     L        T     R           Total
 Volume      42     0      0       42        0     0     0     0         0      0     99     99        0        0      0          0                 141
  %HV       2.4% 0.0% 0.0%         2.4%    0.0% 0.0% 0.0%      0.0%    0.0%   0.0% 2.0%      2.0%    0.0%     0.0% 0.0%           0.0%             2.1%
  PHF       0.44  0.00   0.00      0.44    0.00  0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.39    0.39    0.00     0.00   0.00         0.00             0.41


Rolling Hour Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 225th Ave                 NW 225th Ave                 NW Birch St                     NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R      Bikes        L    T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 7:00 AM     40       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     94        0          0    0      0                 0         134           0      0      0           0
 7:15 AM     42       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     99        0          0    0      0                 0         141           0      0      0           0
 7:30 AM     40       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     91        0          0    0      0                 0         131           0      0      0           0
 7:45 AM     31       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     80        0          0    0      0                 0         111           0      0      0           0
 8:00 AM      8       0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0     26        0          0    0      0                 0         34            0      0      0           0
                                                                                                                                       In          Out




                                                                                                                       HV 0.0%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                      PHF 0.00
                                                                                                                                       0            0
                                                                                                                                          0   0     0
                                                                                                                                                                          HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                         PHF 0.00
                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                  0                                                      0
                    Clay Carney                                                               Out 9                                                                                 0 In
                                                                                                                  0                                                      0




                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                          0
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                               In   6                                                                               0 Out
                                                                                                                  6                                                      0

                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                         HV 0.0%
NW 225th Ave & NW Birch St                                                                              PHF 0.75




                                                                                                                                                               HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                              PHF 0.75
                                                                                                                                          9   0     0
Wednesday, June 12, 2013                                                                                                               Out           In
                                                                                                                                        6            9
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                           Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                           4:55 PM to 5:55 PM
5-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 225th Ave                 NW 225th Ave                 NW Birch St                    NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R     Bikes       L     T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 4:05 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 4:10 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 4:15 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 4:20 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 4:25 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 4:30 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 4:35 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 4:40 PM     2        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 4:50 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 4:55 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 5:00 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 5:05 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 5:10 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 5:15 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 5:20 PM     2        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 5:25 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 5:30 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 5:35 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 5:40 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
 5:45 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      2       0         0     0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 5:50 PM     2        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 5:55 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          0            0      0      0           0
   Total
             14       0       0      0      0      0     0       0      0      0      9       0         0     0           0           0            23           0            0      0       0
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 225th Ave                 NW 225th Ave                 NW Birch St                    NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R     Bikes       L     T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      2       0         0     0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 4:15 PM     0        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 4:30 PM     3        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      0       0         0     0      0                 0          1            0      0      0           0
 5:00 PM     3        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      2       0         0     0      0                 0          5            0      0      0           0
 5:15 PM     2        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          3            0      0      0           0
 5:30 PM     1        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      1       0         0     0      0                 0          2            0      0      0           0
 5:45 PM     3        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      2       0         0     0      0                 0          5            0      0      0           0
   Total
             14       0       0      0      0      0     0       0      0      0      9       0         0     0           0           0            23           0            0      0       0
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
4:55 PM to 5:55 PM
                     Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 225th Ave                 NW 225th Ave                 NW Birch St                    NW Birch St                          Total              Crosswalk
Approach
             In      Out   Total Bikes      In    Out   Total Bikes     In    Out   Total   Bikes       In   Out   Total             Bikes                    North South East          West
 Volume       9       6      15    0        0      0      0     0       6      9      15      0         0     0      0                 0           15          0      0      0           0
  %HV                   0.0%                         0.0%                        0.0%                           0.0%                              0.0%
  PHF                   0.75                         0.00                        0.75                           0.00                              0.75

                  Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                     Westbound
   By
                 NW 225th Ave                   NW 225th Ave                  NW Birch St                    NW Birch St                          Total
Movement
              L    T      R        Total     L    T     R      Total     L      T     R     Total     L        T     R           Total
 Volume       9     0      0       9         0     0     0     0         0      0      6    6         0        0      0          0                 15
  %HV       0.0% 0.0% 0.0%         0.0%    0.0% 0.0% 0.0%      0.0%    0.0%   0.0% 0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0% 0.0%           0.0%             0.0%
  PHF       0.75  0.00   0.00      0.75    0.00  0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00   0.75   0.75    0.00     0.00   0.00         0.00             0.75


Rolling Hour Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                      Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 225th Ave                 NW 225th Ave                 NW Birch St                    NW Birch St                      Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L        T      R   Bikes      L      T     R    Bikes     L      T      R     Bikes       L     T      R               Bikes      Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     5        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      3       0         0     0      0                 0          8            0      0      0           0
 4:15 PM     7        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      3       0         0     0      0                 0         10            0      0      0           0
 4:30 PM     9        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      3       0         0     0      0                 0         12            0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM     7        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      4       0         0     0      0                 0         11            0      0      0           0
 5:00 PM     9        0      0     0        0      0      0     0       0      0      6       0         0     0      0                 0         15            0      0      0           0
                                                                                                                              In         Out




                                                                                                                HV 0.0%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                               PHF 0.00
                                                                                                                              0           0


                                                                                                                                                                 HV 6.5%
                                                                                                                                                                PHF 0.39
                                                                                                                                    0


                    Clay Carney                                                           Out 133                                                                        138 In




                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                          44                                                    61




                                                                                                                          0
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                           In   65                                                                       106 Out
                                                                                                          21                                                    77

                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                      HV 12.3%
NW 227th Ave & NW Dogwood St                                                                         PHF 0.60




                                                                                                                                                      HV 4.5%
                                                                                                                                                     PHF 0.47
                                                                                                                              72          62
Thursday, June 13, 2013                                                                                                       Out          In
                                                                                                                              98          134
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
                                                                                                                    Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                    7:20 AM to 8:20 AM
5-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                 Southbound                 Eastbound                 Westbound                                             Pedestrians
   Start            NW 227th Ave                NW 227th Ave              NW Dogwood St             NW Dogwood St                   Interval                Crosswalk
   Time      L               R   Bikes                         Bikes        T     R     Bikes     L   T           Bikes               Total          North South East         West
 7:00 AM      2              2     0                             0           0    0       0      0    0             0                   4             0      0      0          0
 7:05 AM      1              1     0                             0           0    0       0      0    0             0                   2             0      0      0          0
 7:10 AM      3              1     0                             0           1    1       0      0    0             0                   6             0      0      0          0
 7:15 AM      4              2     0                             0           0    2       0      0    0             0                   8             0      0      0          0
 7:20 AM      1              1     0                             0           3    1       0      1    0             0                   7             0      0      0          0
 7:25 AM      1              1     0                             0           3    1       0      0    0             0                   6             0      0      0          0
 7:30 AM      6              7     0                             0          11    3       0      2    2             0                  31             0      0      0          0
 7:35 AM      2              9     0                             0           5    0       0      7    9             0                  32             0      0      0          0
 7:40 AM      8              9     0                             0           8    0       0      2    6             0                  33             0      0      1          0
 7:45 AM     12             16     0                             0           4    4       0      17   9             0                  62             0      0      3          0
 7:50 AM     17             10     1                             0           4    2       0      22   14            0                  69             0      0      6          0
 7:55 AM      7              6     0                             0           3    4       0      16   10            2                  46             0      0      0          0
 8:00 AM      5              2     0                             0           1    1       0      5    4             0                  18             0      0      0          0
 8:05 AM      5              0     0                             0           1    2       0      2    4             0                  14             0      0      0          0
 8:10 AM      4              1     0                             0           0    1       0      0    2             0                   8             0      0      0          0
 8:15 AM      4              0     0                             0           1    2       0      3    1             0                  11             0      0      0          0
 8:20 AM      2              0     0                             0           1    0       0      0    1             0                   4             0      0      0          0
 8:25 AM      3              2     0                             0           0    3       0      0    0             0                   8             0      0      0          1
 8:30 AM      2              4     0                             0           2    2       0      1    2             0                  13             0      0      0          0
 8:35 AM      5              2     0                             0           1    3       0      2    0             0                  13             0      0      0          0
 8:40 AM      3              0     0                             0           0    1       0      0    2             0                   6             0      0      0          0
 8:45 AM      0              1     0                             0           1    1       0      0    1             0                   4             0      0      0          0
 8:50 AM      3              4     0                             0           2    0       0      0    0             0                   9             0      0      0          0
 8:55 AM      5              6     0                             0           2    1       0      0    1             0                  15             0      0      0          0
   Total
            105              87      1                           0           54    35     0      80      68                   2         429            0             0   10        1
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                 Southbound                 Eastbound                    Westbound                                          Pedestrians
   Start            NW 227th Ave                NW 227th Ave              NW Dogwood St                NW Dogwood St                Interval                Crosswalk
   Time      L               R   Bikes                         Bikes        T     R     Bikes    L       T           Bikes            Total          North South East         West
 7:00 AM      6              4     0                             0          1     1       0      0       0             0               12             0      0      0          0
 7:15 AM      6              4     0                             0          6     4       0      1       0             0               21             0      0      0          0
 7:30 AM     16             25     0                             0          24     3      0      11      17            0                96            0      0      1          0
 7:45 AM     36             32     1                             0          11    10      0      55      33            2               177            0      0      9          0
 8:00 AM     14              3     0                             0          2     4       0      7       10            0               40             0      0      0          0
 8:15 AM      9              2     0                             0          2     5       0      3       2             0               23             0      0      0          1
 8:30 AM     10              6     0                             0          3     6       0      3       4             0               32             0      0      0          0
 8:45 AM      8             11     0                             0          5     2       0      0       2             0               28             0      0      0          0
   Total
            105              87      1                           0           54    35     0      80      68                   2         429            0             0   10        1
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
7:20 AM to 8:20 AM
                     Northbound                 Southbound                 Eastbound                  Westbound                                            Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 227th Ave                NW 227th Ave              NW Dogwood St              NW Dogwood St                      Total               Crosswalk
Approach
             In      Out    Total Bikes    In    Out   Total Bikes     In  Out   Total Bikes      In  Out   Total Bikes                              North South East         West
 Volume     134       98     232    1      0      0      0     0       65  133    198    0       138  106    244    2                    337          0      0     10          0
  %HV                    4.5%                       0.0%                     12.3%                       6.5%                           6.8%
  PHF                    0.47                       0.00                      0.60                       0.39                           0.48

                  Northbound                    Southbound                 Eastbound                  Westbound
   By
                 NW 227th Ave                   NW 227th Ave              NW Dogwood St              NW Dogwood St                      Total
Movement
              L           R        Total                       Total        T     R    Total      L    T          Total
 Volume      72           62       134                         0            44    21 65          77    61         138                    337
  %HV       4.2%   NA   4.8%       4.5%    NA    NA     NA     0.0%    NA 13.6% 9.5% 12.3%      7.8% 4.9%   NA 6.5%                     6.8%
  PHF       0.49         0.44      0.47                        0.00        0.46  0.53 0.60      0.35  0.46        0.39                  0.48


Rolling Hour Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval            Northbound                 Southbound                 Eastbound                    Westbound                                          Pedestrians
   Start            NW 227th Ave                NW 227th Ave              NW Dogwood St                NW Dogwood St                Interval                Crosswalk
   Time      L               R   Bikes                         Bikes        T     R     Bikes    L       T           Bikes            Total          North South East         West
 7:00 AM     64             65     1                             0          42    18      0      67      50            2               306            0      0     10          0
 7:15 AM     72             64     1                             0          43    21      0      74      60            2               334            0      0     10          0
 7:30 AM     75             62     1                             0          39    22      0      76      62            2               336            0      0     10          1
 7:45 AM     69             43     1                             0          18    25      0      68      49            2               272            0      0      9          1
 8:00 AM     41             22     0                             0          12    17      0      13      18            0               123            0      0      0          1
                                                                                                                                In         Out




                                                                                                                  HV 0.0%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                 PHF 0.00
                                                                                                                                0           0


                                                                                                                                                                  HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                 PHF 0.75
                                                                                                                                      0


                    Clay Carney                                                           Out 52                                                                            15 In
                                                                                                            11                                                   5




                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                  1
                  (503) 833-2740
                                                                                           In   80                                                                          16 Out
                                                                                                            69                                                   10

                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                      HV 0.0%
NW 227th Ave & NW Dogwood St                                                                         PHF 0.71




                                                                                                                                                       HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                      PHF 0.72
                                                                                                                                47          5
Wednesday, June 12, 2013                                                                                                        Out         In
                                                                                                                                79          52
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                      Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                      4:45 PM to 5:45 PM
5-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                 Southbound                 Eastbound                      Westbound                                         Pedestrians
   Start            NW 227th Ave                NW 227th Ave              NW Dogwood St                  NW Dogwood St                Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L               R   Bikes                         Bikes        T     R     Bikes        L     T           Bikes            Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     0               0     0                             0          0     0       0          0     1             0                1            0      0      0           0
 4:05 PM     6               0     0                             0          0     3       0          1     1             0               11            0      0      0           0
 4:10 PM     4               1     1                             0          0     5       0          0     1             0               11            0      0      0           0
 4:15 PM     2               1     0                             0          0     0       0          0     6             0                9            0      0      0           0
 4:20 PM     2               0     0                             0          0     3       0          0     0             0                5            0      0      0           0
 4:25 PM     3               0     0                             0          0     2       1          0     0             0                5            0      0      1           0
 4:30 PM     4               1     0                             0          1     5       0          2     1             0               14            0      0      0           0
 4:35 PM     1               1     0                             0          0     3       0          0     0             0                5            0      0      0           0
 4:40 PM     4               0     0                             0          1     0       0          1     1             0                7            0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM     1               0     0                             0          3     6       0          1     0             0               11            0      0      0           0
 4:50 PM     3               0     0                             0          0     8       0          1     0             0               12            0      0      1           0
 4:55 PM     4               1     0                             0          1     5       0          1     0             0               12            0      0      0           0
 5:00 PM     5               0     0                             0          0     2       0          2     0             0                9            0      0      0           0
 5:05 PM     2               0     0                             0          2     8       0          0     0             0               12            0      0      0           0
 5:10 PM     3               1     0                             0          1     4       0          0     1             0               10            0      0      0           0
 5:15 PM     6               0     0                             0          0     5       0          2     1             0               14            0      0      0           0
 5:20 PM     3               0     0                             0          0     3       0          1     0             0                7            0      0      0           0
 5:25 PM     7               0     0                             0          1     5       0          0     0             0               13            0      0      0           0
 5:30 PM     5               1     0                             0          1     8       0          1     1             0               17            0      0      0           0
 5:35 PM     4               1     0                             0          2     11      0          0     1             0               19            0      0      0           0
 5:40 PM     4               1     0                             0          0     4       0          1     1             0               11            0      0      0           0
 5:45 PM     2               0     0                             0          0     4       0          0     0             0                6            0      0      0           0
 5:50 PM     3               0     0                             0          0     7       0          0     0             0               10            0      0      0           0
 5:55 PM     3               0     0                             0          0     8       0          1     0             0               12            0      0      0           0
   Total
             81               9      1                           0           13    109    1      15        16                   0         243           0             0     2        0
  Survey


15-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                 Southbound                 Eastbound                      Westbound                                         Pedestrians
   Start            NW 227th Ave                NW 227th Ave              NW Dogwood St                  NW Dogwood St                Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L               R   Bikes                         Bikes        T     R     Bikes        L     T           Bikes            Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     10              1     1                             0          0      8      0          1     3             0               23            0      0      0           0
 4:15 PM      7              1     0                             0          0     5       1          0     6             0               19            0      0      1           0
 4:30 PM      9              2     0                             0          2     8       0          3     2             0               26            0      0      0           0
 4:45 PM      8              1     0                             0          4     19      0          3     0             0               35            0      0      1           0
 5:00 PM     10              1     0                             0          3     14      0          2     1             0               31            0      0      0           0
 5:15 PM     16              0     0                             0          1     13      0          3     1             0               34            0      0      0           0
 5:30 PM     13              3     0                             0          3     23      0          2     3             0               47            0      0      0           0
 5:45 PM      8              0     0                             0          0     19      0          1     0             0               28            0      0      0           0
   Total
             81               9      1                           0           13    109    1      15        16                   0         243           0             0     2        0
  Survey


Peak Hour Summary
4:45 PM to 5:45 PM
                     Northbound                 Southbound                 Eastbound                 Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   By
                    NW 227th Ave                NW 227th Ave              NW Dogwood St             NW Dogwood St                         Total              Crosswalk
Approach
             In      Out    Total Bikes    In    Out   Total Bikes     In  Out    Total Bikes    In  Out    Total Bikes                               North South East          West
 Volume      52       79     131    0      0      0      0     0       80   52     132    0      15   16      31    0                      147         0      0      1           0
  %HV                    0.0%                       0.0%                       0.0%                      0.0%                             0.0%
  PHF                    0.72                       0.00                       0.71                      0.75                             0.75

                  Northbound                    Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   By
                 NW 227th Ave                   NW 227th Ave              NW Dogwood St              NW Dogwood St                        Total
Movement
              L           R        Total                       Total         T     R   Total      L    T          Total
 Volume      47            5       52                          0            11     69 80         10     5         15                       147
  %HV       0.0%   NA   0.0%       0.0%    NA    NA    NA      0.0%    NA  0.0% 0.0% 0.0%       0.0% 0.0%   NA 0.0%                       0.0%
  PHF       0.73         0.42      0.72                        0.00        0.69   0.72 0.71     0.63  0.42        0.75                    0.75


Rolling Hour Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval            Northbound                 Southbound                 Eastbound                 Westbound                                              Pedestrians
   Start            NW 227th Ave                NW 227th Ave              NW Dogwood St             NW Dogwood St                     Interval               Crosswalk
   Time      L               R   Bikes                         Bikes        T     R     Bikes     L   T           Bikes                 Total         North South East          West
 4:00 PM     34              5     1                             0           6    40      1      7    11            0                    103           0      0      2           0
 4:15 PM     34              5     0                             0           9    46      1       8    9            0                    111           0      0      2           0
 4:30 PM     43              4     0                             0          10    54      0      11    4            0                    126           0      0      1           0
 4:45 PM     47              5     0                             0          11    69      0      10    5            0                    147           0      0      1           0
 5:00 PM     47              4     0                             0           7    69      0       8    5            0                    140           0      0      0           0
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: NE 76th Ave -- NW Quatama Rd                                                                                           QC JOB #: 11079804
 CITY/STATE: Hillsboro, OR                                                                                                        DATE: Thu, Jun 13 2013
                         0          0                           Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                                      0.0        0.0
                         0    0     0
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0


       103   0                            0    99
                                                                                                                      4.9   0.0                      0.0       5.1
             145             0.57        95
                                                                                                                            6.2                      5.3
       150   5                            4   175
                                                                                                                      6.0   0.0                      0.0       5.1

                         8    0     29
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0
                         8          37
                                                                                                                                   0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                     0    0    0



                                                                                                                            0                          0

             0                            0                                                                                 0                          0

                                                                                                                            0                          0

                              6                                                                                                     0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                 NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                  NE 76th Ave                   NE 76th Ave                   NW Quatama Rd               NW Quatama Rd                 Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       0            0      2     0       0        0      0     0        0        3      0      0    0        2     0     0                7
     7:05 AM       0            0      4     0       0        0      0     0        0        5      0      0    0        2     0     0               11
     7:10 AM       0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0        2      0      0    0        4     0     0                6
     7:15 AM       0            0      3     0       0        0      0     0        0        6      0      0    0        4     0     0               13
     7:20 AM       0            0      2     0       0        0      0     0        0        5      0      0    0        1     0     0                8
     7:25 AM       1            0      3     0       0        0      0     0        0       11      0      0    0        2     0     0               17
     7:30 AM       1            0      2     0       0        0      0     0        0        5      0      0    0        8     0     1               17
     7:35 AM       0            0      3     0       0        0      0     0        0       15      0      0    1        9     0     0               28
     7:40 AM       0            0      4     0       0        0      0     0        0        8      0      0    0       10     0     0               22
     7:45 AM       1            0      5     0       0        0      0     0        0       12      0      0    1       19     0     0               38
     7:50 AM       4            0      1     0       0        0      0     0        0       12      0      0    0       25     0     0               42
     7:55 AM       0            0      1     0       0        0      0     0        0       37      2      0    0        5     0     0               45              254
     8:00 AM       1            0      1     0       0        0      0     0        0       14      0      0    0        5     0     0               21              268
     8:05 AM       0            0      3     0       0        0      0     0        0       16      1      0    0        3     0     0               23              280
     8:10 AM       0            0      1     0       0        0      0     0        0        4      2      0    1        4     0     0               12              286
     8:15 AM       1            0      2     0       0        0      0     0        0        7      0      0    0        5     0     0               15              288
     8:20 AM       0            0      1     0       0        0      0     0        0        6      1      0    0        3     0     0               11              291
     8:25 AM       0            0      3     0       0        0      0     0        0        4      0      0    0        5     0     0               12              286
     8:30 AM       0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0        4      0      0    0        6     0     0               10              279
     8:35 AM       0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0        6      0      0    0        2     0     0                8              259
     8:40 AM       0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0        6      0      0    0        6     0     0               12              249
     8:45 AM       0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0        5      0      0    0        1     0     0                6              217
     8:50 AM       0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0        1      0      0    0        5     0     0                6              181
     8:55 AM       0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0        2      0      0    0        7     0     0                9              145
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     20           0     28     0       0        0      0     0        0      244      8      0    4      196     0     0                      500
 Heavy Trucks       0           0      0             0        0      0              0       20      0           0       12     0                             32
  Pedestrians                   8                             0                              0                           0                                   8
    Bicycles       0            0      0             0        0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/18/2013 11:53 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: NE 76th Ave -- NW Quatama Rd                                                                                             QC JOB #: 11079806
 CITY/STATE: Hillsboro, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Wed, Jun 12 2013
                         0          0                           Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                        0.0        0.0
                         0    0     0
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                                     0.0 0.0 0.0


       125   0                             0   151
                                                                                                                       0.8   0.0                       0.0       0.7
             74              0.81        123
                                                                                                                             1.4                       0.8
       77    3                            28    99
                                                                                                                       2.6   33.3                      0.0       2.0

                         2    0     24
                                                                                                                                     0.0 0.0 4.2
                       30           26
                                                                                                                                     3.3        3.8



                              0                                                                                                       0    0    0



                                                                                                                             0                           0

             0                             0                                                                                 0                           2

                                                                                                                             0                           0

                              4                                                                                                       0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                            NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                  NA                        NA




                             NA                                                                                                            NA



 5-Min Count                  NE 76th Ave                    NE 76th Ave                   NW Quatama Rd               NW Quatama Rd                  Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                    (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    5:00 PM        0            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        5     0     0                 6
    5:05 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        8      0      0    3        8     0     0                19
    5:10 PM        0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0        8      0      0    3        8     0     0                21
    5:15 PM        0            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0        5      0      0    3       13     0     1                23
    5:20 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        6      0      0    1        8     0     0                15
    5:25 PM        1            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0        4      2      0    4       16     0     0                30
    5:30 PM        0            0      4     0        0        0      0     0        0        9      0      0    0       13     0     0                26
    5:35 PM        0            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0        5      0      0    4       10     0     0                20
    5:40 PM        0            0      7     0        0        0      0     0        0        8      1      0    3       13     0     0                32
    5:45 PM        0            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0        3      0      0    4        8     0     0                16
    5:50 PM        0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0        8      0      0    1        9     0     0                20
    5:55 PM        1            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0       10      0      0    1       12     0     0                26              254
    6:00 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0              248
    6:05 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0              229
    6:10 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0              208
    6:15 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0              185
    6:20 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0              170
    6:25 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0              140
    6:30 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0              114
    6:35 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0               94
    6:40 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0               62
    6:45 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0               46
    6:50 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0               26
    6:55 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0        0      0      0    0        0     0     0                 0                0
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                     Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     0            0     48     0        0        0      0     0        0       88      4      0    28     144     0     0                       312
 Heavy Trucks      0            0      4              0        0      0              0        0      0            0       0     0                              4
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                              0                           0                                    0
    Bicycles       0            0      0              0        0      0              0        0      0           0        0     0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/18/2013 11:54 AM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: NW Cornelius Pass Rd -- NW Quatama Rd                                                                           QC JOB #: 11079801
 CITY/STATE: Hillsboro, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Thu, Jun 13 2013
                    408          986                        Peak-Hour: 7:15 AM -- 8:15 AM                                   13.0        5.9
                     21 369 18
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                            4.8 13.8 5.6


       100   62                        52   143
                                                                                                              5.0   1.6                        3.8      4.2
             52           0.85         36
                                                                                                                    3.8                        5.6
       172   58                        55   145
                                                                                                              5.2   10.3                       3.6      3.4

                     43 872 75
                                                                                                                            4.7 6.3 2.7
                    482          990
                                                                                                                            12.2        6.0



                           2                                                                                                 0     0    0



                                                                                                                    0                            0

             3                          4                                                                           0                            0

                                                                                                                    0                            0

                           6                                                                                                 0     0    0




                          NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                        NA                                                                           NA                         NA




                          NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count        NW Cornelius Pass Rd            NW Cornelius Pass Rd          NW Quatama Rd               NW Quatama Rd                   Total      Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM        2   59       6     0           1     26      1     0     3       1      1      0    2        0     5     0                107
     7:05 AM        1   63       5     0           0     22      0     0     5       1      1      0    7        0     5     0                110
     7:10 AM        2   55       9     0           0     18      2     0     2       0      2      0    2        0     5     0                 97
     7:15 AM        3   77       6     0           1     26      1     0     2       2      3      0    4        0     2     0                127
     7:20 AM        0   73       6     0           3     27      0     0     5       3      0      0    4        1     4     0                126
     7:25 AM        2   52       5     0           0     27      1     0     3       6      4      0    5        0     7     0                112
     7:30 AM        2   59       4     0           2     32      3     0     4       2      2      0    9        4     7     0                130
     7:35 AM        1   61       5     0           1     36      2     0     8       5      6      0    4        6     2     0                137
     7:40 AM        8  102       5     0           3     38      1     0     4       2      6      0    2        3     4     0                178
     7:45 AM       10   88       4     0           1     36      3     0     3       2      9      0    4        6     5     0                171
     7:50 AM        9   87       8     0           1     24      4     0     5       5      6      0    5       12     3     0                169
     7:55 AM        2   80      13     0           0     25      1     0    10      13     12      0    4        2     4     0                166            1630
     8:00 AM        2   73       5     0           0     28      4     0     8       6      2      0    3        0     3     0                134            1657
     8:05 AM        1   69       6     0           4     31      0     0     7       5      7      0    6        1     6     0                143            1690
     8:10 AM        3   51       8     0           2     39      1     0     3       1      1      0    5        1     5     0                120            1713
     8:15 AM        2   60       7     0           0     29      3     0     1       2      4      0    2        0     2     0                112            1698
     8:20 AM        0   58       1     0           2     44      3     0     1       3      4      0    3        0     2     0                121            1693
     8:25 AM        2   63       5     0           1     33      3     0     3       1      4      0    7        1     4     0                127            1708
     8:30 AM        2   65       9     0           0     26      1     0     3       0      1      0    3        1     3     0                114            1692
     8:35 AM        1   48       4     0           1     20      0     0     1       3      2      0    2        1     4     0                 87            1642
     8:40 AM        1   70       5     0           2     22      4     0     3       3      0      0    2        1     6     0                119            1583
     8:45 AM        0   45       6     0           4     31      2     0     2       0      1      0    0        1    10     0                102            1514
     8:50 AM        1   55       3     0           2     30      1     0     2       0      1      0    4        2     5     0                106            1451
     8:55 AM        2   38       4     0           5     27      2     0     2       0      0      0    0        4     1     0                 85            1370
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                       Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     84 1020     100     0           8    340     32     0    72      80    108      0    52      80    48     0                       2024
 Heavy Trucks       4   48       4                 0     44      4           4       0     16            0       4     0                              128
  Pedestrians           12                                0                          4                           4                                     20
    Bicycles        0    0       0                 0      0      0          0        0      0           0        0     0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/18/2013 11:53 AM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: NW Cornelius Pass Rd -- NW Quatama Rd                                                                            QC JOB #: 11079803
 CITY/STATE: Hillsboro, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Wed, Jun 12 2013
                    1343          630                         Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  1.4        2.1
                     72 1211 60
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                             1.4 1.4 1.7


       163   21                          45   208
                                                                                                                0.6   4.8                      2.2      1.0
             27            0.96          26
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       98    50                         137   162
                                                                                                                2.0   2.0                      0.7      0.6

                     65 564 75
                                                                                                                             0.0 2.0 0.0
                    1398          704
                                                                                                                             1.4        1.6



                            3                                                                                                 0    3    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             4                            1                                                                           0                          1

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                            3                                                                                                 0    1    0




                           NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                         NA                                                                            NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count        NW Cornelius Pass Rd              NW Cornelius Pass Rd          NW Quatama Rd               NW Quatama Rd                 Total      Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    5:00 PM         6   43       3     0              5   118      5     0    0        1      1      0    14       2     1     0              199
    5:05 PM         5   45       6     0              1   115      5     0    1        0      5      0    11       1     3     0              198
    5:10 PM         5   38       6     0              3   100      6     0    3        3      5      0     9       1     2     0              181
    5:15 PM         9   49       5     0              6   109      6     0    1        1      5      0     8       1     3     0              203
    5:20 PM         4   50       5     0              1   108      4     0    3        3      1      0     8       1     4     0              192
    5:25 PM         9   44       5     0              5    88      8     0    2        1      4      0    15       4     4     0              189
    5:30 PM         1   41       7     0              7   106      7     0    2        3      6      0    11       4     7     0              202
    5:35 PM         7   55      10     0              7    90      5     0    1        1      6      0    13       4     4     0              203
    5:40 PM         4   51       7     0              8   101     11     0    3        3      5      0     8       3     4     0              208
    5:45 PM         6   58       4     0              1   101      4     0    3        2      3      0    18       3     6     0              209
    5:50 PM         5   46       9     0              7    78      3     0    1        4      5      0    10       1     3     0              172
    5:55 PM         4   44       8     0              9    97      8     0    1        5      4      0    12       1     4     0              197            2353
    6:00 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0            2154
    6:05 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0            1956
    6:10 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0            1775
    6:15 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0            1572
    6:20 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0            1380
    6:25 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0            1191
    6:30 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0             989
    6:35 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0             786
    6:40 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0             578
    6:45 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0             369
    6:50 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0             197
    6:55 PM         0    0       0     0              0     0      0     0    0        0      0      0     0       0     0     0                0               0
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                         Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles     48  588      96     0             88 1188      92     0    24      28    68       0   128      44    60     0                     2452
 Heavy Trucks       0    0       0                    0    20      0           0       0      4            0       0     0                            24
  Pedestrians            0                                  0                          0                           0                                   0
    Bicycles        0    0       0                    0     2      0          0        0      0            0       0     0                             2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 6/18/2013 11:54 AM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
