                                                                                                                         "NECESSARY PARTIES"
                                                                                                                              MARKED BELOW

                                           NOTICE OF APPLICATION SUBMITTAL
       ANNEXATION                               CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT               PLAN TEXT AMENDMENT
       ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW                     PLAN MAP AMENDMENT                   OTHER: MASTER PLAN
    CASE/FILE: MP-13-01                    (Community Development Dept.: Planning Division)          .


               To Master Plan the proposed Nyberg Rivers retail development on the former KMart site and associated
   PROPOSAL




               properties. An approved Master Plan is required prior to redevelopment of this site. The proposed
               redevelopment Master Plan includes demolition of three existing buildings, construction of seven (7) buildings,
               access and public facilities improvements, parking, pedestrian, bicycle, and landscaping improvements.
               Following Master Plan review by the City Council, Architectural Review is required.

   PROPERTY            Street Address                 7455-7925 SW Nyberg Ave
              n/a                                     2S1 24 A 1601,1602, 1900, 2502, 2506, 2507,2508, 2700, 2S1 24B 2000,
                       Tax Map and Lot No(s).
                                                      2001,2100
                       Planning District              Central Commercial (CC) Office Commercial (CO)
                                                      CUP-13-04 Conditional Use Permit for Retail use in CO and Outdoor
                       Related Applications
                                                      Storage in CC Planning Districts

              Receipt of application                                  4/23/2013                  Name: Will Harper

              Notice of application submittal                         4/25/2013                  Title: Senior Planner
                                                                                       CONTACT


              Project Status / Development Review meeting             5/23/2013                  E-mail: wharper@ci.tualatin.or.us
   DATES




              Comments due for staff report                           5/17/2013                  Phone: 503-691-3027

              Public meeting:      ARB          TPC         n/a                                  Notes: Council Public Hearing Date
                                                                                                 to be determined
              City Council (CC)                             n/a       TBD
                                                                                                 |

                                                         Tigard Community Dev. Dept.                     Utilities
City Staff
                                                         Wilsonville Planning Div.                           Allied Waste Services
    City Manager
                                                      Counties                                               Clean Water Services (CWS)
    Building Official
                                                         Clackamas County Dept. of                           Comcast [cable]
    Chief of Police
                                                          Transportation and Dev.                            Frontier Communications [phone]
    City Attorney                                                                                            Northwest Natural [gas]
    City Engineer                                        Washington County Dept. of
                                                          Land Use and Transportation                        Portland General Electric (PGE)
    Community Dev. Director
                                                      Regional Government                                    TriMet
    Community Services Director
                                                         Metro                                               Tualatin Valley Fire & Rescue
    Economic Dev. Manager
                                                                                                              (TVF&R)
    Engineering Associate                             School Districts                                       United States Postal Service
    Finance Director                                     Lake Oswego School Dist. 7J                          (USPS) (Washington; 18850 SW
    GIS technician(s)                                    Sherwood SD 88J                                      Teton Ave)
    IS Manager                                           Tigard-Tualatin SD 23J (TTSD)                       USPS (Clackamas)
    Operations Director                                  West Linn-Wilsonville SD 3J                         Washington County
    Parks and Recreation                              State Agencies                                          Consolidated Communications
     Coordinator                                         Oregon Dept. of Aviation                             Agency (WCCCA)
    Planning Manager                                     Oregon Dept. of Land
    Street/Sewer Supervisor                                                                              Additional Parties
                                                          Conservation and Development                       Tualatin Citizen Involvement
    Water Supervisor                                      (DLCD) (via proprietary notice)                     Organization (CIO)
Neighboring Cities                                       Oregon Dept. of State Lands:                        DKS7
    Durham                                                Wetlands Program
    King City Planning Commission                        Oregon Dept. of Transportation
    Lake Oswego                                           (ODOT) Region 1
    Rivergrove PC                                        ODOT Maintenance Dist. 2A
    Sherwood Planning Dept.                              ODOT Rail Div.
Rev. 6/01/2012
                                     Submitted April 8, 2013
                                     Conditional Use Permit
                                     An Application For:
                                     Master Plan Review
NYBERG RIVERS
Tualatin, Oregon




                                        NYBERG RIVERS
                                                        Tualatin, Oregon
An Application For:
Master Plan Review
Conditional Use Permit
Submitted: April 8, 2013

Applicant:
Centercal Properties, LLC
7455 SW Bridgeport Road, Suite 205
Tigard, OR 97224
Phone: (503) 968-8940
Contact: Hank Murphy

Prepared by:
Cardno WRG
5415 SW Westgate Drive, Suite 100
Portland, Oregon 97221
Phone: 503-419-2500
Fax: 503-419-2600

21198310
Nyberg Rivers
               Tualatin, Oregon



                An Application For:
                 Master Plan Review
               Conditional Use Permit



              Submitted April 8, 2013
          Re-submitted April 23, 2013



                              Applicant:
           Centercal Properties, LLC
    7455 SW Bridgeport Road, Suite 205
                     Tigard, OR 97224
                Phone: (503) 968-8940
                 Contact: Hank Murphy

                         Prepared by:
                        Cardno WRG
    5415 SW Westgate Drive, Suite 100
             Portland, Oregon 97221
               Phone: 503-419-2500
                   Fax: 503-419-2600

                              21198310
PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
 I. INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 5
    GENERAL INFORMATION ........................................................................................................... 5
    SUMMARY OF PROPOSAL ......................................................................................................... 6
    SURROUNDING USES................................................................................................................ 8
 II. CITY OF TUALATIN CENTRAL URBAN RENEWAL PLAN (2009) ......................... 9
    1.       GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN ................................ 9
    2.       RELATIONSHIP TO LOCAL OBJECTIVES ...............................................................17
 III. TUALATIN MUNICIPAL CODE (TMC) .................................................................... 25
    CHAPTER 03-05: SOIL EROSION, SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT, WATER QUALITY FACILITIES,
    AND BUILDING AND SEWERS ....................................................................................................25
 IV. TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE (TDC) ............................................................. 35
    TDC 6: COMMERCIAL PLANNING DISTRICTS .............................................................................35
    TDC 9: PLAN MAP ................................................................................................................39
    TDC 11: TRANSPORTATION .....................................................................................................41
    TDC 30: TUALATIN URBAN RENEWAL PLAN ....................................................................60
    TDC 32: CONDITIONAL USES .............................................................................................65
    TDC 43: HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL PLANNING DISTRICT (RH) ..................................72
    TDC 50: OFFICE COMMERCIAL PLANNING DISTRICT (CO) .............................................72
    TDC 53: CENTRAL COMMERCIAL PLANNING DISTRICT (CC)..........................................75
    TDC 73: COMMUNITY DESIGN STANDARDS .....................................................................80
    TDC 74: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS .........................................................112
    TDC CHAPTER 75: ACCESS MANAGEMENT ON ARTERIAL STREETS ........................................130
 V. CONCLUSION ....................................................................................................... 136




Nyberg Rivers                                                                                                   Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                                            3                                Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 EXHIBITS
 Exhibit A       Master Plan Document
 Exhibit B       City Applications
 Exhibit C       Site Plan Set
 Exhibit D       Zoning Map & City Plan Exhibits
 Exhibit E       Tax Map
 Exhibit F       Transportation Impact Analysis
 Exhibit G       Clean Water Services Documentation
 Exhibit H       Neighborhood/Developer's Meeting Material




Nyberg Rivers                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                        4         Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
   I.         INTRODUCTION

 GENERAL INFORMATION

 Applicant:                   Centercal Properties, LLC
                              7455 SW Bridgeport Road, Suite 205
                              Tigard, Oregon 97224
                              Phone: (503) 968-8940
                              Contact: Hank Murphy

 Applicant's Representative   Cardno WRG
                              5415 SW Westgate Drive; Suite 100
                              Portland, Oregon 97221
                              (503) 419-2500 phone
                              (503) 419-2600 fax
                              Contact: Michael Cerbone, AICP
                              michael.cerbone@cardno.com

 Tax Lot Information:         Map                        Tax Lots

                              2S124A & 2S124B            1500, 1601, 1602, 1900,
                                                         2000, 2001, 2100, 2502,
                                                         2506, 2507, 2508, 2700
                              City of Tualatin, Oregon
 Location:                    Generally bounded by SW Nyberg Rd to the south,
                              Martinazzi Ave to the west, Interstate 5 to the east,
                              and the Tualatin River to the north.

 Current Zoning Districts:    Office Commercial (CO)
                              Central Commercial (CC)
                              High-Density Residential (HR)

 Project Site Area:           +/- 31.91 acres




Nyberg Rivers                                                                  Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                     5                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 SUMMARY OF PROPOSAL
 THE MASTER PLAN
 The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan area requires approval of a master plan prior to development
 of the site. Specific guidance for what constitutes a "master plan" is provided for within the City
 of Tualatin Central Urban Renewal Plan - October 2009:

         "Prior to approval of applications for development projects within Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
         13, 25, 26, 27, 31, 32, and 33, applicants will be required to submit and gain City
         approval of a master plan governing development within the Block(s). Such master
         plan shall contain sufficient information, as determined by the City, to ensure that
         development meets the objectives of the Plan. Master plans may include, but are not
         limited to, treatment of such issues as access, transportation, sewer, water, storm
         drainage, internal circulation, building location, building design and materials, parking,
         landscaping and pedestrian facilities.

         Master plans for Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 13, 25, 26, 27, 31, 32, 33, as well as subsequent
         modifications to those plans, must be approved by the City Council at a public hearing.
         The public hearing shall be called and conducted in the manner provided for in Section
         1.031 of the Tualatin Development Code. In approving a master plan, the City Council
         may attach conditions that it finds necessary to achieve the objectives of the Urban
         Renewal Plan."


 The Central Urban Renewal Plan (heretofore listed as "The Plan") was originally adopted on
 January 27, 1975 and has undergone several amendments to reflect the City of Tualatin's
 current vision for the overall urban renewal area, as well as specific blocks designated within the
 subarea. An accompanying report to The Plan outlines the goals and objectives, as well as an
 outline of the project activities undertaken through The Plan. These project activities are public
 improvements under the following categories:
             Flood Control--minimizing flood risk within The Plan area
             Roads and Streets--identifying specific streets           and   interchanges    needing
             infrastructure improvements and capital funding.
             Utilities--improvements needed in sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water supply, and
             electricity systems. Specific project activities are summarized.
             Parking Facilities--establishment of the Core Area Parking District (CAPD) in 1979,
             as well as impact fees on new construction to provide for parking lot development
             within the parking district.
             Pedestrian Facilities--improvement of pedestrian circulation within the URA through
             the construction of sidewalks, improvements to the triangular park site, and the
             development of design guidelines for private pedestrian walkways and street
             furniture.
             Civic Facilities--includes pedestrian oriented facilities, major features of Tualatin
             Commons (water feature and landmark), site acquisition for police facility, library
             expansion and participating in design discussion for a community building.


Nyberg Rivers                                                                          Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                           6                        Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
             Transit Facilities--assisting Tri-Met in locating park-and-ride           facilities   and
             encouraging private development to integrate transit provisions.


 The Plan also outlines land uses within the renewal area, which are governed by the Planning
 District Standards outlined in the Tualatin Development Code.             The Planning District
 Designations applicable to this master plan application include the Central Commercial (CC),
 Office Commercial (CO), and High Density Residential (HR) designations. A discussion of
 permitted uses as well as additional considerations for Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 is addressed in
 Section II of this project narrative.
 The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan represents a comprehensive and collaborative effort to create a
 vibrant center that provides a seamless extension of the Tualatin City Center. The primary
 commercial tenants will work to attract regional visitors to the City core in a mix of uses; creating
 avibrant and active City Center. In addition, this project will provide transportation, pedestrian
 and bicycle amenities and linkages to the regional framework serving residents and visitors to
 the site. The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan will play an important role in establishing the Tualatin
 City Center as a regional draw for residents, visitors, businesses, and critical public facilities.
 The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan is a multi-tenant shopping center redevelopment project. The
 Site Plan, attached as Exhibit C, illustrates the build-out plan for the project. The master plan
 and the Development Plan, attached as Exhibit A, is focused on the areas designated as the
 Primary Development Area, whereas, the residual areas are designated as Future Development
 Area(s). The Primary Development Area is controlled by CenterCal Properties, LLC (the
 developer) and detailed project planning has occurred on these portions of the master plan. The
 Future Development Area(s) are anticipated to be pursued and completed by others. The
 Development Plan focuses project statistics and planning on the Primary Development Area.
 The shopping center has been carefully planned so that development within the Primary
 Development Area does not preclude and in fact facilitates later development in the Future
 Development Areas.
 The balance of this project narrative addresses each of the applicable approval criteria for a
 master plan and demonstrates that the proposed development conforms with each criterion.

 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
 There is one conditional use approval requested under this application. As a supplement to the
 associated Master Plan sections, those uses identified as conditional use are addressed in this
 narrative. Based on conversation with the City of Tualatin and comments received during the
 Pre-Application conference held on March 7, 2013, a portion of the proposed retail store
 located in Building 1040 is subject to CUP review and approval, as the site straddles the CC
 and CO planning districts. The portion of building in the CC District is permitted outright and
 the portion of the building located in the CU District, as well as the outdoor storage and sales, is
 subject to the approval criteria of Chapter 32. Under 50.030(2), uses in the CC District are
 allowed as conditional uses in the CO District. Further, under 53.050 (5), outdoor storage and
 sales are permitted in the CC District as a conditional use. Accordingly, the conditional use
 narrative specifically addresses the [square feet of Building 1040 located in the CO zone and
 the outdoor storage and sales located in the CC zone. All other uses on the site are permitted
 uses and do not require a conditional use permit.




Nyberg Rivers                                                                          Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                           7                        Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 SURROUNDING USES
 Table A: SURROUNDING LAND USE
  Location               Zoning Designation               Land Use
                          High Density Residential (RH)   Tualatin River &
  North
                            General Commercial (CG)       Heron's Landing Apartments
                                                          SW Nyberg Street/
  South                     Central Commercial (CC)
                                                          Fred Meyer
  East                      General Commercial (CG)       Interstate 5
                                                          SW Martinazzi Avenue/
  West                      General Commercial (CG)
                                                          Tualatin Central Downtown




Nyberg Rivers                                                                   Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                        8                    Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
II.      CITY OF TUALATIN CENTRAL URBAN RENEWAL PLAN (2009)
  1.     GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN
         THE OVERALL GOAL OF THE PLAN IS:
         To strengthen the social and economic development of central Tualatin by
         stabilizing and improving property values, eliminating existing blight, and
         preventing future blight; and to encourage and facilitate land uses, private and
         public, that result in activity during all business hours, evenings, nights, and
         weekends; and to encourage indoor and outdoor uses.
  LAND USE
         Objective:      Implement the Tualatin Commons Redevelopment Project and
                         Central Design District Enhancement Project to provide an
                         appropriate environment which encourages private development
                         within the Project area' and surrounding properties that support the
                         overall goal. A major water feature may be included in the Tualatin
                         Commons Redevelopment Project. Both projects will be oriented to
                         pedestrians with connections to the Tualatin Community Park and to
                         other public and private developments in the town center area.
                         The projects will be implemented as a series of public/private
                         partnerships. The role of the Commission includes acquiring and
                         packaging development sites; conveying, by sale or lease, portions
                         of the sites to private developers; and contributing towards
                         construction of public facilities and improvements. These public
                         facilities may include but are not limited to a water feature,
                         community facilities, pedestrian facilities, streetscape
                         enhancements, art and parking facilities. Development of all
                         commercial and residential space will be a private sector
                         responsibility.
  Response:      The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan represents a private sector commercial
                 redevelopment project that will transform an existing and underutilized shopping
                 center into a vibrant economic asset for the City. The existing shopping center
                 has been anchored by a now vacant K-Mart and includes an assortment of other
                 supporting retail uses such as drive-thru banks, fast-food restaurants, and small
                 to medium miscellaneous retailers.
                 In an effort to enhance and reinvigorate the existing shopping center, CenterCal
                 is proposing to redevelop the center as shown on Exhibit C. The full
                 redevelopment vision will include removal of the vacant but existing 96,799
                 square foot former K-Mart building and McBale property as well as the addition of
                 a new mix of upgraded tenants including a large retailer and an assortment of
                 small and medium-sized retail/restaurant uses. The redevelopment will bring a
                 total of 245,456 SF of new leasable commercial space to the center, increasing
                 the economic and social vibrancy of the center.
                 This proposal and the City's review and approval of this application will
                 "encourage private development within the Project area and surrounding
                 properties" as anticipated by the City under this objective. Certainly the
                 redevelopment this center will result in increased business activities "during all
                 business hours, evenings, nights and weekends" and will encourage indoor and


Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          9                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 outdoor uses through a well-designed landscaped and plaza plan as well as
                 active outdoor retail sales and storage uses.
                 Development of all commercial space under this proposal is a private sector
                 responsibility. The development also proposes to improve and build several
                 public facilities such as:
                            A new roadway connection to SW Boones Ferry Road (shown as "Street
                            A" in Figure 2) that includes sidewalks.
                            An enhanced site-access driveway to SW Nyberg Road that will better
                            accommodate vehicular queuing and demand.
                            A potential future (assuming the City desires to move forward) new site-
                            access connection to SW Martinazzi Avenue that aligns across from SW
                            Seneca Street. This connection would be the Seneca Street extension
                            envisioned in the Town Center Plan. Prior to the City making a decision
                            on any new SW Street Seneca alignment, the redevelopment site plan
                            preserves this connection opportunity in the present or future.
                            The preservation of east-west and north-south travel ways that will
                            provide vehicular and pedestrian access between Street A, the Seneca
                            Street alignment/extension, and enhanced access to SW Nyberg Road.
                            New sidewalks along the enhanced site-access driveway to SW Nyberg
                            Road that provide pedestrian connections to the integrated site
                            circulation network.
                            New bikeway connections along the perimeter of the site.
                            The existing SW 75th Avenue site-access driveway to SW Nyberg Road
                            should be closed in order to minimize turning movement conflicts, allow
                            for the construction of a westbound right-turn lane at the SW Nyberg
                            Road/signalized site driveway, and improve the interchange access
                            spacing conditions along SW Nyberg Road.
                 Together, the public infrastructure improvements and redevelop of an
                 underutilized commercial property with commercial uses are highly consistent
                 with the overall goals and objectives of the Central Urban Renewal Plan.


 GOAL 1:         COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
         To encourage and facilitate commercial development in the Urban Renewal Area
         with an emphasis on establishing a visible and viable central business district that
         encourages community and business activity on weekdays, evenings and
         weekends.
         Objectives (only applicable objectives listed):




Nyberg Rivers                                                                         Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          10                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                         c.    Encourage the development of existing Central Commercial
                               designated land before re-designating other land within the
                               Urban Renewal Area as Central Commercial.
                         d.    Support Central Commercial designated land for
                               development by assisting in the marketing and promotion of
                               central Tualatin as a place to visit, shop, and conduct
                               business.
 Response:       The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan is located within an existing Central Commercial
                 designated area. Objective C encourages the full utilization and development of
                 this Central Commercial land before re-designating other land Central
                 Commercial. Today, this center is underutilized. The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan
                 will add over 245,000 square feet of net leasable space to a center that is
                 currently underutilized in form and function and partially vacant. Objective D
                 seems to be directed at the City and encourages the City to support Central
                 Commercial land by promoting central Tualatin as a place to visit, shop and
                 conduct business.

                 The City's assistance with and review of this application certainly supports the
                 ultimate development of the site with Central Commercial uses and will further
                 attract users to central Tualatin upon redevelopment of the center.

                 The redevelopment of this center will make better use of this existing land with a
                 development that is more dense and connected to the existing City Center. The
                 site plan and associated tenant mix allowed through this application will create a
                 regional draw that will ultimately help the City with drawing visitors to the City
                 Center.


 IMPROVED TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION
 GOAL 5:         TRANSPORTATION
         To provide transportation access and circulation which is supportive of central
         area development.
         Objectives (only applicable objectives listed:
                         a.    Assist in and encourage opportunities to share parking
                               between compatible developments. Such opportunities may
                               include providing public parking for shared use for public
                               and private entities in the Tualatin Commons Redevelopment
                               Project Area and Central Design District Enhancement
                               Project Area.
                         b.    Support the implementation of transportation improvements
                               described in the Transportation Element of the Tualatin
                               Community Plan and Transportation System Plan.


 Response:       The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan will provide transportation access and circulation
                 which is supportive of Central Area development. The off-street parking provided
                 throughout the redevelopment site will operate as shared use parking and will

Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         11                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 meet the needs of the tenants, while also conforming to the Tualatin
                 Development Code parking minimums consistent with the subject land use
                 districts.

                 The applicant has proposed a multi-modal site access and circulation plan. As
                 shown on the Master Plan, Exhibit C, pedestrian and bicycle accessways are
                 provided throughout the site that ties in to the existing regional framework. The
                 Nyberg Rivers Master Plan--Pedestrian Bicycle Plan details this pedestrian and
                 bicycle network. Connecting the on-site and off-site pedestrian and bicycle
                 networks will allow safe, convenient and multi-modal access to the site for
                 residents and visitors.

                 Vehicle access to the site is preserved and enhanced through several
                 improvements identified in more detail within the TIA. In short, under the
                 redevelopment plan, the existing 75th Avenue connection to SW Nyberg Road will
                 be closed to allow for improved access management along SW Nyberg Road.
                 The existing signalized access on SW Nyberg Road that currently serves the
                 shopping center and the adjacent Fred Meyer site will remain. However, a few
                 changes are proposed in order to better accommodate the redevelopment: (1)
                 the westbound right-turn lane will be developed on SW Nyberg Road to enhance
                 access to the site and minimize vehicle queuing on SW Nyberg Road; (2) the
                 existing site driveway is proposed to be widened as shown in the proposed site
                 plan to accommodate increased site traffic. This widening will include dual
                 southbound left-turn lanes, a shared through/right-turn lane, and a single in-
                 bound receiving lane. A raised median will be constructed in the driveway throat
                 to control on-site turning maneuvers and manage vehicle queues within the
                 driveway throat; (3) the north and south approach signal phasing is proposed to
                 be modified from permissive left-turn phasing to split phasing.

                 With these improvements, all of the study intersections, site access points, and
                 internal site intersections, except for the SW Martinazzi Avenue/SW Sagert Road
                 and SW 65th Avenue/SW Sagert Road intersections (discussed below), are
                 forecast to operate with acceptable operating standards during the weekday p.m.
                 and Saturday midday peak hours.

                 The project will have an insignificant impact at either the SW Martinazzi
                 Avenue/SW Sagert Road or the SW 65th Avenue/SW Sagert Road intersections
                 (the project will result in a less than 1.5 percent increase in traffic at either
                 intersection).

                 The TIA demonstrates that the project will have an insignificant impact on the
                 other study intersections (generally resulting in less than a two percent increase
                 in traffic relative to 2014 background conditions). At all signalized intersections
                 beyond the site frontage (with the exception of the I-5 interchange), the project
                 will add on average one vehicle or less per signal cycle to any movement. This
                 level of impact is considered less than significant by traffic engineering standards
                 and well below the level that would be perceived by motorists. The TIA
                 concludes that anticipated vehicle queues can be accommodated at the I-5 ramp
                 terminals and the SW Nyberg Road/Signalized site driveway.



Nyberg Rivers                                                                          Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          12                        Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 Lastly, the Nyberg Rivers redevelopment project has proposed an on-site
                 roadway network that will meet the intent of the City's loop road connection. The
                 proposal includes the following:
                              A new roadway connection to SW Boones Ferry Road (shown as
                              "Street A" on Exhibit C that includes sidewalks.
                              An enhanced site-access driveway to SW Nyberg Road that will better
                              accommodate vehicular queuing and demand.
                              A potential future (assuming the City desires to move forward) new
                              site-access connection to SW Martinazzi Avenue that aligns across
                              from SW Seneca Street. This connection would be the Seneca Street
                              extension envisioned in the Town Center Plan. Prior to the City
                              making a decision on any new SW Street Seneca alignment, the
                              redevelopment site plan preserves this connection opportunity in the
                              present or future.
                              The preservation of east-west and north-south travel ways that will
                              provide vehicular and pedestrian access between Street A, the
                              Seneca Street alignment/extension, and enhanced access to SW
                              Nyberg Road.
                              New sidewalks along the enhanced site-access driveway to SW
                              Nyberg Road that provide pedestrian connections to the integrated
                              site circulation network.
                              New bikeway connections along the perimeter of the site.


                 These findings aptly demonstrate that the proposed development provides
                 "transportation access and circulation which is supportive of central area
                 development" and is consistent with Objectives A and B above to support shared
                 parking and the implementation of transportation improvements in the
                 Community Plan and TSP.




 GOAL 6:         PEDESTRIAN AND BIKEWAYS
         To develop a pedestrian/bicycle system linking the Urban Renewal Area to
         residential areas, parks, natural areas, and to link the business district on the
         south side of SW Boones Ferry Road to the future business district on the north
         side of SW Boones Ferry Road.
         Objectives:
                         a.      Create pedestrian ways and bikeways to link the downtown
                                 area to the Community Park and to connect development on
                                 the north and south sides of SW Boones Ferry Road.
                         b.      Provide sidewalks and lighting in the Urban Renewal Area
                                 where appropriate to encourage and support pedestrian-



Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          13                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                               oriented activities in the downtown area. Provide rain
                               protection where feasible.
                         c.    Create attractive pedestrian streetscapes in the downtown
                               area (central sub-area).
 Response:       As shown on the Nyberg Rivers Master Plan--Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan
                 enclosed as Exhibit A with this project narrative, the master plan provides a
                 pedestrian/bicycle system with an internal connectivity network for both east-west
                 and north-south access, as well as linkage to the larger regional bicycle and
                 pedestrian framework. These regional bicycle and pedestrian elements include
                 the Ice Age Tonquin Trail, located west of the City Center and the Tualatin
                 Commons area, as well as the Tualatin River Trail, located along the southern
                 banks of the Tualatin River. Sidewalks and adequate lighting are provided
                 throughout the Nyberg Rivers redevelopment site. Although this site is not within
                 the central downtown sub-area, Nyberg Rivers does create attractive pedestrian
                 streetscapes. Representative cross-sections are included with the master plan to
                 demonstrate the theming and amenities that will be provided to create an
                 attractive pedestrian streetscape.


 GOAL 7:         TRANSIT
         To support the development of the metropolitan transportation system (Tri-Met) in
         order to provide alternative transportation modes for the residential and
         employment population of the Urban Renewal Area.
         Objectives:
                         a.    Assist Tri-Met in locating park-and-ride facilities in outlying
                               areas in the community, and assist in locating other transit-
                               related facilities in the Urban Renewal Area.
                         b.    Encourage design of private and public developments which
                               integrate transit provisions.
                         c.    Assist in locating commuter rail transit near the downtown
                               area and mitigating impacts of train horn noise.
 Response:       There is an existing Tri-Met bus route located just west of Nyberg Rivers, along
                 SW Martinazzi Avenue and adjacent to the Tualatin Library and City Offices. The
                 bus line is #76, with service between Tualatin and the Beaverton Transit Center
                 along SW Boones and Lower Boones Ferry Road. The transit stop includes a
                 covered waiting area with well-marked signage. This transit stop will be
                 preserved with the redevelopment and pedestrian and bicycle linkages to this
                 stop will also be improved to the transit stop as shown on the Master Plan.



 PUBLIC UTILITIES
 GOAL 8:         UTILITIES
         To assist in providing public utilities in the Urban Renewal Area as needed to
         facilitate growth and aesthetic quality.


Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         14                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
         Objectives:
                         a.     Assist in improving, developing and relocating water, sewer,
                                storm drainage and road systems within the Urban Renewal
                                Area.
                         b.     Underground overhead electric, cable, and telephone lines in
                                the downtown area and in all new development in the Urban
                                Renewal Area. The Tualatin Commons Project Area and
                                Central Design District Enhancement Project Area are the
                                highest priority for undergrounding of utilities, to enhance
                                the aesthetic value of the downtown.
 Response:       The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan includes preliminary utility designs for on-site
                 water, sewer, storm drainage and road infrastructure. Those preliminary plans
                 are included with this project narrative. Generally, all electric, cable, and
                 telephone lines will be underground.


 RECREATIONAL AND COMMUNITY FACILITIES
 GOAL 9:         PARKS

         To provide a high-quality park and recreation system to offset the environmental
         effect of large areas of commercial and industrial development.

         Objectives (only relevant objectives listed):

                         a.     Create green and open spaces centered around the Tualatin
                                River, Nyberg Creek, Hedges Creek, and significant stands of
                                trees.


                         c.     Link the downtown area to the Community Park with a system
                                of pedestrian ways and bikeways.

                         d.     Preserve the natural value of the Tualatin River as a scenic,
                                recreational and open space asset. Seek limitation of river
                                use in this area to non-motorized boats.
 Response:       As shown on the Nyberg Rivers Master Plan--Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan
                 enclosed as Exhibit A with this project narrative, the master plan provides a
                 pedestrian and bicycle linkage to the larger regional park and recreational system
                 within and adjacent the community. The pedestrian and bicycle network helps
                 link the site to the downtown core area and other park amenities such as These
                 the Ice Age Tonquin Trail, located west of the City Center and the Tualatin
                 Commons area, as well as linkage to the Tualatin River, located along the
                 northern border of the Nyberg Rivers Master Plan area. The Master Plan
                 includes a shared pathway easement is provided with this Master Plan for future
                 development of a path along the Tualatin River. For those using that future path,
                 the Master Plan links that path to the new pedestrian and bicycle network on-site,
                 facilitating a greater overall connectivity as intended under the Goal 9 objectives.


Nyberg Rivers                                                                         Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          15                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 FLOOD CONTROL AND OTHER PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
 GOAL 10:        FLOOD PROTECTION

         To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public
         and private losses due to flood conditions.

         Objectives (only relevant objectives listed):
                      a.      Provide flood protection for the Urban Renewal Area by
                              participating in federal, state, and local flood control projects.

                         b.      Provide for the sound use and development of special flood
                                 hazard areas by utilizing special construction standards in
                                 the floodplain within the Urban Renewal Area. The Tualatin
                                 Development Code establishes standards for floodplain
                                 construction whereby structures must either be elevated
                                 above the floodplain or be made flood-proof.
 Response:       The northern portion of the Nyberg Rivers area is located within the 100-year
                 Floodplain as mapped by FEMA and Metro. The majority of the area within the
                 100-year Floodplain is located outside of the area of impact for proposed
                 development as shown on Exhibit C Site Plan. Site grading will ensure that all
                 structures are located 2 feet above the 100-year floodplain, consistent with the
                 Tualatin City Code. The proposed Master Plan has been designed consistent
                 with the City, State and Federal government regulations that govern development
                 within the floodplain.


 GOAL 11:        DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

         To create an atmosphere in the Urban Renewal Area which is aesthetically
         pleasing in order to promote the desirability of investment and occupancy in
         properties.

         Objectives (only relevant objectives listed):


                         c.    Provide attractive and functional street and walkway lighting
                               for public safety and convenience in the Urban Renewal Area.


 Response:       The applicant will be submitting for Architectural Review pending Master Plan
                 review and approval. Despite this subsequent review, the Applicant seeks
                 approval of its design proposal under this Master Plan process. The Master Plan
                 includes a design submittal in Exhibit A. Design concepts for each elevation are
                 provided demonstrating the high quality of the intended finishes as well as the
                 architectural massing and articulation of each façade. Cross-sections are also
                 provided to demonstrate the attractive and functional streetscape and walkway
                 lighting. Together with the architectural massing, streetscape and walkway

Nyberg Rivers                                                                      Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                        16                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 lighting, the integrated landscape plan evokes the vegetation types of each major
                 region of the state creating a sense of place and importance where the horizontal
                 design elements are integrated with the vertical structures. Each of these design
                 elements will not only greatly enhance the overall appearance of the site; they
                 will also enhance public safety and convenience within the URA.



 2.      RELATIONSHIP TO LOCAL OBJECTIVES
      The Tualatin Central Urban Renewal Plan exists to implement local objectives for
      central Tualatin, as they are expressed in the Tualatin Community Plan. The Urban
      Renewal Plan is a part of the Community Plan. The Community Plan and Planning
      District Standards together comprise the Tualatin Development Code.
      The goals and objectives of the Urban Renewal Plan are based upon those in the
      Community Plan, as they relate to the Urban Renewal Area. The Urban Renewal
      Plan serves to further define local objectives as follows:
                    a.      Land Use
                            The Plan calls for the promotion and support of Commercial
                            (Goal 1), Residential (Goal 2), Industrial (Goal 3), and Civic
                            (Goal 4) Development within the Urban Renewal Area. In
                            particular, the Tualatin Commons Redevelopment Project and
                            Central Design District Enhancement Project serve to further
                            the local objective of establishing a socially and economically
                            viable center in the community.
 Response: The Tualatin Community Plan is comprised of Chapters 1-30 within the
             Development Code.        The portion of the Community Plan pertaining to
             Commercial development within the Urban Renewal area is within Chapter 6:
             Commercial Planning Districts and Chapter 30: Tualatin Urban Renewal Plan. A
             response to the pertinent standards within Chapter 6 and Chapter 30 is provided
             below under those applicable headings.         The site is outside the Tualatin
             Commons Redevelopment Project and Central Design District Enhancement
             areas, although the proposed design elements consider the context of these two
             areas.

                         b.     Improved Traffic and Transportation
                                Goals 5 (Transportation), 6 (Pedestrian and Bikeways) and 7
                                (Transit) directly address objectives of the Transportation
                                Element of the Community Plan and the Transportation
                                System Plan. In particular, the plan calls for funding and
                                construction of street improvements, pedestrian and bicycle
                                facilities; for cooperation with Tri-Met in the placement of
                                park-and-ride lots in outlying areas of the community, to
                                encourage other facilities within the Urban Renewal Area; and
                                to ensure adequate parking is provided within the
                                redevelopment area.
 Response:       The findings above under Goals 5-7 are incorporated by reference herein in
                 response this criterion. The TIA aptly demonstrates that this proposal includes
                 the construction of street improvements, pedestrian and bicycle improvements


Nyberg Rivers                                                                       Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         17                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 and adequate parking in a manner that meets all of the City, County and state
                 standards for transportation facilities.


                         c.     Public Utilities
                                Goal 8 (Public Utilities) calls for Urban Renewal participation
                                in design and construction of public utilities within the Urban
                                Renewal Area. Such improvements are done in conformance
                                with the Water and Sewer Service elements of the Community
                                Plan and other applicable standards.
 Response:       The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan includes preliminary utility designs for on-site
                 water, sewer, storm drainage and road infrastructure. Those preliminary plans
                 are included with this project narrative in Exhibit A.


                         d.     Recreational and Community Facilities
                                Goal 4 (Civic Development) includes an objective to
                                participate in developing a community center and expansion
                                of the public library. Goal 4 also includes an objective to
                                develop a water feature in the Tualatin Commons
                                Redevelopment Project as a way to encourage community-
                                related private and public uses within the area. Goal 9 (Parks)
                                includes objectives regarding linking the central area to the
                                Community Park and preserving the scenic value of the
                                Tualatin River, Hedges Creek and Nyberg Creek.
 Response:       As addressed under the Goal 9 above, incorporated herein by reference, and as
                 shown on the Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan enclosed as Exhibit A, the Nyberg
                 Rivers Master Plan provides a pedestrian and bicycle linkage to the larger
                 regional park and recreational system. These regional elements include the Ice
                 Age Tonquin Trail, located west of the City Center and the Tualatin Commons
                 area, as well as linkage to the Tualatin River, located due north of Nyberg Rivers.
                 A shared pathway easement is provided with this proposal to provide for future
                 development of a trail network along the Tualatin River.

                         e.     Flood Control and Other Public Improvements
                         The Plan has as a major activity implementation of flood control
                         projects (Goal 10). The Plan anticipates Urban Renewal participation
                         in additional projects which will serve to supplement the city's
                         regulatory efforts described in the Tualatin Development Code,
                         Flood Plain District Standards.
 Response:       As addressed under Goal 10, the northern portion of the Nyberg Rivers area is
                 located within the 100-year Floodplain. The majority of this area is located
                 outside of the area of impact for proposed development activity at Nyberg Rivers.
                 Site grading will ensure that all structures are located above the floodplain. The
                 site has been designed in conformance with all local, regional and federal
                 floodplain regulations.


 D.              OUTLINE OF PROJECT ACTIVITIES

Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         18                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
         1.      PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

                 b.      Roads and Streets

                 The Transportation Study included in the 1977 plan amendments and the
                 additional work included in the Review and Update of the Urban Renewal
                 Plan and the City's Transportation System Plan 2001 have recommended
                 revisions to the street and road system within the Urban Renewal Area.
                 Transportation planning in Tualatin occurs within the context of the
                 Transportation Element of the Community Plan. As a result of these
                 studies, revisions were made to the Transportation Element.

                 The Transportation Element currently calls for the following improvements
                 (displayed on Map 3, "Transportation") to be implemented within the Urban
                 Renewal Area:

                 ·       SW Nyberg Street
                         This street will function as a major arterial between SW Tualatin-
                         Sherwood Road on the west and SW 65th Avenue on the east. West
                         of SW Tualatin- Sherwood Road bypass, SW Nyberg Street will
                         function as a minor collector primarily as a main access point into
                         the downtown area.

                         At the east end of the bridge, a loop ramp to accommodate the
                         eastbound to northbound traffic was completed in the fall of 1991.
                         This loop ramp was necessary because of the heavy left turn
                         demand which required a double left turn lane. The existing bridge is
                         not wide enough to accommodate two travel lanes in each direction
                         and a double left turn lane, making the loop necessary. A free right
                         turn onto westbound SW Nyberg Road from southbound I-5 is
                         necessary to more effectively accommodate heavy travel
                         movements to the employment centers.

                         Additional improvements are identified to the interchange due to
                         significant congestion levels in the Urban Renewal Area. These
                         include widening the southbound off ramp, widening the roadway
                         from the K-Mart/Fred Meyer signal east which includes the over-
                         crossing to accommodate two west bound lanes, west bound to
                         south bound turn lane and four east bound lanes, turn lanes and
                         pedestrian improvements.

                         Improvement of SW Nyberg Street from the K-Mart driveway to SW
                         Martinazzi Avenue including road widening and pedestrian
                         improvements may be necessary to serve the land use of the
                         Tualatin Commons Redevelopment Area, Central Design District
                         Project Area and other developments in the central and east sub-
                         areas of the Urban Renewal area.



Nyberg Rivers                                                                    Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                        19                    Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                         SW Nyberg Street, from SW Martinazzi to SW Boones Ferry Road will
                         function as a local downtown street and should be developed with
                         two travel lanes and on-street parking. Portions may be closed,
                         realigned, or rebuilt depending on the location of the major water
                         feature in the Tualatin Commons Redevelopment Project or the
                         Central Design District Enhancement Project. Closure will require
                         specific authorization from the City Council. The status of this
                         segment will be addressed during site planning efforts related to the
                         Tualatin Commons Redevelopment Project.

                         SW Martinazzi Avenue
                         This roadway will function as a minor arterial from SW Tualatin-
                         Sherwood Road to SW Nyberg and should be widened to
                         accommodate two lanes of traffic, center left turn lanes, bike lanes
                         and a signal at SW Seneca Street. From SW Nyberg Street to the
                         southern edge of the District the roadway will function as a major
                         arterial and should be widened to accommodate four lanes of traffic,
                         a center turn lane or medians and pedestrian amenities.

 Response:       Some of these listed projects are included in this application request to be
                 constructed by a private developer. For instance, a new roadway connection to
                 SW Boones Ferry Road (shown as "Street A" in Figure 2) that includes
                 sidewalks.
                         An enhanced site-access driveway to SW Nyberg Road that will better
                            accommodate vehicular queuing and demand.
                            A potential future (assuming the City desires to move forward) new
                            site-access connection to SW Martinazzi Avenue that aligns across
                            from SW Seneca Street. This connection would be the Seneca Street
                            extension envisioned in the Town Center Plan. Prior to the City
                            making a decision on any new SW Street Seneca alignment, the
                            redevelopment site plan preserves this connection opportunity in the
                            present or future.
                            The preservation of east-west and north-south travel ways that will
                            provide vehicular and pedestrian access between Street A, the
                            Seneca Street alignment/extension, and enhanced access to SW
                            Nyberg Road.
                            New sidewalks along the enhanced site-access driveway to SW
                            Nyberg Road that provide pedestrian connections to the integrated
                            site circulation network.
                            New bikeway connections along the perimeter of the site.


                 In particular, the Nyberg Street improvements and the new Loop Road through
                 the site directly implement this desired project list.

                 Specific Project Activities, Road and Street Improvements: The Plan
                 proposes to participate in the following improvements to the road and
                 street system within the Urban Renewal Area:

Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         20                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 Road Improvements:
                                SW Nyberg Street west of K-Mart to SW Martinazzi Avenue.
                                Improvements may be constructed in conjunction with the
                                Tualatin Commons Redevelopment Project or Central Design
                                District Enhancement Project, including rebuilding and
                                widening of road and pedestrian improvements.
 Response:       The proposed road improvements along SW Nyberg Street are not being
                 constructed in conjunction with the Commons Redevelopment or Central Design
                 District Enhancement Project. However, the Applicant is proposing to add a new
                 350-foot westbound right-turn lane at the SW Nyberg Road/signalized site
                 driveway at the K-Mart entrance.


                 c.      Utilities

                 Improvements in sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water supply, and electricity
                 systems have been Plan activities since the establishment of the Urban
                 Renewal Area. The Report (Section B.1.) describes the original and current
                 conditions of these systems. The Water Service and Sewer Service
                 Elements of the Community Plan state the city's policies and procedures
                 regarding system improvements. The improvements within the Urban
                 Renewal Area are shown on Maps 13-18 of the Report.
 Response:       Based on the Maps 13-18 provided in the Urban Renewal Report, there are
                 existing utilities that currently serve the site. Map 14 shows an existing 8-inch
                 sanitary sewer line that extends into the site from near the Library, heading east
                 to serve the existing retail pads. Map 16 shows existing storm lines providing
                 service to the site, a 12-inch storm lines lies within Nyberg Street and 18-inch
                 and 21-inch lines within Martinazzi Road. Map 18 shows an existing 10-inch
                 water line within SW Nyberg Street and 8-inch lines extended into the site from
                 Nyberg and Martinazzi Road. All proposed improvements and updates to the
                 existing utilities are shown on the Site Utility Plan, provided with this submittal.
                 The proposed Master Plan is consistent with maps 13-18.


 F.              LAND USE

 Land use within the Urban Renewal Area is governed by the Planning District Standards
 contained in the Tualatin Development Code. The Urban Renewal Area contains the
 following Planning District Designations:

         ·       Central Commercial
         ·       Office Commercial
         ·       General Commercial
         ·       General Manufacturing
         ·       Light Manufacturing
         ·       High Density Residential/High Rise
         ·       High Density Residential



Nyberg Rivers                                                                         Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          21                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 The regulations governing development within these districts are summarized in Table 2
 and Map 7, "Planning Districts and Blocks," displays the Planning District designations
 within the Urban Renewal Area.

 In some cases, the Plan calls for additional considerations to be applied to land uses
 within the Urban Renewal Area. These apply to specific "blocks" as shown on the
 Planning Districts Map (Map 7). These considerations pertain to permitted land uses,
 minimum lot sizes, and requirements for "Master Planning" of entire blocks or groups of
 blocks.
 Response: Map 2 of the 2009 Urban Renewal Report displays the land use designations
               throughout the Urban Renewal Area. The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan site
               contains areas designated Central Commercial (CC), Office Commercial (CO),
               and High Density Residential (RH). All of the proposed uses on the site are
               permitted where they are located in each zoning district.


 SUMMARY OF PLANNING DISTRICTS USES
 1.      PERMITTED USES
         In addition to the uses normally permitted within the relevant Planning District, the
         Planning District Standards allow the following additional permitted and
         conditional uses in the areas listed (only sections relevant to the subject property,
         Blocks 1-5 are cited below)):

 Permitted uses:
       c.     Uses permitted in the Residential High Density District on Block 1.

         d.      Multi-family uses and single-family common-wall residential units are
                 allowed on Blocks 2, 3, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22 and 23.

 Conditional Uses:
       b.     Uses permitted in the Central Commercial Planning District on Block 1.
 Response: The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan includes Urban Renewal Area Blocks 1, 2, 3, and
              5. Both the Urban Renewal Plan and the underlying CO, CC and RH zoning
              district regulations apply to the site In addition to the uses permitted by the
              underlying zoning districts, the Urban Renewal Plan allows additional uses on
              Block 1 as cited above. Block 1 is zoned CO. The Urban Renewal Plan expands
              the allowed uses on Block 1 to all of those uses permitted under the CO zone (as
              the underlying zoning district) as well as the "uses permitted in the Residential
              High Density District" and "uses permitted in the Central Commercial Planning
              District...." (See subsections (c) and (b) above). The Applicant is proposing a
              sporting goods store as one use on the site. The sporting goods store is located
              within a portion of Block 1 zoned CO and a portion of Block 2 zoned CC.
              Sporting goods stores are permitted uses in the CC District and are therefore,
              under the Urban Renewal Plan, permitted uses in the CC district and conditional
              uses in the CO district within Block 1. Outdoor storage and sales is permitted
              under Chapter 32 within the CC district. Thus, the conditional use permit
              narrative below seeks approval of the outdoor storage and sales as a conditional
              use in the CC district and seeks approval for the portion of the sporting goods


Nyberg Rivers                                                                    Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                      22                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 store that is located in the CC District. The conditional use narrative is provided
                 below.


 2.      STRUCTURE HEIGHT
         The following structure heights are permitted within the relevant Planning
         Districts and Blocks:

         b.      Buildings constructed on Blocks 1, 2, 3, 5, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 22 can
                 be a maximum of 60 feet in height.
         c.      35 feet between the Tualatin Commons central water feature and the
                 primary pedestrian corridor, except for architectural focal elements.
         d.      75 feet for Architectural Focal Elements for Blocks 14, 17, 18 and 20.

 Response:       The Master Plan comprises only Blocks 1, 2, 3 and 5. The Applicant is aware of
                 the maximum structure heights within the relevant Planning Districts. The
                 maximum height allowed for the applicable blocks is 60-feet. The Applicant is
                 not proposing any structures or design elements that will exceed 60 feet in
                 height. The building elevations provided in the Master Plan document and
                 included as a part of Exhibit C show that the proposed development is well below
                 the 60-foot maximum height allowance.



 3.      MINIMUM LOT SIZES


      Within the Urban Renewal Area, the Planning District Standards allow for
      minimum lot sizes that are generally in excess of the normal Planning District
      requirements. This is to allow for development which can incorporate a greater
      number of design features, e.g. landscaping, to achieve the design objectives of
      the Plan. The following minimum lot sizes shall apply to the creation of new lots
      by partition, subdivision or lot line adjustment in the Planning Districts and
      Blocks listed:
      a.     Unless otherwise noted, minimum lot sizes within the Urban Renewal Area
             are 25,000 square feet.
      b.     Minimum lot sizes within the Core Area Parking District are 5,000 square
             feet.
 Response: A lot consolidation is proposed with the Nyberg Rivers Master Plan that would
             result in Tax Lots 2507 and 2700 being consolidated into one (1) legal lot. The
             resulting lot size is approximately 13.07 acres, well in excess of the 25,000
             square foot URA minimum.


 4.      REQUIREMENTS FOR MASTER PLANNING
         Prior to approval of applications for development projects within Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4,
         5, 13, 25, 26, 27, 31, 32, and 33, applicants will be required to submit and gain City
         approval of a master plan governing development within the Block(s). Such

Nyberg Rivers                                                                         Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          23                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
         master plan shall contain sufficient information, as determined by the City, to
         ensure that development meets the objectives of the Plan. Master plans may
         include, but are not limited to, treatment of such issues as access, transportation,
         sewer, water storm drainage, internal circulation, building location, building
         design and materials, parking, landscaping and pedestrian facilities.

         Master plans for Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 13, 25, 26, 27, 31, 32, 33, as well as
         subsequent modifications to those plans, must be approved by the City Council at
         a public hearing. The public hearing shall be called and conducted in the manner
         provided for in Section 1.031 of the Tualatin Development Code. In approving a
         master plan, the City Council may attach conditions that it finds necessary to
         achieve the objectives of the Urban Renewal Plan.

       For blocks within which land is under multiple ownerships, and where special
       conditions exist, the Commission may initiate master plans to govern
       development. Block 23, because of its unusual platting pattern and the difficulty of
       providing street access may require such master planning.
       Plans developed by the Commission for those purposes will be referenced within
       the Development Code.
 Response:    The Applicant is aware of the requirements applicable for master planning. As
              the site is located within Blocks 1, 2, 3 and 5, the Applicant is submitting for
              master plan approval, consistent with this requirement. This master plan and the
              development plan shown on the Site Plan address the Primary Development
              Area. The remaining areas are designated as Future Development Area(s). The
              Primary Development Area is controlled by the Applicant. The Future
              Development Area(s) are anticipated to be pursued and completed by third
              parties.
                 This project narrative together with the attached exhibits, addresses all
                 applicable master plan elements, as well as Tualatin Municipal and Development
                 Code provisions. The Applicant is also aware that this proposal is subject to a
                 public hearing before the City Council.




Nyberg Rivers                                                                      Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                        24                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
  III.       TUALATIN MUNICIPAL CODE (TMC)
 CHAPTER 03-05: SOIL EROSION, SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT, WATER
 QUALITY FACILITIES, AND BUILDING AND SEWERS
 EROSION CONTROL
 3-5-010 POLICY.
 It is the policy of the City to require temporary and permanent measures for all
 construction projects to lessen the adverse effects of construction on the environment.
 The contractor shall properly install, operate and maintain both temporary and
 permanent works as provided in this chapter or in an approved plan, to protect the
 environment during the term of the project. In addition, these erosion control rules apply
 to all properties within the City, regardless of whether that property is involved in a
 construction or development activity. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any person
 from the obligation to comply with the regulations or permits of any federal, state, or
 local authority. [Ord. 846-91 §1, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       The applicant is aware of the erosion control requirements for all construction
                 projects. At the time of construction staging, the contractor will properly install,
                 operate and maintain erosion control measures consistent with City
                 requirements. The applicant's representative will be submitting for an Erosion
                 Control Permit pending Master Plan approval.



 3-5-050 EROSION CONTROL PERMITS.
 (1)     Except as noted in subsection (3) of this section, no person shall cause any
         change to improved or unimproved real property that causes, will cause, or is
         likely to cause a temporary or permanent increase in the rate of soil erosion from
         the site without first obtaining a permit from the City and paying prescribed fees.
         Such changes to land shall include, but are not limited to, grading, excavating,
         filling, working of land, or stripping of soil or vegetation from land.

 (2)     No construction, land development, grading, excavation, fill, or the clearing of
         land is allowed until the City has issued an Erosion Control Permit covering such
         work, or the City has determined that no such permit is required. No public
         agency or body shall undertake any public works project without first obtaining
         from the City an Erosion Control Permit covering such work, or receiving a
         determination from the City that none is required.

 Response:       The Applicant will seek and obtain approval of an Erosion Control Permit prior to
                 any ground disturbing activities that require an Erosion Control Permit under this
                 section.

 ADDITIONAL SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
 3-5-200 DOWNSTREAM PROTECTION REQUIREMENT.
 Each new development is responsible for mitigating the impacts of that development
 upon the public storm water quantity system. The development may satisfy this


Nyberg Rivers                                                                         Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          25                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 requirement through the use of any of the following techniques, subject to the limitations
 and requirements in TMC 3-5-210:

 (1)     Construction of permanent on-site stormwater quantity detention facilities
         designed in accordance with this title;

 (2)     Enlargement of the downstream conveyance system in accordance with this title
         and the Public Works Construction Code;

 (3)     The payment of a Storm and Surface Water Management System Development
         Charge, which includes a water quantity component designated to meet these
         requirements. [Ord. 846-91 §20, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       The proposed project includes the construction of public and private storm sewer
                 lines. All on-site surface water will be captured, conveyed and treated through an
                 on-site stormwater system before discharged into the public system. Public storm
                 lines have been designed for Street "A" and SW Seneca Street extension with
                 treatment from Contech stormfilter structures. Additionally, a public storm line
                 with a 15-foot easement has been proposed behind the proposed retail buildings
                 (1005, 1010, and 1040). The public line then runs south to serve the property in
                 the southeast corner of the site and the acquired ODOT land (proposed buildings
                 F-100 and G-100). A private storm line will be extended to the north for
                 connections to proposed buildings J-100, M-100, and N-100. The storm service
                 for existing buildings "A", "B", and "C" will remain in place, but will be retrofit with
                 Contech stormfilter structures to treat the existing impervious area.

                 The remainder of the site will be captured in sumped catch basins and conveyed
                 to Contech stormfilter structures. Sumped catch basins and Contech stormfilter
                 structures are an approved pretreatment and treatment device per the City of
                 Tualatin and Clean Water Services. A detailed Storm Drainage Plan and
                 Drainage Report is submitted as a separate exhibit demonstrating compliance
                 with this criterion.


 3-5-210 REVIEW OF DOWNSTREAM SYSTEM.
 For new development other than the construction of a single family house or duplex,
 plans shall document review by the design engineer of the downstream capacity of any
 existing storm drainage facilities impacted by the proposed development. That review
 shall extend downstream to a point where the impacts to the water surface elevation
 from the development will be insignificant, or to a point where the conveyance system
 has adequate capacity, as determined by the City Engineer.

 To determine the point at which the downstream impacts are insignificant or the drainage
 system has adequate capacity, the design engineer shall submit an analysis using the
 following guidelines:

 (1)     evaluate the downstream drainage system for at least ¼ mile;

 (2)     evaluate the downstream drainage system to a point at which the runoff from the
         development in a build out condition is less than 10 percent of the total runoff of

Nyberg Rivers                                                                            Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                            26                        Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
         the basin in its current development status. Developments in the basin that have
         been approved may be considered in place and their conditions of approval to
         exist if the work has started on those projects;

 (3)     evaluate the downstream drainage system throughout the following range of
         storms: 2, 5, 10, 25 year;

 (4)     The City Engineer may modify items 1, 2, 3 to require additional information to
         determine the impacts of the development or to delete the provision of
         unnecessary information.

 If the increase in surface waters leaving a development will cause or contribute to
 damage from flooding, then the identified capacity deficiency shall be corrected prior to
 development or the development must construct onsite detention. To determine if the
 runoff from the development will cause or contribute to dam-age from flooding the City
 Engineer will consider the following factors:

 (1)     The potential for or extent of flooding or other adverse impacts from the run-off of
         the development on downstream properties;

 (2)     The potential for or extent of possibility of inverse condemnation claims;

 (3)     Incremental impacts of runoff from the subject and other developments in the
         basin; and

 (4)     Other factors that may be relevant to the particular situation.

 The purpose of the City Engineer's review is to protect the City and its inhabitants from
 the impacts or damage caused by runoff from development while recognizing all
 appropriate limitations on exactions from the development. [Ord. 846-91 §21, 10/28/1991;
 Ord. 972-97 §1, 2/24/1997]

 Response:       According to the Drainage Report provided with this Master Plan application, the
                 proposed private stormwater conveyance systems were modeled using xpswmm
                 modeling software and were designed to convey the 25-year storm event with a
                 maximum 82% full capacity. A downstream analysis is not required for this
                 project as the site discharges directly into the Tualatin River. The final design of
                 the stormwater treatment and conveyance system will be reviewed by City staff
                 to ensure conformance with all applicable local, regional (CWS), State and
                 Federal requirements.

 3-5-220 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING ON-SITE DETENTION TO BE CONSTRUCTED.
 The City shall determine whether the onsite facility shall be constructed. If the onsite
 facility is constructed, the development shall be eligible for a credit against Storm and
 Surface Water System Development Charges, as provided in City ordinance.

 On-site facilities shall be constructed when any of the following conditions exist:

 (1)     There is an identified downstream deficiency, as defined in TMC 3-5-210, and
         detention rather than conveyance system enlargement is determined to be the
         more effective solution.

Nyberg Rivers                                                                         Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          27                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 (2)     There is an identified regional detention site within the boundary of the
         development.

 (3)     There is a site within the boundary of the development which would qualify as a
         regional detention site under criteria or capital plan adopted by the Unified
         Sewerage Agency.

 (4)     The site is located in the Hedges Creek Subbasin as identified in the Tualatin
         Drainage Plan and surface water runoff from the site flows directly or indirectly
         into the Wetland Protected Area (WPA) as defined in TDC 71.020. Properties located
         within the Wetland Protection District as described in TDC 71.010, or within the
         portion of the subbasin east of SW Tualatin Road are excepted from the on-site
         detention facility requirement. [Ord. 846-91 §22, 10/28/1991; Ord. 952-95 § 4,
         10/23/1995]

 Response:       The proposed project includes the construction of public and private storm sewer
                 lines. All on-site surface water will be captured, conveyed and treated through an
                 on-site stormwater system before discharged into the public system. Public storm
                 lines have been designed for Street "A" and SW Seneca Street extension with
                 treatment from Contech stormfilter structures. Additionally, a public storm line
                 with a 15-foot easement has been proposed behind the proposed retail buildings
                 (1005, 1010, and 1040). The public line then runs south to serve the property in
                 the southeast corner of the site and the acquired ODOT land (proposed buildings
                 F-100 and G-100). A private storm line will be extended to the north for
                 connections to proposed buildings J-100, M-100, and N-100. The storm service
                 for existing buildings "A", "B", and "C" will remain in place, but will be retrofit with
                 Contech stormfilter structures to treat the existing impervious area.

                 The remainder of the site will be captured in sumped catch basins and conveyed
                 to Contech stormfilter structures. Sumped catch basins and Contech stormfilter
                 structures are an approved pretreatment and treatment device per the City of
                 Tualatin and Clean Water Services. A Storm Drainage Plan and Drainage
                 Report are enclosed with this application for proposed layouts and more
                 information. The proposed stormwater system for the master plan does not
                 propose to connect into a facility that has an existing downstream deficiency as
                 described by TMC 3-5-210. There currently are no existing regional detention
                 facilities located within the master plan area nor are there any existing detention
                 facilities within the master plan area that would qualify as a regional facility. The
                 site is not located within the Hedges Creek Subbasin, all stormwater runoff will
                 be treated and released into the Tualatin River or Nyberg Creek. Therefore no
                 on-site detention is required to be constructed.

 3-5-230 ON-SITE DETENTION DESIGN CRITERIA.
 (1)     Unless designed to meet the requirements of an identified downstream deficiency
         as defined in TMC 3-5.210, stormwater quantity onsite detention facilities shall be
         designed to capture run-off so the run-off rates from the site after development do
         not exceed predevelopment conditions, based upon a 25-year, 24-hour return
         storm.



Nyberg Rivers                                                                            Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                            28                        Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 (2)     When designed to meet the requirements of an identified downstream deficiency
         as defined in TMC 3-5.210, stormwater quantity on-site detention facilities shall be
         designed such that the peak runoff rates will not exceed predevelopment rates for
         the 2 through 100 year storms, as required by the determined downstream
         deficiency.

 (3)     Construction of on-site detention shall not be allowed as an option if such a
         detention facility would have an adverse effect upon receiving waters in the basin
         or subbasin in the event of flooding, or would increase the likelihood or severity
         of flooding problems downstream of the site. [Ord. 846-91 §23, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       The applicant is not proposing to construct any on-site detention facilities nor are
                 any required pursuant to 3-5-220. Therefore, these criterion are not applicable to
                 this review.


 3-5-240 ON-SITE DETENTION DESIGN METHOD.
 (1)     The procedure for determining the detention quantities is set forth in Section 4.4
         Retention/Detention Facility Analysis and Design, King County, Washington,
         Surface Water Design Manual, January, 1990, except subchapters 4.4.5 Tanks,
         4.4.6 Vaults and Figure 4.4.4G Permanent Surface Water Control Pond Sign. This
         reference shall be used for procedure only. The design criteria shall be as noted
         herein. Engineers desiring to utilize a procedure other than that set forth herein
         shall obtain City approval prior to submitting calculations utilizing the proposed
         procedure.

 (2)     For single family and duplex residential subdivisions, stormwater quantity
         detention facilities shall be sized for the impervious areas to be created by the
         subdivision, including all residences on individual lots at a rate of 2640 square
         feet of impervious surface area per dwelling unit, plus all roads which are
         assessed a surface water management monthly fee under Unified Sewerage
         Agency rules. Such facilities shall be constructed as a part of the subdivision
         public improvements. Construction of a single family or duplex residence on an
         existing lot of record is not required to construct stormwater quantity detention
         facilities.

 (3)     All developments other than single family and duplex, whether residential, multi-
         family, commercial, industrial, or other uses, the sizing of stormwater quantity
         detention facilities shall be based on the impervious area to be created by the
         development, including structures and all roads and impervious areas which are
         assessed a surface water management monthly fee under Unified Sewerage
         Agency rules. Impervious surfaces shall be determined based upon building
         permits, construction plans, site visits or other appropriate methods deemed
         reliable by City. [Ord. 846-91 §24, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       The applicant is not proposing to construct any on-site detention facilities nor are
                 any required pursuant to 3-5-220. Therefore, these criterion are not applicable to
                 this review.

 3-5-250 FLOODPLAIN DESIGN STANDARDS.


Nyberg Rivers                                                                         Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          29                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 (1)     Balanced Cut and Fill Standard.

         All fill placed in a floodplain shall be balanced with an equal amount of removal of
         soil material. No net fill in any floodplain is allowed with two exceptions:

         (a)     When an engineering study has been conducted and approved by the City
                 showing that the increase in water surface elevation resulting from the fill
                 will not cause or contribute to significant damage from flooding to existing
                 buildings or dwellings on properties upstream and downstream;

         (b)     When an area has received special protection from floodplain improvement
                 projects which either lower the floodplain, or otherwise protect affected
                 properties, are approved by the City, where the exceptions comply with
                 adopted master plans, if any, and where all required permits and approvals
                 have been obtained in compliance with other local, state, and federal laws
                 regarding fill in floodplains, including FEMA rules.

 (2)     Excavation Restricted.

         Large areas may not be excavated in order to gain a small amount of fill in a
         floodplain. Excavation areas shall not exceed the fill areas by more than 50
         percent of the square footage, unless approved by the City.

 (3)     Excavation and Fill Volume Calculation.

         Any excavation dug below the winter "low water" elevation shall not count
         towards compensating for fill, since these areas would be full of water in the
         winter, and not available to hold storm water following a rain. Winter "low water"
         elevation is defined as the water surface elevation during the winter when it has
         not rained for at least three days, and the flows resulting from storms have
         receded. This elevation may be determined from records, studies or field
         observation. Any fill placed above the 100 year floodplain will not count towards
         the fill volume.

 (4)     Excavation Grade Design Standard.

         The excavated area must be designed to drain if it is an area identified to be dry in
         the summer; for example, if it is to be used for a park, or if it is to be mowed in the
         summer. Excavated areas identified as to remain wet in the summer, such as a
         constructed wetland, shall be designed not to drain. For areas that are to drain,
         the lowest elevation should be at least six inches above the winter "low water"
         elevation, and sloped at a minimum of two percent towards the drainage way. One
         percent slopes will be allowed in small areas.

 (5)     Excavation Location.

         Excavation to balance a fill does not need to be on the same property as the fill,
         but shall be in the same drainage basin, within points of constriction on the
         conveyance system, if any, as near as practical to the fill site, and shall be
         constructed as a part of the same development project which placed the fill. [Ord.
         846-91 §25, 10/28/1991]


Nyberg Rivers                                                                      Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                        30                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 Response:       There is no proposed cut or fill that will occur within the 100-year floodplain. This
                 approval criteria is therefore not applicable.



 3-5-260 FLOODWAY DESIGN STANDARDS.
 (1)     Obstruction Prohibited.

         Nothing may be constructed or placed in a floodway that will impede or constrict
         the flow of storm water. This includes, but is not limited to earth works, street and
         bike path crossings, and trees. If an object is placed in the floodway, the floodway
         must be widened or modified to accommodate the storm flows with no
         measurable increase in water surface elevation upstream or downstream, or
         unless the property owners of property where the water surface increase occurs
         grant written permission by agreement or easement.

         The floodway may not be modified such that water velocities are increased such
         that stream bank erosion will be increased, unless the stream banks are protected
         to prevent an increase in erosion.

 (2)     Floodway Modifications.

         Any proposed work within or modification to a floodway must be certified by an
         Oregon Registered Professional Engineer as meeting the requirements of TMC 3-
         5.250(1).

 (3)     Floodway Identification.

         For streams, creeks, rivers and other watercourses where the City has not
         identified the floodway, the entire floodplain shall be treated as a floodway, or a
         study prepared by an Oregon Registered Professional Engineer and approved by
         the City may be used to define the floodway limits for a stream section. [Ord. 846-
         91 §26, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       There is no proposed work proposed within the Floodway. This approval criteria
                 is therefore not applicable.



 3-5-280 PLACEMENT OF WATER QUALITY FACILITIES.
 Title III specifies that certain properties shall install water quality facilities for the
 purpose of removing phosphorous. No such water quality facilities shall be constructed
 within the defined area of existing or created wetlands unless a mitigation action,
 approved by the City, is constructed to replace the area used for the water quality facility.
 [Ord. 846-91 §28, 10/28/1991; Ord. 972-97 § 3, 2/24/1997; Ord. 1068-01 §2, 3/26/2001; Ord.
 1068-01, 03/26/2001]

 Response:       The Applicant is not proposing to construct water quality facilities within existing
                 or proposed wetlands. The Applicant has provided a Preliminary Drainage report



Nyberg Rivers                                                                          Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                           31                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 submitted with this application that provides detailed stormwater design and
                 demonstrates that this criteria is not applicable.


 PERMANENT ON-SITE WATER QUALITY FACILITIES
 3-5-290 PURPOSE OF TITLE.
 The purpose of this title is to require new development and other activities which create
 impervious surfaces to construct or fund on-site or off-site permanent water quality
 facilities to reduce the amount of phosphorous entering the storm and surface water
 system. [Ord. 846-91 §29, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       This project represents redevelopment and new development that will result in
                 additional impervious surfaces. The treatment of stormwater within the
                 redevelopment project will be conveyed to Contech StormFilters facilities.
                 StormFilters are an approved treatment device per the City of Tualatin and Clean
                 Water Services (CWS). A Storm Drainage Plan and Drainage Report enclosed
                 with this application provide the detailed design and function of the proposed
                 system that reduces the amount of phosphorous entering the storm and surface
                 water system.


 3-5-330 PERMIT REQUIRED.
 Except as provided in TMC 3-5-310, no person shall cause any change to improved or
 unimproved real property that will, or is likely to, increase the rate or quantity of run-off
 or pollution from the site without first obtaining a permit from the City and following the
 conditions of the permit. [Ord. 846-91 §33, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       The Applicant is aware of this requirement and has designed a stormwater
                 system in compliance with this criteria. The Applicant will obtain all necessary
                 permits prior to development activity commencing within the plan area.



 3-5-340 FACILITIES REQUIRED.
 For new development, subject to the exemptions of TMC 3-5-310, no permit for
 construction, or land development, or plat or site plan shall be approved unless the
 conditions of the plat, plan or permit approval require permanent stormwater quality
 control facilities in accordance with this Title III. [Ord. 846-91 §34, 10/28/1991; Ord. 1323-
 11 §1, 6/13/2011]

 Response:       This project provides on-site permanent water quality control facilities. The
                 treatment of stormwater on the redevelopment project will be conveyed to
                 Contech StormFilters facilities. StormFilters are an approved treatment device
                 per the City of Tualatin and Clean Water Services. A Storm Drainage Plan and
                 Drainage Report are enclosed with this application. The Applicant is aware of
                 this requirement and will obtain all necessary permits prior to development
                 activity commencing within the plan area.



Nyberg Rivers                                                                         Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          32                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 3-5-345 INSPECTION REPORTS.
 The property owner or person in control of the property shall submit inspection reports
 annually to the City for the purpose of ensuring maintenance activities occur according
 to the operation and maintenance plan submitted for an approved permit or architectural
 review. [Ord. 1319-11§6, 3/28/2011]

 Response:       The Applicant is aware of this requirement and will submit inspection reports
                 annually according to an operation and maintenance plan submitted to and
                 approved by the City.

 3-5-350 PHOSPHOROUS REMOVAL STANDARD.
 The stormwater quality control facilities shall be designed to remove 65 percent of the
 phosphorous from the runoff from 100 percent of the newly constructed impervious
 surfaces. Impervious surfaces shall include pavement, buildings, public and private
 roadways, and all other surfaces with similar runoff characteristics. [Ord. 846-91 §35,
 10/28/1991]

 Response:       The Applicant is aware of the phosphorous removal standard. The treatment of
                 stormwater on the redevelopment project will be conveyed to Contech
                 StormFilters facilities. StormFilters are an approved treatment device per the
                 City of Tualatin and Clean Water Services. The StormFilters are designed to
                 remove at least 65 percent of the phosphorous from 100 percent of the newly
                 constructed impervious surface. A Storm Drainage Plan and Drainage Report
                 are enclosed with this application that provides detailed design drawings
                 demonstrating compliance with this criteria. .


 3-5-360 DESIGN STORM.
 The stormwater quality control facilities shall be designed to meet the removal efficiency
 of TMC 3-5-350 for a mean summertime storm event totaling 0.36 inches of precipitation
 falling in four hours with an average return period of 96 hours. [Ord. 846-91 §36,
 10/28/1991]

 Response:       The treatment of stormwater on the redevelopment project will be conveyed to
                 Contech StormFilters facilities. StormFilters are an approved treatment device
                 per the City of Tualatin and Clean Water Services. The Storm Drainage Plan
                 and Drainage Report submitted with this application demonstrate that these
                 facilities are designed to meet the removal efficiency standard for a mean
                 summertime storm event totaling .36 inches of precipitation falling in four hours
                 with an average return period of 96 hours.


 3-5-380 CRITERIA FOR GRANTING EXEMPTIONS TO CONSTRUCTION OF ON-SITE
 WATER QUALITY FACILITIES.
 On-site facilities shall be constructed as required by OAR 340-41-455, unless otherwise
 approved by the City on a case by case basis due to the size of the development,
 topography, or other factors causing the City to determine that the construction of onsite
 permanent stormwater treatment systems is impracticable or undesirable.

Nyberg Rivers                                                                       Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         33                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 Determinations by the City may be based upon, but not limited to, consideration of the
 following factors:

 Response:       No exemption is requested with this Master Plan application. Therefore, this
                 criterion does not apply.



 3-5-390 FACILITY PERMIT APPROVAL.
 A stormwater quality control facility permit shall be approved only if the following are
 met:

 (1)     The plat, site plan, or permit application includes plans and a certification
         prepared by an Oregon registered, professional engineer that the proposed
         stormwater quality control facilities have been designed in accordance with
         criteria expected to achieve removal efficiencies for total phosphorous required
         by this Title III. Clean Water Services Design and Construction Standards shall be
         used in preparing the plan for the water quality facility; and

 (2)     The plat, site plan, or permit application shall be consistent with the areas used to
         determine the removal required in TMC 3-5-350; and

 (3)     A financial assurance, or equivalent security acceptable to the City, is provided by
         the applicant which assures that the stormwater quality control facilities are
         constructed according to the plans established in the plat, site plan, or permit
         approval. The financial assurance may be combined with our financial assurance
         requirements imposed by the City; and

 (4)     A stormwater facility agreement identifies who will be responsible for assuring the
         long term compliance with the operation and maintenance plan. [Ord. 846-91 §39,
         10/28/1991; Ord. 1323-11 §3, 06/13/2011]

 Response:       The Applicant is aware of the requirements needed to achieve stormwater quality
                 control permit approval. This project will achieve the needed requirements.



 3-5-400 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE.
 If under TMC 3-5-380, an on-site facility will not be constructed, the Storm and Surface
 Water System Development Charge shall be paid. [Ord. 846-91 §40, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       On-site facilities are feasible based on the existing site topography and type of
                 development being proposed. Therefore, the applicant is not seeking an
                 exemption as outlined in TMC 3-5-380. An on-site facility will be constructed for
                 Nyberg Rivers, so storm and surface water SDCs will not be paid.



 3-5-410 PERMIT FEE.



Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         34                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 The City shall collect a reasonable fee established by the Council by resolution for the
 review of plans, administration, enforcement and field inspection to carry out the
 provisions of this title. [Ord. 846-91 §41, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       The Applicant is aware that permit fees will apply in order to conduct proper
                 review of plans, administration, enforcement, and field inspection for water
                 quality facility permitting.



 3-5-420 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
 The permanent stormwater quality control facilities for the construction of any single
 family and duplex subdivision shall be adequately sized for the public improvements of
 the subdivision and for the future construction of single family and duplex houses on the
 individual lots at a rate of 2,640 square feet of impervious surface per dwelling unit. [Ord.
 846-91 §42, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       This criterion does not apply.



 3-5-430 PLACEMENT OF WATER QUALITY FACILITIES.
 No water quality facilities shall be constructed within the defined area of existing or
 created wetlands unless a mitigation action is approved by the City, and is constructed
 to replace the area used for water quality. [Ord. 846-91 §43, 10/28/1991]

 Response:       No water quality facilities will be constructed within the defined area of existing or
                 created wetlands.

 IV.         TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE (TDC)
 TDC 6: COMMERCIAL PLANNING DISTRICTS
 SECTION 6.010 BACKGROUND.
 (1)     Commercial development in Tualatin has occurred primarily in the downtown area
         and near the City's two Interstate 5 Freeway interchanges at Lower Boones Ferry
         Road and Nyberg Street. Downtown development consists mostly of retail,
         service, and office uses ranging in size from small, locally owned firms to large
         national chain stores such as K-Mart. Development near the interchanges is
         predominantly automobile-oriented and includes motels, automobile service
         stations, and restaurants. [Ord. 849-91, §3, 11/25/91]

 (2)     At present, there are approximately 165 acres of land zoned for commercial use,
         but only a little over 1/3 of this land is developed. Two factors account for the bulk
         of the undeveloped commercial land. First, much of this land is in large parcels
         (10 or more acres) owned by a few major developers such as Schnitzer Investment
         Corporation. These firms have held their land in anticipation of economic
         conditions favorable to large-scale commercial development. Second, much of the
         undeveloped commercial land is in the 100-year flood plain of the Tualatin River


Nyberg Rivers                                                                           Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                           35                        Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
         and is thus subject to additional development costs necessary to comply with
         applicable flood plain regulations.

 (3)     Despite the large amount of undeveloped commercial land, a number of factors
         suggest that this land will be needed for commercial use during the planning
         period. First, the demand for additional goods and services will increase as
         Tualatin's population increases. Greater concentrations of population and the
         relatively high incomes of the area's residents will support increasingly
         specialized types of retail and service establishments. It should be noted that the
         adjoining communities of Durham, Rivergrove and Lake Grove are predominantly
         residential in character, with relatively little commercial development.
         Consequently, growth of these cities will increase the demand for available
         commercial land in Tualatin, particularly near the Lower Boones Ferry Road
         interchange with I-5. Second, the Lower Boones Ferry Road interchange area is
         subject to continued development pressure because of its accessibility for
         freeway travelers looking for gasoline, food, or lodging on their way to and from
         Portland. And finally, the City is located adjacent to three of the region's major
         transportation routes, the Interstate 5 and 205 Freeways and the State Highway
         217 Expressway. This access to the remainder of the region and to the Willamette
         Valley provides an opportunity for larger-scale commercial and freeway-oriented
         developments.

 (4)     It should be noted that while most of Tualatin's residents work elsewhere, they will
         more likely work in the City if diversified job opportunities are available. Tualatin's
         supply of commercial land will thus eventually create additional diverse job
         opportunities and hopefully decrease Tualatin residents' needs to travel out of the
         community to find jobs.

  (6)    As much of the City's commercial land area is visible from the Interstate 5
         Freeway and because all residents of Tualatin must pass through a commercial
         area before reaching their homes, it is important that aesthetic design in
         commercial areas be sensitively handled. Generally, the design of a community's
         commercial area defines much of the community's character. Fortunately, the City
         has an Architectural Review process and an Urban Renewal Agency to help
         prevent inappropriate, unattractive development, but much more could be done to
         increase the quality of architectural and landscape design in commercial areas.
         Because much of Tualatin's commercial land is forested, is visible from the
         freeway, or is adjacent to residential uses, land-extensive commercial uses, such
         as automobile, truck and machinery sales and rental, would be more appropriately
         located in the City's Western Industrial District where there are relatively large, flat
         and un-forested parcels of land. This area will have good access to freeways, and
         land-extensive commercial uses would not affect the industrial uses planned for
         this area.

 Response:       Nyberg Rivers represents a commercial development that will include anchor
                 tenants and supporting smaller retail tenants to provide a mix of retail, service,
                 and office uses within the approximate 26 acre site. This site is directly adjacent
                 to the Tualatin City Center, due east from the City Center and Tualatin Commons
                 area, and is bounded to the east by Interstate 5. As this development is near the
                 interchange, the proposed master plan does include parking to suit regional
                 visitors, as well as pedestrian and bicycle networks to accommodate people

Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         36                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 seeking to access the site via the Tualatin River Trail, local bike/pedestrian
                 networks, or the Ice Age Tonquin trail located west of the downtown. Nyberg
                 Rivers represents a commercial development that will serve local Tualatin
                 consumers and a larger, regional consumer base, all in an intimate and
                 aesthetically pleasing environment created at an appropriate pedestrian scale.
                 Building elevations and plan views are provided with this application to
                 demonstrate the general aesthetic that will be created on-site.

 SECTION 6.020 ASSUMPTIONS.
 The following are general assumptions used to formulate this Plan:

 (1)     Demand for the City's commercial land will increase.

 (2)     Large-scale commercial enterprises will find Tualatin an increasingly attractive
         location.

 (3)     The City will become a commercial center serving a population much larger than
         its own.

 (4)     Retail commercial enterprises will locate primarily in the City's downtown area.

 (5)     Freeway service establishments and offices will locate adjacent to the City's
         freeway interchanges or will be visible from the Interstate 5 Freeway.

 (6)     Demand for hospital-related commercial development will occur near Meridian
         Park Hospital.

 (7)     The creation of residential and employment concentrations away from the
         downtown core will create the need for neighborhood commercial centers. These
         centers are intended to provide for day-to-day shopping and service needs and
         are not intended to be serious competition with businesses in the downtown area.
         [Ord. 592-83, § 26, 6/13/83]

 Response:       The Applicant is aware of the assumptions used to formulate the Plan. As
                 demand for the City's commercial land increases and Tualatin's presence as a
                 regional attractor of large-scale commercial enterprises grows, the uses and
                 intensities proposed at Nyberg Rivers will be a perfect complement to the vision
                 of the Plan. The increased investment and level of development proposed is
                 consistent with the intent of the assumptions outline above.

 SECTION 6.030 OBJECTIVES
 The following are general objectives used to guide the development of this Plan:

 (1)     Encourage commercial development.

 (2)     Provide increased employment opportunities.

 (3)     Provide shopping opportunities for surrounding communities.




Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         37                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 (4)     Locate and design commercial areas to minimize traffic congestion and maximize
         access.

 (5)     Continue to utilize specific and enforceable architectural and landscape design
         standards for commercial development.

 (6)     Encourage developers to consider solar access when designing commercial
         development projects.

 (7)     Provide for limited and carefully designed neighborhood commercial centers.

 (8)     Provide for the continued development of major medical services facilities in the
         City of Tualatin, especially at the Meridian Park Hospital site. The Medical Center
         Planning District shall be applied only to a property, or a group of contiguous
         properties, of no less than 25 acres and shall have frontage on an arterial as
         designated in TDC Chapter 11, Tualatin Community Plan.

 (9)     To work with the applicable jurisdictions and agencies to develop the Durham
         Quarry Site and Durham Quarry Area with high quality development. It is
         appropriate to apply an overlay district on the Durham Quarry Site and Durham
         Quarry Area to allow mixed commercial/residential uses. It is appropriate to enter
         into an intergovernmental agreement with the City of Tigard and Washington
         County to allow the City of Tualatin to review and decide land use applications
         and building permit applications for the portion of the Durham Quarry Site in the
         City of Tigard. [Ord. 592-83, §27, 6/13/83; Ord. 827-91, §2, 3/25/91; Ord. 1062.00, §2,
         12/11/00; Ord. 1133-03, 3/24/03; Ord. 1062-00, 1/03/01]

 Response:       The Applicant is aware of the purpose of each commercial planning district
                 outlined above. Nyberg Rivers represents a commercial redevelopment that
                 provides increased employment opportunities, enhanced transportation
                 networks, and architectural and landscape designs that create a sense of place
                 and are designed to a pedestrian appropriate scale. These elements will work to
                 integrate with the existing City Center and Tualatin Commons fabric in order to
                 create a more comprehensive and vibrant vision for Tualatin.

 SECTION 6.040 COMMERCIAL PLANNING DISTRICT OBJECTIVES.
 This section describes the purpose of each commercial planning district.

 (1)     Office Commercial Planning District (CO). To provide areas suitable for
         professional office uses adjacent to or across from residential areas. Restaurants
         may be allowed by conditional use permit when designed as an integral part of a
         major office complex. It is the intent of this district to provide for office
         development ranging in size from small buildings with one or two tenants to large
         complexes housing business headquarters offices. In the design of development
         in this district, care shall be taken to preserve significant natural resources and to
         provide extensive perimeter landscaping, especially adjacent to residential areas
         and streets.

  (4)    Central Commercial Planning District (CC). To provide areas for a full range of
         retail, professional and service uses of the kinds usually found in downtown areas
         patronized by pedestrians. Civic, social and cultural functions that serve the

Nyberg Rivers                                                                      Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                        38                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
         general community are also appropriate. The Central Commercial Planning
         District is almost entirely within the downtown portion of the urban renewal area.
         The Urban Renewal Plan contains extensive development policies and design
         standards that apply to this district. These policies and standards are intended to
         help create a village atmosphere in the down-town area. Multiple-family housing is
         appropriate in certain areas of this district, as specified in the Urban Renewal
         Plan.

 Response:       Nyberg Rivers is located within the Office Commercial (CO), Central Commercial
                 (CC) and High Density Residential (RH) planning districts. The northeast portion
                 of the site is within the CO district, while the property fronting SW Nyberg Street
                 has the CC designation. Based on the proposed Site Plan, the CO district will
                 include commercial uses permitted in the CO District. The CC district is focused
                 on commercial retail users, with a full range of retail, professional and service
                 uses. The uses will work well to complement the existing retail uses located
                 within the City Center and the Tualatin Commons. As demonstrated in this
                 narrative, the proposed Master Plan does address all applicable Urban Renewal
                 Plan development policies and design standards that apply to each commercial
                 district.



 TDC 9: PLAN MAP
 SECTION 9.010 BACKGROUND.
 This Plan section includes the Plan Map, (Map 9-1) classification of planning district
 boundaries, and brief descriptions of the land uses in each Plan area. The Plan Map is a
 synthesis of the objectives contained in each Plan element that can be portrayed
 graphically in map form. The Map is based on an analysis of data contained in the Phase
 I - Technical Memoranda, Northwest Tualatin Concept Plan 2005 and an analysis of Plan
 objectives and the Statewide Planning Goals of the Land Conservation and Development
 Com-mission. [Ord. 635-84, §4, 6/11/84; Ord. 1191-05, 6/27/05]

 Response:       The Applicant does have a copy of the Community Plan Map--Planning Districts
                 (Map 9-1) and is aware of the planning district boundaries for each area. Nyberg
                 Rivers is located within the Office Commercial (CO), Central Commercial (CC)
                 and High Density Residential (RH) planning districts. The northeast portion of
                 the site is within the CO district, while the property fronting SW Nyberg Street has
                 a CC designation. The RH designation applies to the existing residential area
                 located in the northwest corner of the site.

 SECTION 9.020 PLANNING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
 The boundaries between planning districts, as portrayed on the Plan Map, are intended
 to follow property lines (or extensions thereof), roadways, or natural features such as
 creeks. Where such definition was not possible, the Map is drawn to scale and district
 boundaries can be determined by using this scale. It should be noted that property lines
 shown on the Plan Map were derived from County Assessor's Maps and are therefore
 relatively accurate. Consequently, the planning districts shown on the Plan shall be
 considered zoning districts, as normally termed. This eliminates the need for two sets of



Nyberg Rivers                                                                         Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          39                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 maps and simplifies the understanding of what land uses may be allowed on an
 individual property.

 Response:       The Applicant is aware of the planning district boundaries and where each district
                 boundary does occur. This project does occur across several property lines and
                 proposed uses will occur across both CO and CC districts.

 SECTION 9.025 TUALATIN DESIGN TYPE BOUNDARIES.
 (1)     Map 9-4, Tualatin Design Type Boundaries, shows the City's final location of the
         Metropolitan Service District's Growth Concept Design Types. Metro adopted the
         general location of the Design Types as part of adopting the Urban Growth
         Management Functional Plan (UGMFP) (Metro Code, Chapter 3). The UGMFP, Title
         1, says, "For each of the following 2040 Growth Concept design types, city and
         county comprehensive plans shall be amended to include the boundaries of each
         area, determined by the city or county consistent with the general locations
         shown on the 2040 Growth Concept Map: " Map 9-4 shows the location of the
         applicable Design Types consistent with the general locations shown on the 2040
         Growth Concept Map. The boundaries are intended to follow the Planning District
         Boundaries, property lines, rights-of-way centerlines and water features.

 Response:       The Applicant is aware of the design type boundaries outlined on Map 9-4 of the
                 Community Plan. The entire site is within the Town Center (TC) design area.
                 The City has not yet adopted any Town Center zoning regulations. Metro's Town
                 Center designation is contained within Title 6. Title 6 was recently amended by
                 Metro and has not yet been acknowledged. In turn, Metro Code Section
                 3.07.810 states that Title 6 requirements are not directly applicable to the City
                 until one year after acknowledgment. Therefore, while the site is within a Town
                 Center design area, there are no specific Town Center regulations yet applicable
                 to the site.


 SECTION 9.030 AREA DESCRIPTIONS.
 To clarify the Plan Map, the Map has been divided into 14 plan areas, and the following
 describes, in narrative form, the permitted uses for each plan area. All Plan Areas with
 the exception of those comprising commercial and industrial lands, provide the
 framework for neighborhood organizations. It was with this in mind that the plan areas
 were drawn. Each area, with the exception stated above, was viewed as a potential
 neighborhood unit, having its own area of interest, comprising a population of 3,000 to
 5,000 persons and served, as much as possible, by common facilities such as schools or
 parks. [Ord. 635-84, §5, 6/11/84]

 Response:       Nyberg Rivers is within Area 1, which is the area generally described as the
                 City's central area and the City's Central Urban Renewal area. A description of
                 that area is provided below under Section 9.031--Area 1.




Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         40                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 SECTION 9.031 AREA 1.
 This portion of the Plan comprises the City's central area and is described in the City's
 adopted Central Urban Renewal Plan. The Central Urban Renewal Plan is a separate plan,
 but considered an element of this Plan. This Plan has been drafted to minimize any land
 use conflicts between uses on the periphery of the Central Urban Renewal Area. Map 9-3,
 "Central Tualatin Urban Renewal Area Planning Districts," shows the Central Urban
 Renewal boundary, the Core Area Parking District boundary, land use blocks within the
 Central Urban Renewal Area, minimum lot sizes for blocks within the Central Urban
 Renewal Area, and the designation of which blocks require a Master Plan to be submitted
 for development. [Ord. 694-86, §1, 5/27/86; Ord. 1109-02, 4/22/02]

 Response:       Nyberg Rivers is within Area 1 and is included as a part of the Central Urban
                 Renewal Area, although it is outside the Core Area Parking District shown on
                 Map 9-3. This map also shows the land use blocks within the Central Urban
                 Renewal Area. Nyberg Rivers encompasses land within Blocks 1, 2, 3 and 5.
                 These blocks require Master Plan review and approval prior to redevelopment.



 TDC 11: TRANSPORTATION
 SECTION 11.610 TRANSPORTATION GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.
       (1) Established at the outset of the TSP planning process, the transportation goals
           and objectives provide guidance and direction for the development of the City of
           Tualatin's transportation system over the next twenty years. A total of eleven
           goals have been developed in the categories of mobility, livability, coordination,
           public transportation, pedestrian and bicycle facilities, accessibility, environment,
           system preservation, capacity, transportation funding, and safety. Under each of
           these goals are sets of objectives that help define how each specific goal will be
           accomplished.

 Response:       The Applicant is aware of the transportation goals and objectives established
                 under the recently adopted February 2013 TSP update. The eleven goals are
                 addressed below, with responses provided for each goal.

 (2)      Goal 1: Mobility
          Provide a transportation system that serves the travel needs of Tualatin residents,
          businesses, and visitors.

          Objectives
          (a)    Provide an interconnected system of streets, pedestrian and bicycle
                 facilities, and other forms of transportation which will link the community;
                 minimize travel distances and vehicle-miles traveled; and safely, efficiently,
                 and economically move motor vehicles, pedestrians, bicyclists, transit
                 vehicles, trucks, and trains to and through the area when it is fully
                 urbanized.

          (b)    Act within the police power of the City as the City Road Authority and in
                 conjunction with the State and Washington and Clackamas County road


Nyberg Rivers                                                                      Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                        41                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 authorities to protect the safety of the general public by regulating the flow,
                 access and movement of traffic within the City.

         (c)     Encourage and support programs that help the City meet Metro's 2040
                 mode share targets, including, but not limited to, ride-sharing, flexible work
                 hours and the Transportation Management Association.

         (d)     Discourage residential development patterns, such as single-entrance
                 subdivisions and gated communities, which reduce connectivity and
                 mobility options for all members of the community.

         (e)     For Plan Map and Text Amendments adopt a Level of Service standard F
                 for the p.m. peak hour and E for the one-half hour before and after the p.m.
                 peak hour for the Town Center 2040 Design Type (Map 9-4), and E/E for the
                 rest of the 2040 Design Types. For development applications, including, but
                 not limited to subdivisions and architectural reviews, a LOS of at least D
                 and E are encouraged for signalized and un-signalized intersections,
                 respectively.

 Response:       As discussed previously within this narrative, the streets and pedestrian and
                 bicycle facilities proposed at Nyberg Rivers provide an interconnected system
                 that allows access both to and through the site, with linkages to the existing
                 regional transportation system. The enclosed Pedestrian & Bicycle Plan included
                 with the Master Plan document does show the street and pedestrian and bicycle
                 network for the area.        Also, as supporting evidence for the proposed
                 transportation improvements, a TIA prepared by Kittelson and Associates is
                 included with this application. The TIA identifies several significant transportation
                 improvements that are proposed as part of the development of this project and
                 demonstrates that the applicable City, Washington County and ODOT operating
                 standards are met. The transportation findings provided previously in this
                 application are incorporated herein by reference.



 (3)     Goal 2: Livability
         Provide a transportation system that balances user needs with the community's
         desire to remain a pleasant, economically vital city.


         Objectives

         (a)     Provide a transportation system that is adequate to handle the truck,
                 transit, and automobile traffic in such a way to encourage industrial
                 development, the preservation of existing residential neighborhoods, the
                 minimization of industrial traffic and congestion in the Town Center area,
                 and the successful implementation of the City's economic development
                 goals.

         (b)     Minimize the adverse social, economic and environmental impacts created
                 by the transportation system, including balancing the need for street
                 connectivity with the need to minimize neighborhood cut-through traffic.

Nyberg Rivers                                                                          Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          42                        Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
         (c)     Work with surrounding local governments, Washington and Clackamas
                 Counties, Metro, Oregon Department of Transportation, and Tri-Met to
                 develop alternate transportation facilities that will allow development
                 without major disruption of existing neighborhoods or downtown.

         (d)     Incorporate a landscape element into the development plans of arterials,
                 collectors and local streets.

         (e)     Preserve and protect Tualatin's historic sites, where practicable, when
                 developing new transportation facilities.

         (f)     Ensure safe and efficient access to the Tualatin Town Center.

 Response:       The streets and pedestrian and bicycle facilities proposed at Nyberg Rivers do
                 contribute to a transportation system that balances user needs with the Tualatin
                 community's desire to remain a pleasant, economically vital city. The internal
                 street system is proposed to provide adequate vehicle access and flow through
                 the site while encouraging safe pedestrian and bicycle interaction with those
                 vehicles. The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan--Transportation Plan, included under
                 Exhibit A with this application, displays the proposed network as well as sample
                 cross-sections of those transportation elements. Heavier freight and delivery
                 traffic is focused to the back portion of the site, with greater access to the back of
                 the larger retail buildings. The proposed transportation improvements noted in a
                 TIA prepared by Kittelson and Associates will work to improve the transportation
                 network and ensure safe and efficient access both to the Nyberg Rivers site and
                 the adjacent Tualatin Town Center. The transportation findings provided
                 previously in this application are incorporated herein by reference.

 (4)     Goal 3: Coordination
         Maintain a transportation system plan that is consistent with the goals and
         objectives of the community, the region, and the state.

         Objectives

         (a)     Provide a City transportation system that is consistent with other elements
                 and objectives of the Tualatin Community Plan.

         (b)     Coordinate planning of the City transportation system with the Regional
                 Transportation Plan prepared by the Metro, working toward a plan that is
                 consistent with the RTP.

         (c)     Work with Metro, ODOT, Tri-Met, Washington County, Clackamas County,
                 and other surrounding organizations/jurisdictions to resolve regional and
                 statewide transportation issues that impact Tualatin, including developing
                 one or more arterial routes connecting I-5 and Highway 99W south of
                 Highway 217, ensuring adequate capacity on the freeway system, and
                 improving access to and the capacity of I-5 interchanges between Highway
                 217 and the North Wilsonville Interchange.

 Response:       The proposed updates to the transportation system in and around Nyberg Rivers
                 represent changes that are more in line with the goals and objectives of a


Nyberg Rivers                                                                           Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                           43                        Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                 coordinated transportation plan. Specifically, the streets and pedestrian and
                 bicycle facilities proposed at Nyberg Rivers provide an interconnected system
                 that allows access both to and through the site, with linkages to the existing
                 regional transportation system. Also, as supporting evidence for the proposed
                 transportation improvements, a TIA prepared by Kittelson and Associates is
                 included with this application. The TIA defines the proposed transportation
                 improvements along with the levels of service to provide safe and efficient
                 transportation options. Those improvements include:

                         An on-site roadway network that will meet the intent of the City's loop road
                         connection. The proposal includes the following:
                            A new roadway connection to SW Boones Ferry Road (shown as "Street
                            A" in Figure 2 of the TIA) that includes sidewalks.
                            An enhanced site-access driveway to SW Nyberg Road that will better
                            accommodate vehicular queuing and demand.
                            A potential future (assuming the City desires to move forward) new
                            site-access connection to SW Martinazzi Avenue that aligns across
                            from SW Seneca Street. This connection would be the Seneca Street
                            extension envisioned in the Town Center Plan. Prior to the City
                            making a decision on any new SW Street Seneca alignment, the
                            redevelopment site plan preserves this connection opportunity in the
                            present or future.

                            The preservation of east-west and north-south travel ways that will
                            provide vehicular and pedestrian access between Street A, the
                            Seneca Street alignment/extension, and enhanced access to SW
                            Nyberg Road.

                            New sidewalks along the enhanced site-access driveway to SW
                            Nyberg Road that provide pedestrian connections to the integrated
                            site circulation network.

                            New bikeway connections along the perimeter of the site.

                            Closure of the existing SW 75th Avenue site-access driveway to SW
                            Nyberg Road to minimize turning movement conflicts, allow for
                            construction of a westbound right-turn lane at SW Nyberg
                            Road/signalized site driveway, and to improve the interchange access
                            spacing conditions along SW Nyberg Road.

                            A new 350-foot westbound right-turn lane constructed on SW Nyberg
                            Road

                 These elements will work to create a more efficient and coordinated
                 transportation system within Nyberg Rivers and the City Center.

 (5)     Goal 4: Public Transportation
         Improve public transportation service both within Tualatin and to the surrounding


Nyberg Rivers                                                                         Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          44                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
         area, to reduce reliance on the private automobile.
         Objectives

         (a)     Support and assist whenever practicable, the development of the
                 metropolitan public transportation system through cooperation with the
                 Tri-County Metropolitan Transportation District (Tri-Met).

         (b)     Working through Tri-Met, develop transit systems and stations, park and
                 ride systems, and related facilities in convenient and appropriate locations
                 that adequately and efficiently serve the residential and employment
                 populations.

         (c)     Work to create or improve local transit service within Tualatin either
                 through Tri-Met or other local agencies; quick, direct transit service to
                 adjacent communities; and high capacity inter-city transit service, where
                 appropriate.

 Response:       There is an existing Tri-Met bus route located just west of Nyberg Rivers, along
                 SW Martinazzi Avenue and adjacent to the Tualatin Library and City Offices. The
                 bus line is #76, with service between Tualatin and the Beaverton Transit Center
                 along SW Boones and Lower Boones Ferry Road. The transit stop includes a
                 covered waiting area with well-marked signage. This bus line should work to
                 provide public transportation service for users of the Nyberg Rivers commercial
                 center.

 (6)     Goal 5: Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities
         Provide for an interconnected system of pedestrian and bicycle facilities
         throughout Tualatin to serve short-distance and recreational trips.
         Objectives

         (a)     Provide sidewalks on both sides of all fully developed streets within the
                 City, except where it would be unsafe to do so.

         (b)     Develop safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle systems that link all
                 land uses, provide connections to transit facilities, and provide access to
                 publicly-owned land intended for general public use.

         (c)     Maintain and update official map showing existing and future street rights-
                 of-way with bicycle lanes and bikeways.

         (d)     Develop a continuous multi-use pathway along the Tualatin River, and
                 provide opportunities for pedestrian and bicycle movement across the
                 river.

         (e)     Adopt development standards that support pedestrian and bicycle access
                 to commercial, industrial, and institutional development. These include, but
                 are not limited to direct pathway connections, bicycle racks and lockers,
                 and shower facilities.

         (f)     Allow curb extensions and pedestrian crossing refuges where appropriate.



Nyberg Rivers                                                                      Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                        45                      Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
 Response:       The pedestrian and bicycle facilities proposed at Nyberg Rivers contribute to an
                 interconnected system that ties into the existing City network. The proposed
                 internal street system provides sidewalks on both sides of the street, while
                 pedestrian and bicycle accessways are provided into and through the site in both
                 a north-south and east-west direction. The Nyberg Rivers Master Plan--
                 Pedestrian & Bicycle Plan, included under Exhibit A with this application, displays
                 the proposed network as well as sample cross-sections of those transportation
                 elements. The internal accessways do provide access to the Tualatin River Trail,
                 as well as the regional Ice Age Tonquin Trail located west of the City Center.

  (7)    Goal 6: Accessibility
         Provide a transportation system that serves the needs of all members of the
         community.

         Objectives

         (a)     Provide for the transportation disadvantaged by complying with state and
                 federal regulations concerning this matter and cooperating with local,
                 county and regional agencies providing transportation services for the
                 disadvantaged.

         (b)     Upgrade existing transportation facilities and work with public
                 transportation providers to ensure services that improve access for all
                 users.

 Response:       The proposed transportation system upgrades provide accessibility from ADA
                 compliant parking stalls to the primary entrances to each building and access to
                 the Tri-Met bus station located west of the site along SW Martinazzi Avenue in
                 compliance with this criteria.

 (8)     Goal 7: Environment
         Provide a transportation system that protects the environment of the community
         and region.

         Objectives
         (a)    Provide a transportation system which encourages energy conservation, in
                terms of efficiency of the road network and in the standards developed for
                street improvements.

         (b)     Cooperate with the Department of Environmental Quality, Clean Water
                 Services, and Metro to meet applicable air and water quality and traffic
                 noise standards.

         (c)     Encourage use of the existing transportation facilities by increasing use of
                 alternative modes of transportation and encourage development that
                 decreases reliance on the automobile.

         (d)     Balance transportation improvements with the need to protect natural
                 resources.



Nyberg Rivers                                                                        Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                         46                       Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
         (e)     Provide authority for the City Engineer to modify right-of-way widths and
                 street improvement widths to address unusual conditions.

 Response:       The proposed updates to the transportation infrastructure at Nyberg Woods does
                 promote greater pedestrian and bicycle access, which will put less stress on the
                 transportation system. Also, with the proposed system upgrades proposed under
                 the TIA performed by Kittelson, greater vehicle efficiency and movement will be
                 achieved. The site is also designed for shared parking amongst uses and with
                 the mix of uses will promote internal pedestrian site trips to lessen overall vehicle
                 trips. These elements combine to provide a transportation system that better
                 protects the environment of the community and region.

 (9)     Goal 8: System Preservation
         Ensure that development does not preclude the construction of identified future
         transportation improvements, and ensure that development mitigates the
         transportation impacts it generates.

         Objectives
         (c)    Require developers to aid in the development of the transportation system
                by dedicating or reserving needed rights-of-way, and by constructing half
                or full street improvements needed to serve new development and to
                mitigate the impacts of new development.

         (d)     Require developers to mitigate the impacts of development on the
                 transportation system by constructing off-street pedestrian, bicycle and
                 transit facilities.

         (e)     Establish local street plans for contiguous vacant and re-developable areas
                 of five acres or more planned or zoned for development that identify local
                 street access points to the collector and arterial street system, and local
                 street connections to adjacent development.

 Response:       The proposed Nyberg Rivers development does include several updates to the
                 transportation infrastructure. Those updates include:

                         The Nyberg Rivers redevelopment project has proposed an on-site
                         roadway network that will meet the intent of the City's loop road
                         connection. The proposal includes the following:
                         ·   A new roadway connection to SW Boones Ferry Road (shown as
                             "Street A" in Figure 2 of the TIA) that includes sidewalks.
                         ·   An enhanced site-access driveway to SW Nyberg Road that will better
                             accommodate vehicular queuing and demand.
                         ·   A potential future (assuming the City desires to move forward) new
                             site-access connection to SW Martinazzi Avenue that aligns across
                             from SW Seneca Street. This connection would be the Seneca Street
                             extension envisioned in the Town Center Plan. Prior to the City
                             making a decision on any new SW Street Seneca alignment, the
                             redevelopment site plan preserves this connection opportunity in the
                             present or future.

Nyberg Rivers                                                                          Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                          47                        Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
                         ·   The preservation of east-west and north-south travel ways that will
                             provide vehicular and pedestrian access between Street A, the
                             Seneca Street alignment/extension, and enhanced access to SW
                             Nyberg Road.
                         ·   New sidewalks along the enhanced site-access driveway to SW
                             Nyberg Road that provide pedestrian connections to the integrated
                             site circulation network.
                         ·   New bikeway connections along the perimeter of the site.
                             Closure of the existing SW 75th Avenue site-access driveway to SW
                             Nyberg Road to minimize turning movement conflicts, allow for
                             construction of a westbound right-turn lane at SW Nyberg
                             Road/signalized site driveway, and to improve the interchange access
                             spacing conditions along SW Nyberg Road.

                             A new 350-foot westbound right-turn lane constructed on SW Nyberg
                             Road

                 The site design also facilitates connections to surrounding properties and does
                 not preclude the development of other transportation facilities consistent with the
                 TSP. These commitments by the applicant will work to create a more efficient
                 and coordinated transportation system within Nyberg Rivers and the City Center.



 (10)    Goal 9: Capacity
         Provide a transportation system that has sufficient capacity to serve user needs.

         Objectives
         (a)    Establish an arterial street system which will attract and effectively
                accommodate all "through" trips to relieve residential collectors and local
                streets from heavy and hazardous traffic burdens.

         (b)     Locate proposed rail spur lines to minimize conflicts with adjoining land
                 uses and streets.

         (c)     Minimize new railroad grade crossings to reduce time losses due to traffic
                 delays and accidents, and to produce in-creased efficiency of railroad
                 operation and increased public convenience.

         (d)     Maintain and update the City's access management standards in the
                 Tualatin Development Code to preserve the safe and efficient operation of
                 the City's roadways, consistent with their functional classification.

 Response:        All of the study intersections, site access points, and internal site intersections,
                 except for the previously identified SW Martinazzi Avenue/SW Sagert Road and
                 SW 65th Avenue/SW Sagert Road intersections, are forecast to operate with
                 acceptable operating standards during the weekday p.m. and Saturday midday
                 peak hours.



Nyberg Rivers                                                                           Cardno WRG
Master Plan                                           48                        Submitted April 8, 2013
Conditional Use Permit
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- SW Boones Ferry Rd                                                                       QC JOB #: 10772125
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                     1    0.25    2                           Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                               0.0        0.0

                     0     1      0
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 0.0 0.0

      1217    1                          1   1308
                                                                                                             2.5   0.0                       0.0      2.3
       0.94   645         0.95         903   0.92
                                                                                                                   2.2                       2.7
      805     159                      404   1011
                                                                                                             1.9   0.6                       1.5      1.7

                    314    0     366
                                                                                                                          2.2 0.0 0.8

                    564 0.88 680
                                                                                                                          1.2        1.5



                           15                                                                                              0    0    0


                                                                                                                   0                          0

              7                          8                                                                         4                         10

                                                                                                                   0                          2


                           7                                                                                               1    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                    NA




              NA                       NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count       SW Martinazzi Ave                    SW Martinazzi Ave       SW Boones Ferry Rd       SW Boones Ferry Rd
     Period          (Northbound)                         (Southbound)             (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At Left Thru Right                                                                                                               Total
                                     U              Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right     U                           Totals
     4:00 PM    27      0      11    0                0      0      0     0     0   57     12      0    25    70      0     0              202         2305
     4:05 PM    27      0      38    0                0      0      0     0     0   61     16      0    21    64      0     0              227         2346
     4:10 PM    32      0      29    0                0      0      0     0     1   48     15      0    26    70      0     0              221         2370
     4:15 PM    29      0      38    0                0      0      0     0     0   59      8      0    30    81      0     0              245         2431
     4:20 PM    27      0      28    0                0      0      0     0     0   53     12      0    24    67      0     0              211         2464
     4:25 PM    38      0      30    0                0      0      0     0     0   40     13      0    26    64      0     0              211         2509
     4:30 PM    17      0      16    0                0      0      0     0     0   49     12      0    32    76      0     0              202         2516
     4:35 PM    39      0      40    0                0      0      0     0     0   50     12      0    19    65      0     0              225         2545
     4:40 PM    22      0      27    0                0      1      0     0     0   47     15      0    35    90      0     0              237         2583
     4:45 PM    23      0      30    0                0      0      0     0     0   53     16      0    33    74      1     0              230         2599
     4:50 PM    20      0      19    0                0      0      0     0     1   64     14      0    30    81      0     0              229         2622
     4:55 PM    28      0      21    0                0      0      0     0     0   52     15      0    29    70      0     0              215         2655
     5:00 PM    26      0      41    0                0      0      0     0     0   54     12      0    36    75      0     0              244         2697
     5:05 PM    25      0      42    0                0      0      0     0     0   44      9      0    43    81      0     0              244         2714
     5:10 PM    29      0      30    0                0      0      0     0     0   56     15      0    41    79      0     0              250         2743
     5:15 PM    25      0      33    0                0      0      0     0     0   59     15      0    28    78      0     0              238         2736
     5:20 PM    23      0      33    0                0      0      0     0     0   51     10      0    42    78      0     0              237         2762
     5:25 PM    25      0      25    0                0      0      0     0     0   60     14      0    38    66      0     0              228         2779
     5:30 PM    29      0      25    0                0      0      0     0     0   55     12      0    30    66      0     0              217         2794
     5:35 PM    35      0      32    0                0      0      0     0     0   45     12      0    30    73      1     0              228         2797
     5:40 PM    28      0      26    0                0      0      0     0     0   42     12      0    31    76      0     0              215         2775
     5:45 PM    36      0      22    0                0      0      1     0     0   39     12      0    30    75      0     0              215         2760
     5:50 PM    26      0      23    0                0      0      0     0     0   42      5      0    31    81      0     0              208         2739
     5:55 PM    28      0      24    0                0      0      0     0     0   32      9      0    24    61      0     0              178         2702
 Peak 15-Min              Northbound                          Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right       U              Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right     U
  All Vehicles 320      0    452     0                0      0      0     0     0  616    144      0   480   940      0     0                      2952
 Heavy Trucks    4      0       0                     0      0      0           0    8      0            8     8      0                             28
  Pedestrians           4                                   12                       8                        12                                    36
   Bicycles      1      0       0                     0      0      0           0    1      0            0     2      0                              4
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- Existing Site Dwy near City Hall                                                            QC JOB #: 10772123
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                      575 0.91 692                          Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                    1.0        1.3

                       0   433 142
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 1.4 0.0

       0       0                     104    132
                                                                                                               0.0    0.0                     0.0   0.0
        0.00   0           0.92        0   0.80
                                                                                                                      0.0                     0.0
       0       0                      28    207
                                                                                                               0.0    0.0                     0.0   0.0

                       0   588 65
                                                                                                                             0.0 1.5 0.0

                      461 0.91 653
                                                                                                                             1.3        1.4



                            3                                                                                                 0    3    1


                                                                                                                      0                        0

               7                      15                                                                              0                        0

                                                                                                                      0                        0


                            0                                                                                                 0    1    0




                           NA                                                                                                      NA




               NA                    NA                                                                               NA                      NA




                           NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count            SW Martinazzi Ave             SW Martinazzi Ave
     Period                                                                 Existing Site Dwy near City Hall
                                                                                                         Existing Site Dwy near City Hall
                          (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                                                                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                        (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)             Total
                    Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right        U     Left Thru Right       U                  Totals
     4:00 PM          0     39       8    0        14     30      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      8      0       102        1149
     4:05 PM          0     57       6    0        14     18      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0     11      0       109        1166
     4:10 PM          0     54       5    0         8     30      0     0      0      0      0      0        5     0     14      0       116        1192
     4:15 PM          0     50       3    0        13     34      0     0      0      0      0      0        1     0      9      0       110        1208
     4:20 PM          0     42       9    0        11     25      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0      6      0        97        1210
     4:25 PM          0     48       7    0        11     26      0     0      0      0      0      0        2     0     14      0       108        1226
     4:30 PM          0     37       8    0        12     32      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0      5      0        98        1228
     4:35 PM          0     58       3    0        13     27      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0     18      0       122        1252
     4:40 PM          0     47       5    0        15     35      0     0      0      0      0      0        0     0     10      0       112        1275
     4:45 PM          0     37       5    0        12     40      0     0      0      0      0      0        0     0      8      0       102        1283
     4:50 PM          0     42       6    0        10     37      0     0      0      0      0      0        2     0     11      0       108        1276
     4:55 PM          0     50       3    0        14     27      0     0      0      0      0      0        2     0      9      0       105        1289
     5:00 PM          0     54       5    0        13     43      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0      9      0       128        1315
     5:05 PM          0     47       7    0         7     40      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0     14      0       118        1324
     5:10 PM          0     59       7    0        14     41      0     0      0      0      0      0        0     0      1      0       122        1330
     5:15 PM          0     49      10    0        14     30      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      8      0       114        1334
     5:20 PM          0     44       6    0        11     38      0     0      0      0      0      0        2     0      8      0       109        1346
     5:25 PM          0     52       4    0        10     40      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0      3      0       113        1351
     5:30 PM          0     49       4    0         9     35      0     0      0      0      0      0        5     0      5      0       107        1360
     5:35 PM          0     57       5    0         9     32      0     0      0      0      0      0        2     0      5      0       110        1348
     5:40 PM          0     46       6    0         9     35      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0     10      0       110        1346
     5:45 PM          0     48       4    0         4     35      0     0      0      0      0      0        5     0      7      0       103        1347
     5:50 PM          0     47       4    0         6     39      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      5      0       104        1343
     5:55 PM          0     44       3    0         9     20      0     0      0      0      0      0        0     0      7      0        83        1321
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                   Southbound                  Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                              Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right        U     Left Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        0    640      76    0       136    496      0     0      0      0      0      0      28      0     96      0            1472
 Heavy Trucks         0      4       0              0      4      0            0      0      0               0     0      0                     8
  Pedestrians                0                             0                          4                           12                           16
   Bicycles           0      0       0              0      1      0            0      0      0               0     0      0                     1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- SW Seneca St                                                                           QC JOB #: 10772121
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                              DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                      463 0.88 650                          Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                               1.5        1.4

                       50 413    0
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 1.7 0.0

       144     42                     0       0
                                                                                                           0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0
        0.83   0          0.91        0   0.00
                                                                                                                 0.0                       0.0
       120     78                     0       0
                                                                                                           0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0

                       94 608    0
                                                                                                                        0.0 1.5 0.0

                      491 0.91 702
                                                                                                                        1.4        1.3



                           26                                                                                            0    3    0


                                                                                                                 0                          0

               1                     25                                                                          0                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          0


                           16                                                                                            0    2    0




                          NA                                                                                                  NA




               NA                    NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count            SW Martinazzi Ave             SW Martinazzi Ave          SW Seneca St              SW Seneca St
     Period               (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                             Total
                    Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                      Totals
     4:00 PM          6     43      0     0         0     24      7     0     2     0      5      0     0    0      0         0           87         1076
     4:05 PM          6     66      0     0         0     25      2     0     3     0      9      0     0    0      0         0          111         1101
     4:10 PM         11     46      0     0         0     29      4     0     3     0      5      0     0    0      0         0           98         1109
     4:15 PM          7     57      0     0         0     32      1     0     2     0      6      0     0    0      0         0          105         1130
     4:20 PM          7     43      0     0         0     22      5     0     5     0      5      0     0    0      0         0           87         1128
     4:25 PM         10     56      0     0         0     31      1     0     3     0      3      0     0    0      0         0          104         1140
     4:30 PM          9     36      0     0         0     34      3     0     3     0      1      0     0    0      0         0           86         1130
     4:35 PM          6     62      0     0         0     27      1     0     3     0      7      0     0    0      0         0          106         1153
     4:40 PM          9     47      0     0         0     30      5     0     2     0     10      0     0    0      0         0          103         1174
     4:45 PM         10     45      0     0         0     41      1     0     3     0      4      0     0    0      0         0          104         1186
     4:50 PM          1     45      0     0         0     30      5     0     4     0     10      0     0    0      0         0           95         1179
     4:55 PM          9     48      0     0         0     32      5     0     1     0      7      0     0    0      0         0          102         1188
     5:00 PM         12     60      0     0         0     38      5     0     1     0      6      0     0    0      0         0          122         1223
     5:05 PM          7     56      0     0         0     46      1     0     2     0      9      0     0    0      0         0          121         1233
     5:10 PM          5     53      0     0         0     37      5     0     6     0      4      0     0    0      0         0          110         1245
     5:15 PM          8     51      0     0         0     20      3     0     7     0      8      0     0    0      0         0           97         1237
     5:20 PM          9     42      0     0         0     38      5     0     7     0      1      0     0    0      0         0          102         1252
     5:25 PM         12     55      0     0         0     40      7     0     3     0      3      0     0    0      0         0          120         1268
     5:30 PM          6     44      0     0         0     34      7     0     3     0      9      0     0    0      0         0          103         1285
     5:35 PM         10     66      0     0         0     25      6     0     2     0      7      0     0    0      0         0          116         1295
     5:40 PM          9     43      0     0         0     35      4     0     5     0     10      0     0    0      0         0          106         1298
     5:45 PM          5     59      0     0         0     38      4     0     2     0      7      0     0    0      0         0          115         1309
     5:50 PM          6     41      0     0         0     36      5     0     2     0      3      0     0    0      0         0           93         1307
     5:55 PM          3     49      0     0         0     25      2     0     4     0      1      0     0    0      0         0           84         1289
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                   Southbound                Eastbound                Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       96    676      0     0         0    484    44      0    36     0     76      0     0    0      0         0                  1412
 Heavy Trucks         0      4      0               0      8      0           0     0      0            0    0      0                             12
  Pedestrians                4                            20                        0                        8                                    32
   Bicycles           0      1      0               0      1      0           0     0      0            0    0      0                              2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- Existing Site Dwy                                                                        QC JOB #: 10772119
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                      491 0.88 702                          Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                 1.4        1.3

                       0   481 10
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 1.5 0.0

       0       0                      32     32
                                                                                                             0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0
        0.00   0           0.90        0   0.73
                                                                                                                   0.0                       0.0
       0       0                       0     16
                                                                                                             0.0   0.0                       0.0      6.3

                       0   670    6
                                                                                                                          0.0 1.3 16.7

                      481 0.90 676
                                                                                                                          1.5        1.5



                            0                                                                                              0    3    0


                                                                                                                   0                          0

               2                      28                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                   0                          0


                            0                                                                                              0    2    0




                           NA                                                                                                   NA




               NA                     NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count            SW Martinazzi Ave             SW Martinazzi Ave         Existing Site Dwy           Existing Site Dwy
     Period               (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                    Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right         U                      Totals
     4:00 PM          0     48      0     0         0     29      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       1      0           78          978
     4:05 PM          0     72      1     0         0     34      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       0      0          108         1007
     4:10 PM          0     52      0     0         1     33      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       5      0           92         1013
     4:15 PM          0     63      1     0         1     37      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       1      0          103         1044
     4:20 PM          0     47      0     0         2     25      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       3      0           78         1037
     4:25 PM          0     62      0     0         0     34      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       4      0          101         1054
     4:30 PM          0     44      0     0         0     35      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       1      0           81         1051
     4:35 PM          0     61      1     0         1     33      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       7      0          103         1075
     4:40 PM          0     55      0     0         1     39      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       1      0           96         1095
     4:45 PM          0     54      0     0         0     45      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       1      0          100         1117
     4:50 PM          0     42      1     0         1     39      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       4      0           87         1113
     4:55 PM          0     55      1     0         2     37      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       2      0           97         1124
     5:00 PM          0     71      0     0         0     44      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       1      0          116         1162
     5:05 PM          0     59      1     0         4     51      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       4      0          119         1173
     5:10 PM          0     55      0     0         1     40      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       3      0           99         1180
     5:15 PM          0     55      2     0         0     28      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       4      0           89         1166
     5:20 PM          0     48      0     0         0     39      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       3      0           90         1178
     5:25 PM          0     66      0     0         0     43      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       1      0          110         1187
     5:30 PM          0     49      0     0         0     43      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       1      0           93         1199
     5:35 PM          0     74      1     0         1     31      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       2      0          109         1205
     5:40 PM          0     47      0     0         2     43      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       5      0           97         1206
     5:45 PM          0     62      0     0         0     45      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       2      0          109         1215
     5:50 PM          0     47      1     0         0     39      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0           87         1215
     5:55 PM          0     52      0     0         0     26      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0           78         1196
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                   Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles        0    740      4     0        20    540      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0      32      0                  1336
 Heavy Trucks         0      4      0               0      8      0           0      0       0            0      0       0                          12
  Pedestrians                0                             0                         0                          12                                  12
   Bicycles           0      1      0               0      1      0           0      0       0            0      0       0                           2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- Existing Right-Out Only Dwy                                                               QC JOB #: 10772117
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                      491 0.85 665                          Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                  1.4        1.5

                       0   491    0
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                           0.0 1.4 0.0

       0       0                      12     12
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0
        0.00   0           0.89        0   0.50
                                                                                                                    0.0                       0.0
       0       0                       0      0
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0

                       0   653    0
                                                                                                                           0.0 1.5 0.0

                      491 0.91 653
                                                                                                                           1.4        1.5



                            0                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                    0                          0

               0                       0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                    0                          0


                            0                                                                                               0    2    0




                           NA                                                                                                    NA




               NA                     NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count            SW Martinazzi Ave             SW Martinazzi Ave     Existing Right-Out Only Dwy Existing Right-Out Only Dwy
     Period               (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                    Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right        U    Left Thru Right        U                       Totals
     4:00 PM          0     51      0     0         0     28      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            79          962
     4:05 PM          0     70      0     0         0     35      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0           106          989
     4:10 PM          0     50      0     0         0     34      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            84          990
     4:15 PM          0     61      0     0         0     35      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            97         1018
     4:20 PM          0     45      0     0         0     37      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      2     0            84         1009
     4:25 PM          0     62      0     0         0     41      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0           103         1027
     4:30 PM          0     39      0     0         0     40      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            80         1029
     4:35 PM          0     62      0     0         0     30      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            93         1041
     4:40 PM          0     52      0     0         0     39      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            92         1059
     4:45 PM          0     52      0     0         0     37      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            89         1074
     4:50 PM          0     43      0     0         0     44      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            87         1080
     4:55 PM          0     53      0     0         0     37      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            90         1084
     5:00 PM          0     66      0     0         0     46      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      2     0           114         1119
     5:05 PM          0     58      0     0         0     46      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0           104         1117
     5:10 PM          0     55      0     0         0     52      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0           107         1140
     5:15 PM          0     54      0     0         0     33      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      2     0            89         1132
     5:20 PM          0     46      0     0         0     33      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      2     0            81         1129
     5:25 PM          0     63      0     0         0     52      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0           116         1142
     5:30 PM          0     49      0     0         0     42      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      3     0            94         1156
     5:35 PM          0     75      0     0         0     38      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0           113         1176
     5:40 PM          0     45      0     0         0     38      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            83         1167
     5:45 PM          0     60      0     0         0     47      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0           107         1185
     5:50 PM          0     48      0     0         0     37      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            85         1183
     5:55 PM          0     51      0     0         0     29      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            80         1173
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                   Southbound                   Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right        U    Left Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles        0    716      0     0         0    576      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      8     0                   1300
 Heavy Trucks         0      4      0               0      8      0            0       0      0            0       0      0                          12
  Pedestrians                0                             0                           0                           0                                  0
   Bicycles           0      1      0               0      0      0            0       0      0            0       0      0                           1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- SW Tualatin-Sherwood Rd                                                                QC JOB #: 10772115
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                              DATE: Wed, Jun 06 2012
                     901 0.91 286                           Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                               1.2        2.1

                     84 632 185
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                        1.2 1.3 1.1

      1280    42                       1   1104
                                                                                                           4.6   4.8                       0.0      5.1
       0.94   1449      0.94        1103   0.93
                                                                                                                 4.3                       5.1
      1572    81                       0   1948
                                                                                                           4.1   0.0                       0.0      3.5

                     92 244 314
                                                                                                                        2.2 1.6 1.0

                     713 0.82 650
                                                                                                                        1.1        1.4



                          2                                                                                              0    0    0


                                                                                                                 0                          0

              16                       3                                                                         0                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          0


                          4                                                                                              0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                   NA




              NA                     NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                         NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count       SW Martinazzi Ave                  SW Martinazzi Ave     SW Tualatin-Sherwood Rd   SW Tualatin-Sherwood Rd
     Period          (Northbound)                       (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At Left Thru Right                                                                                                             Total
                                     U            Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U                         Totals
     4:00 PM     7     23      22    0             11     42      4     0     4   116      6     0      0    86      0     0             321         3812
     4:05 PM     5     16      25    0             10     42      5     0     4   109      8     0      0   119      0     0             343         3845
     4:10 PM    12     28      21    0             19     45    12      0     4    90      5     0      0    86      0     0             322         3893
     4:15 PM     6     16      25    0             16     39      5     0     5   141     11     0      0   106      0     0             370         3950
     4:20 PM     8     13      11    0             20     38      7     0     4   129      7     0      0    77      0     0             314         3971
     4:25 PM     7     23      33    0              5     58      9     0     8   114      4     0      0    83      0     0             344         4000
     4:30 PM     7     13      14    0             10     30      1     0     7   140      5     0      0   104      0     0             331         3990
     4:35 PM     8     27      35    0             17     71      7     0     2   100      8     0      0    79      0     0             354         4039
     4:40 PM     6     22      26    0             14     37      1     0     4   141      6     1      0   130      0     0             388         4058
     4:45 PM    10     17      20    0             18     32      6     0     1   112      3     0      0    73      0     0             292         4061
     4:50 PM     7     11      24    0             11     48      8     0     5   119      5     0      0    94      0     0             332         4060
     4:55 PM    11     18      18    0             26     53    11      0     0   109      4     0      0    69      0     0             319         4030
     5:00 PM     6     22      20    0             12     45    13      0     8   127      5     0      0    84      0     0             342         4051
     5:05 PM    12     22      33    0             15     45      4     0     2   127      6     0      0   103      0     0             369         4077
     5:10 PM     7     34      36    0             15     78      9     0     4   116      3     0      0    78      1     0             381         4136
     5:15 PM     6     25      22    0             11     43      7     0     5   133      7     0      0   111      0     0             370         4136
     5:20 PM    14     16      31    0             21     57      3     0     4   119      9     0      0    93      0     0             367         4189
     5:25 PM     0     17      27    0             13     83    10      0     4   123     15     0      0    91      0     0             383         4228
     5:30 PM     5     13      22    0             12     40      5     0     2   123     10     0      0    98      0     0             330         4227
     5:35 PM    12     19      29    0             19     66      5     0     5    59      2     0      0    94      0     0             310         4183
     5:40 PM     3      3      19    0             12     37    10      0     5   124      4     0      1    97      0     0             315         4110
     5:45 PM     8     17      25    0             21     51      8     0     6    79     13     0      0    79      0     0             307         4125
     5:50 PM     5     24      20    0             10     42      4     0     5    78      6     0      0   139      0     0             333         4126
     5:55 PM     9     18      15    1             17     50    11      0     5    80      7     0      0    69      0     0             282         4089
 Peak 15-Min              Northbound                        Southbound                Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right       U            Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U
  All Vehicles 100    324    364     0            164    664    80      0    44 1504      64     0      0 1168       4     0                     4480
 Heavy Trucks    0      4       4                   0      4      0           4    40      0            0    68      0                            124
  Pedestrians           0                                  4                       32                         0                                   36
   Bicycles      0      0       0                   0      0      0           0     0      0            0     0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- SW Nyberg St                                                                               QC JOB #: 10772113
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                      488 0.85 653                          Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                   1.4        1.5

                       10 478    0
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 1.5 0.0

       92      29                    325    716
                                                                                                               2.2   0.0                       2.2      1.3
        0.90   10         0.91        55   0.90
                                                                                                                     0.0                       0.0
       140     101                   336     29
                                                                                                               0.7   1.0                       0.6      0.0

                       27 299 19
                                                                                                                            7.4 1.0 0.0

                      915 0.77 345
                                                                                                                            1.1        1.4



                           10                                                                                                0    3    0


                                                                                                                     0                          2

               6                      19                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                     0                          0


                           0                                                                                                 0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                      NA




               NA                    NA                                                                              NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count            SW Martinazzi Ave             SW Martinazzi Ave            SW Nyberg St                SW Nyberg St
     Period               (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                    Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right        U                      Totals
     4:00 PM          0     20       2    0         0     27      1     0     1       2     13      0    17       3     30        0          116         1367
     4:05 PM          1     27       3    0         0     32      1     0     4       0      8      0    24       2     39        0          141         1392
     4:10 PM          2     26       0    0         0     36      1     0     4       0      5      0    20       5     20        0          119         1395
     4:15 PM          2     31       2    0         0     30      2     0     2       0     13      0    25       3     28        0          138         1424
     4:20 PM          2     18       2    0         0     36      1     0     1       1      5      0    22       3     26        0          117         1417
     4:25 PM          1     28       0    0         0     32      3     0     2       0      6      0    32       3     32        0          139         1445
     4:30 PM          0     13       0    0         0     33      3     0     3       1      6      0    22       2     23        0          106         1441
     4:35 PM          3     32       0    0         0     34      3     0     3       2      8      0    23       2     27        0          137         1466
     4:40 PM          1     25       1    0         0     36      1     0     0       0      8      0    25       3     27        0          127         1489
     4:45 PM          3     22       3    0         0     41      1     0     5       2     10      0    25       5     25        0          142         1536
     4:50 PM          4     15       3    0         0     41      0     0     1       0      7      0    27       6     27        0          131         1547
     4:55 PM          0     21       0    0         0     34      1     0     2       0     11      0    35       5     30        0          139         1552
     5:00 PM          2     35       2    0         0     47      0     0     5       1      9      0    33       7     26        0          167         1603
     5:05 PM          1     30       0    0         0     42      1     0     1       1      9      0    31       6     27        0          149         1611
     5:10 PM          5     33       4    0         0     54      0     0     1       3      9      0    14       2     21        0          146         1638
     5:15 PM          1     20       1    0         0     33      1     0     2       0      6      0    27       7     32        0          130         1630
     5:20 PM          2     21       2    0         0     31      0     0     3       1      8      0    26       1     22        0          117         1630
     5:25 PM          1     27       2    0         0     50      1     0     4       0     10      0    32       6     32        0          165         1656
     5:30 PM          4     18       1    0         0     35      1     0     2       0      6      0    38       5     29        0          139         1689
     5:35 PM          3     40       1    0         0     45      1     0     6       0      8      0    24       6     29        0          163         1715
     5:40 PM          0     17       2    0         0     36      2     0     1       0      6      0    23       1     27        0          115         1703
     5:45 PM          2     24       2    0         0     48      0     0     2       0      7      0    32       4     34        0          155         1716
     5:50 PM          1     15       2    0         0     36      2     0     1       0      6      0    31       1     32        0          127         1712
     5:55 PM          2     17       0    0         0     26      1     0     1       2     12      0    31       4     33        0          129         1702
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                   Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles       32    392      24    0         0    572      4     0    28      20    108      0   312      60   296         0                  1848
 Heavy Trucks         0      0       0              0     12      0           0       0      0            4       0      4                            20
  Pedestrians                0                             8                          0                          16                                   24
   Bicycles           0      0       0              0      1      0           0       0      0            0       0      1                             2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Unsignalized Site Dwy -- SW Nyberg St                                                                            QC JOB #: 10772111
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                       82 0.79 68                             Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                  0.0        0.0

                       82    0     0
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 4:50 PM -- 5:05 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

       721     28                       40    679
                                                                                                                1.2   0.0                       0.0      1.3
        0.70   0            0.88       639   0.88
                                                                                                                      0.0                       1.4
       28      0                         0      0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0

                       0     0     0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                       0    0.00   0
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                             5                                                                                                1    0    0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

               0                         0                                                                            0                          2

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                             0                                                                                                0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                      NA                                                                             NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count         Unsignalized Site Dwy           Unsignalized Site Dwy          SW Nyberg St                SW Nyberg St
     Period              (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                    Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right        U                        Totals
     4:00 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      3     0     4       0      0      0     0      48      5        0           60            668
     4:05 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0     13     0     3       0      0      0     0      51      5        0           72            696
     4:10 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      3     0     1       0      0      0     0      53      3        0           60            700
     4:15 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      7     0     1       0      0      0     0      46      1        0           55            700
     4:20 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      5     0     4       0      0      0     0      43      2        0           54            699
     4:25 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      4     0     0       0      0      0     0      65      2        0           71            715
     4:30 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      3     0     1       0      0      0     0      45      7        0           56            722
     4:35 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      5     0     2       0      0      0     0      53      3        0           63            729
     4:40 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      8     0     1       0      0      0     0      40      3        0           52            729
     4:45 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      6     0     4       0      0      0     0      41      5        0           56            724
     4:50 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      7     0     3       0      0      0     0      62      4        0           76            736
     4:55 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0     12     0     1       0      0      0     0      47      5        0           65            740
     5:00 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      7     0     3       0      0      0     0      72      2        0           84            764
     5:05 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      6     0     0       0      0      0     0      46      0        0           52            744
     5:10 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      2     0     6       0      0      0     0      53      8        0           69            753
     5:15 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      4     0     1       0      0      0     0      53      1        0           59            757
     5:20 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      7     0     3       0      0      0     0      39      3        0           52            755
     5:25 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      7     0     3       0      0      0     0      74      3        0           87            771
     5:30 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0     11     0     1       0      0      0     0      59      3        0           74            789
     5:35 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      3     0     2       0      0      0     0      56      5        0           66            792
     5:40 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      5     0     2       0      0      0     0      53      4        0           64            804
     5:45 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      5     0     0       0      0      0     0      62      2        0           69            817
     5:50 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      3     0     2       0      0      0     0      68      6        0           79            820
     5:55 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      6     0     0       0      0      0     0      45      3        0           54            809
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                     Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles        0     0      0     0            0     0    104     0    28       0      0      0     0     724     44        0                  900
 Heavy Trucks         0     0      0                  0     0      0           0       0      0            0      12      0                           12
  Pedestrians               0                               4                          0                           0                                   4
   Bicycles           0     0      0                  0     0      0           0       0      0            0       1      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Fred Meyer/Site Dwy -- SW Nyberg St/SW Tualatin-Sherwood Rd                                                      QC JOB #: 10772109
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                      250 0.88 114                             Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                 0.4        0.0

                       44    24 182
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:20 PM -- 5:35 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.5

       1771    32                       72   1995
                                                                                                                3.9   0.0                     0.0   3.5
        0.93   1888         0.98      1691   0.95
                                                                                                                      3.8                     4.0
       1962    42                      232   2306
                                                                                                                3.6   0.0                     0.4   3.2

                       36    10 236
                                                                                                                             2.8 0.0 0.8

                      298 0.88 282
                                                                                                                             0.3        1.1



                             8                                                                                                0    0    1


                                                                                                                      0                        0

               15                        0                                                                            0                        1

                                                                                                                      0                        0


                             2                                                                                                0    1    0




                            NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                      NA                                                                             NA                      NA




                            NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count           Fred Meyer/Site Dwy             Fred Meyer/Site Dwy
     Period                                                                    SW Nyberg St/SW Tualatin-Sherwood
                                                                                                          SW Nyberg
                                                                                                                 Rd St/SW Tualatin-Sherwood Rd
                          (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                                                                           Hourly
Beginning At                                                                         (Eastbound)               (Westbound)            Total
                    Left Thru Right       U         Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U                 Totals
     4:00 PM          5      3      15     0         15      1      1      0     1   133      0     0      16   115      6     0      311         4116
     4:05 PM          4      0      20     0         15      1      7      0     1   178      0     0      12   137      9     0      384         4156
     4:10 PM          2      3      25     0         19      3      3      0     1   124      8     0      26   133      6     0      353         4151
     4:15 PM          2      2      26     0          9      5      6      0     1   176      9     0      23   150      6     0      415         4256
     4:20 PM          4      5      27     0          6      4      3      0     6   133      0     1      28   138     11     0      366         4255
     4:25 PM          2      1      17     0         26      1      6      0     4   140      3     0      12   134     13     0      359         4289
     4:30 PM          3      0      15     0          7      2      2      0     1   180      8     0      16   162      5     0      401         4351
     4:35 PM          4      1      27     0         19      2      4      0     3   134      2     0      26   117     11     0      350         4340
     4:40 PM          1      2      16     0          7      0      2      0     5   185      5     0       7   168      4     0      402         4386
     4:45 PM          2      2      24     0         19      2      3      0     2   143      4     0      24   123      5     0      353         4422
     4:50 PM          3      3      16     0         15      2      2      0     5   176      2     0      13   145      5     0      387         4406
     4:55 PM          2      0      26     0         15      1      3      0     2   149      2     0      21   150      6     0      377         4458
     5:00 PM          7      0      23     0         20      3      3      0     5   155      2     0      14   137      4     0      373         4520
     5:05 PM          0      0      17     0         16      3      3      0     2   162      1     0      19   135      5     0      363         4499
     5:10 PM          2      1      23     0         12      2      3      0     1   155      5     0      27   150      3     0      384         4530
     5:15 PM          0      1      10     0         13      2      3      0     2   162      5     0      16   132      5     0      351         4466
     5:20 PM          5      0      25     0         13      2      4      0     0   141      3     0      22   137      7     0      359         4459
     5:25 PM          7      0      16     0         20      4     10      0     1   144      4     0      17   143     10     0      376         4476
     5:30 PM          3      0      13     0         13      1      4      0     4   182      7     0      26   154      7     0      414         4489
     5:35 PM          1      1      17     0         12      2      5      0     0   124      3     0      26   138      6     0      335         4474
     5:40 PM          1      2      11     0         16      0      2      0     5   156      5     0      17   163      8     0      386         4458
     5:45 PM          3      1      18     0         16      2      0      0     2   132      5     1      26   164      5     0      375         4480
     5:50 PM          4      3      11     0          8      6      6      0     4   117      2     0       9   155      3     0      328         4421
     5:55 PM          2      1      19     0          5      1      4      0     2   126      4     0      26   135      6     0      331         4375
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                            Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U         Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U
  All Vehicles       60      0    216      0        184     28     72      0    20 1868      56     0     260 1736      96     0            4596
 Heavy Trucks         0      0       0                0      0      0            0   112      0             0    60      0                   172
  Pedestrians                0                              24                        28                          0                          52
   Bicycles           0      0       0                0      0      0            0     0      0             0     0      0                    0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 75th Ave -- SW Nyberg St                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10772107
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                           4   0.33 33                             Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                              25.0        6.1

                           4    0     0
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 4:50 PM -- 5:05 PM
                                                                                                                              25.0 0.0 0.0

       1995    0                            33   2024
                                                                                                                 3.5   0.0                        6.1      3.5
        0.96   2306            0.97       1991   0.97
                                                                                                                       3.2                        3.4
       2306    0                             0   2306
                                                                                                                 3.2   0.0                        0.0      3.2

                           0    0     0
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

                           0   0.00   0
                                                                                                                              0.0         0.0



                                10                                                                                             0     0    0


                                                                                                                       0                           0

               0                             0                                                                         1                           3

                                                                                                                       0                           0


                                0                                                                                              0     0    0




                                NA                                                                                                   NA




               NA                          NA                                                                          NA                         NA




                                NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count                   SW 75th Ave                      SW 75th Ave            SW Nyberg St              SW Nyberg St
     Period                    (Northbound)                    (Southbound)             (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right          U                      Totals
     4:00 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   163      0      0     0   149      5         0          318         4008
     4:05 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   213      0      0     0   149      6         0          369         4056
     4:10 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   168      0      0     0   177      9         0          354         4060
     4:15 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   211      0      0     0   167      5         0          383         4136
     4:20 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   166      0      0     0   164      3         0          333         4126
     4:25 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   183      0      0     0   184      1         0          369         4172
     4:30 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   202      0      0     0   170      1         0          373         4213
     4:35 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   180      0      0     0   181      1         0          362         4218
     4:40 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   208      0      0     0   156      4         0          368         4257
     4:45 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   186      0      0     0   153      5         0          344         4266
     4:50 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   207      0      0     0   171      4         0          382         4259
     4:55 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   190      0      0     0   174      2         0          367         4322
     5:00 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   198      0      0     0   167      3         0          369         4373
     5:05 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   195      0      0     0   153      2         0          351         4355
     5:10 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   190      0      0     0   169      5         0          364         4365
     5:15 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   185      0      0     0   158      4         0          347         4329
     5:20 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   179      0      0     0   152      1         0          333         4329
     5:25 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   180      0      0     0   171      1         0          352         4312
     5:30 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   208      0      0     0   186      1         0          395         4334
     5:35 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   153      0      0     0   167      4         0          324         4296
     5:40 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   183      0      0     0   180      6         0          369         4297
     5:45 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      2    0     0   166      0      0     0   196      5         0          369         4322
     5:50 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   136      0      0     0   168      2         0          306         4246
     5:55 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   150      0      0     0   163      2         0          315         4194
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right          U
  All Vehicles        0           0      0     0          0       0      8    0     0 2380       0      0     0 2048      36         0                  4472
 Heavy Trucks         0           0      0                0       0      0          0    72      0            0    84      0                             156
  Pedestrians                     0                               4                       0                         0                                     4
   Bicycles           0           0      0                0       0      0          0     1      0            0     1      0                              2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 SB Ramp Terminal -- SW Nyberg St                                                                             QC JOB #: 10772105
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                      1702 0.92    0                           Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                 2.6        0.0

                      1054 5      643
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:20 PM -- 5:35 PM
                                                                                                                             3.0 20.0 1.7

       2043    0                          0   1109
                                                                                                                3.5   0.0                       0.0      3.7
        0.96   1482        0.99         989   0.91
                                                                                                                      2.8                       4.0
       2314    832                      120   2125
                                                                                                                3.1   3.5                       0.8      2.5

                       0    0      0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                      957 0.00     0
                                                                                                                             3.2        0.0



                            1                                                                                                 0    0    0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

               0                          0                                                                           1                          2

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                            0                                                                                                 0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                      NA




               NA                       NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count          I-5 SB Ramp Terminal             I-5 SB Ramp Terminal         SW Nyberg St                SW Nyberg St
     Period                (Northbound)                     (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                    Left Thru Right        U         Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right        U                      Totals
     4:00 PM          0       0      0     0          42       0    66     0     0   104     55      0    15      86      0        0          368         4708
     4:05 PM          0       0      0     0          49       0    89     0     0   102     83      0    10      72      0        0          405         4759
     4:10 PM          0       0      0     0          34       0    65     0     0   154     67      0    13     107      0        0          440         4797
     4:15 PM          0       0      0     0          44       0    93     0     0   116     63      0     8      84      0        0          408         4837
     4:20 PM          0       0      0     0          47       0    82     0     0   128     64      0    15      80      0        0          416         4856
     4:25 PM          0       0      0     0          33       0    79     0     0   121     54      0     6     111      0        0          404         4851
     4:30 PM          0       0      0     0          54       1   105     0     0   103     65      0    12      64      0        0          404         4855
     4:35 PM          0       0      0     0          44       0    73     0     0   146     69      0     8     106      0        0          446         4902
     4:40 PM          0       0      0     0          68       2    84     0     0   115     76      0     8      76      0        0          429         4917
     4:45 PM          0       0      0     0          53       0    78     0     0   112     65      0    19      77      0        0          404         4908
     4:50 PM          0       0      0     0          39       0    76     0     0   162     69      0     9      97      0        0          452         4950
     4:55 PM          0       0      0     0          58       1   106     0     0   106     61      0    14      72      0        0          418         4994
     5:00 PM          0       0      0     0          41       0    69     0     0   131     72      0    12     102      0        0          427         5053
     5:05 PM          0       0      0     0          64       1    86     0     0   110     71      0     5      76      0        0          413         5061
     5:10 PM          0       0      0     0          36       1    95     0     0   131     71      0    11      83      0        0          428         5049
     5:15 PM          0       0      0     0          66       0    96     0     0   106     63      0    12      66      0        0          409         5050
     5:20 PM          0       0      0     0          57       0    89     0     0   128     70      0    11      65      0        0          420         5054
     5:25 PM          0       0      0     0          47       0    88     0     0   135     64      0     7      90      0        0          431         5081
     5:30 PM          0       0      0     0          70       0   114     0     0   100     81      0     4      79      0        0          448         5125
     5:35 PM          0       0      0     0          46       0    82     0     0   101     61      0    18      90      0        0          398         5077
     5:40 PM          0       0      0     0          64       1    84     0     0   127     66      0    10     101      0        0          453         5101
     5:45 PM          0       0      0     0          50       0   111     0     0   109     49      0    14      93      0        0          426         5123
     5:50 PM          0       0      0     0          64       0    96     0     0   119     56      0    10      78      0        0          423         5094
     5:55 PM          0       0      0     0          43       0    96     0     0    88     45      0    10      72      0        0          354         5030
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                      Southbound               Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right        U         Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles        0       0      0     0         696       0 1164      0     0 1452     860      0    88     936      0        0                  5196
 Heavy Trucks         0       0      0                24       0    32           0    48     44            4      28      0                            180
  Pedestrians                 0                                4                       0                           0                                    4
   Bicycles           0       0      0                 0       0     0           0     0      0            0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 NB Ramp Terminal -- SW Nyberg St                                                                             QC JOB #: 10772103
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                      0    0.00 667                            Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                 0.0        1.8

                      0     0      0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 4:45 PM -- 5:00 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

      1103    0                         662   1150
                                                                                                                3.9   0.0                       1.7      1.4
       0.94   1162         0.95         488   0.91
                                                                                                                      1.2                       1.0
      2115    953                         0   1334
                                                                                                                1.9   2.7                       0.0      1.3

                     615    5     172
                                                                                                                             6.2 20.0 2.3

                     953 0.86 792
                                                                                                                             2.7        5.4



                            16                                                                                                0    0    1


                                                                                                                      0                          0

              0                          17                                                                           1                          5

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                            0                                                                                                 0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                      NA




              NA                        NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count     I-5 NB Ramp Terminal                  I-5 NB Ramp Terminal         SW Nyberg St                SW Nyberg St
     Period           (Northbound)                          (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At Left Thru Right                                                                                                                  Total
                                      U              Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right        U                      Totals
     4:00 PM    35       0      14    0                0       0     0     0     0    85     74      0     0      45     46        0          299         3767
     4:05 PM    51       0       9    0                0       0     0     0     0    92     54      0     0      41     48        0          295         3763
     4:10 PM    60       0      11    0                0       0     0     0     0    77    102      0     0      57     56        0          363         3795
     4:15 PM    44       0       8    0                0       0     0     0     0    69     90      0     0      39     52        0          302         3824
     4:20 PM    96       0      12    0                0       0     0     0     0    76     84      0     0      27     46        0          341         3829
     4:25 PM    46       1      12    0                0       0     0     0     0    89     85      0     0      39     52        0          324         3818
     4:30 PM    61       0      12    0                0       0     0     0     0    84     72      0     0      33     46        0          308         3823
     4:35 PM    63       1      10    0                0       0     0     0     0    82     96      0     0      33     46        0          331         3851
     4:40 PM    46       0      15    0                0       0     0     0     0   118     67      0     0      49     60        0          355         3852
     4:45 PM    67       1      10    0                0       0     0     0     0    80     85      0     0      39     56        0          338         3864
     4:50 PM    39       0      21    0                0       0     0     0     0   108    101      0     0      41     65        0          375         3918
     4:55 PM    75       1      16    0                0       0     0     0     0    96     77      0     0      30     64        0          359         3990
     5:00 PM    43       0       8    0                0       0     0     0     0    92     88      0     0      52     55        0          338         4029
     5:05 PM    49       0      20    0                0       0     0     0     0   106     68      0     0      37     62        0          342         4076
     5:10 PM    51       0       7    0                0       0     0     0     0    78     91      0     0      50     59        0          336         4049
     5:15 PM    30       0       5    0                0       0     0     0     0   104     62      0     0      49     56        0          306         4053
     5:20 PM    46       1      16    0                0       0     0     0     0    99     78      0     0      31     58        0          329         4041
     5:25 PM    54       1      17    0                0       0     0     0     0    88     79      0     0      41     47        0          327         4044
     5:30 PM    52       0      27    0                0       0     0     0     0   111     61      0     0      36     34        0          321         4057
     5:35 PM    72       0      25    0                0       0     0     0     0    75     64      0     0      40     44        0          320         4046
     5:40 PM    57       0      23    0                0       0     0     0     0   114     83      0     0      49     48        0          374         4065
     5:45 PM    70       0      17    0                0       0     0     0     0    92     57      0     0      35     47        0          318         4045
     5:50 PM    39       0      10    0                0       0     0     0     0   113     81      0     0      44     52        0          339         4009
     5:55 PM    45       0      17    0                0       0     0     0     0    76     53      0     0      35     52        0          278         3928
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                           Southbound               Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right        U              Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles 724       8    188     0                0       0     0     0     0 1136 1052         0     0     440   740         0                  4288
 Heavy Trucks   56       0       4                     0       0     0           0     8     20            0       0     20                            108
  Pedestrians            0                                     4                       0                           4                                    8
   Bicycles      0       0       0                     0       0     0           0     0      0            0       1      0                             1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Signalized Entrance to Nyberg Woods -- SW Nyberg St                                                    QC JOB #: 10772101
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Jun 05 2012
                    277 0.85 376                    Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                  0.4        0.0

                    191    5     81
                                                   Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 1.2

      1093    290                      80    879
                                                                                                      1.3   0.0                       0.0      1.3
       0.95   952         0.96        789   0.89
                                                                                                            2.0                       1.4
      1303    61                       10   1050
                                                                                                      1.5   1.6                       0.0      1.9

                    112    7     17
                                                                                                                   2.7 0.0 0.0

                    76 0.81 136
                                                                                                                   1.3        2.2



                           9                                                                                        0    0    0


                                                                                                            0                          0

              3                         4                                                                   1                          3

                                                                                                            0                          0


                           2                                                                                        0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                             NA




              NA                      NA                                                                    NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                             NA



 5-Min Count                                                              SW Nyberg St                SW Nyberg St
     Period      Signalized Entrance to NybergSignalized
                                               Woods Entrance to Nyberg Woods
                                                                           (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
                     (Northbound)
Beginning At Left Thru Right                      (Southbound)                                                                      Total
                                      U     Left Thru Right       U  Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right        U                      Totals
     4:00 PM     5       1       2    0       7       0    16     0   15    76      1      0     2      67      6        0          198         2420
     4:05 PM    13       1       2    0      11       0    18     0   20    64      5      0     3      66      4        0          207         2443
     4:10 PM     9       1       0    0       9       0    14     0   17    82      6      0     1      73      8        0          220         2454
     4:15 PM     3       0       1    0       9       0    19     0   28    38      2      0     1      60      5        1          167         2439
     4:20 PM     5       0       1    0       8       1    13     0   21    83      5      0     0      65      2        0          204         2445
     4:25 PM     6       0       2    0       4       1    15     0   20    64      4      0     1      52      5        0          174         2382
     4:30 PM     7       0       2    0       5       0    15     0   13    67      6      0     0      60      7        0          182         2375
     4:35 PM     9       1       0    0       9       0    13     0   22    85      6      0     1      66      5        0          217         2400
     4:40 PM     9       1       1    0       4       1    16     0   29    86      6      0     0      78      5        0          236         2415
     4:45 PM    13       0       1    0       5       1    13     0   16    70      1      0     0      64      7        0          191         2386
     4:50 PM    12       3       0    0       2       1    14     0   32    78     10      0     1      70      6        0          229         2427
     4:55 PM    12       0       1    0       7       0    19     0   23    82      4      0     0      61     13        0          222         2447
     5:00 PM     8       0       3    0      10       0    17     0   18    69      4      0     1      63      5        0          198         2447
     5:05 PM     9       0       4    0       4       1    19     0   28    89      5      0     1      69      6        0          235         2475
     5:10 PM    11       1       1    0       5       0    15     0   20    67      4      0     1      80      7        0          212         2467
     5:15 PM     8       1       0    0      11       0    21     0   18    85      2      0     1      76      7        0          230         2530
     5:20 PM     6       0       2    0      12       1    11     0   24    81      4      0     1      53      3        0          198         2524
     5:25 PM     9       0       1    0       6       0    19     0   25    89      7      1     3      59      3        0          222         2572
     5:30 PM     6       0       3    0       6       0    14     0   34    71      8      0     0      50     13        0          205         2595
     5:35 PM     8       0       0    0       3       2    21     0   25   101      7      0     2      52      7        0          228         2606
     5:40 PM     3       1       0    0      10       0    14     0   31    79      9      0     1      68      6        0          222         2592
     5:45 PM     4       1       1    0       7       1    17     0   35    88      7      0     0      48      3        0          212         2613
     5:50 PM     6       1       2    0       7       1    15     0   26    78      5      0     1      68      6        0          216         2600
     5:55 PM     8       0       3    0      17       2    16     0   21    61      4      0     0      59      9        0          200         2578
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                  Southbound              Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                            Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right        U     Left Thru Right       U  Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles 112       8      20    0      80       4   220     0 264    964     44      0    12     900     80        0                  2708
 Heavy Trucks    0       0       0            0       0     0          0    12      0            0      20      0                            32
  Pedestrians            0                           12                      4                           0                                   16
   Bicycles      0       0       0            0       0     0          0     0      0            0       1      0                             1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:40 PM                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- SW Boones Ferry Rd                                                                       QC JOB #: 10772126
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                     2    0.50    1                          Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                               0.0        0.0

                     1     0      1
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 12:50 PM -- 1:05 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 0.0 0.0

      596     0                          1    667
                                                                                                             2.0   0.0                       0.0      1.5
       0.95   405         0.94         416   0.89
                                                                                                                   0.5                       2.2
      522     117                      250    697
                                                                                                             0.6   0.9                       0.4      0.4

                    179    0     291
                                                                                                                          1.7 0.0 0.3

                    367 0.90 470
                                                                                                                          0.5        0.9



                           2                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                   0                          0

              1                          3                                                                         7                          4

                                                                                                                   0                          3


                           11                                                                                              1    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                    NA




              NA                       NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count       SW Martinazzi Ave                    SW Martinazzi Ave       SW Boones Ferry Rd       SW Boones Ferry Rd
     Period          (Northbound)                         (Southbound)             (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At Left Thru Right                                                                                                               Total
                                     U              Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right     U                           Totals
   11:40 AM     16      0      17    0                0      0      0     0     0   41      5      0    31    38      0     0              148
   11:45 AM     13      1      20    0                0      0      0     0     0   40      8      0    21    40      0     0              143
   11:50 AM     18      0      30    0                0      0      0     0     0   39     10      0    26    39      0     0              162
   11:55 AM     20      0      17    0                0      0      0     0     0   29      9      0    15    37      0     0              127             1525
   12:00 PM     15      0      20    0                0      0      0     0     0   39      9      0    21    35      0     0              139             1560
   12:05 PM      7      1      17    0                0      0      0     0     0   36      7      0    17    49      0     0              134             1576
   12:10 PM      8      0      34    0                1      0      0     0     0   32     14      0    22    26      1     0              138             1603
   12:15 PM     14      0      23    0                0      0      0     0     0   44      4      0    20    36      0     0              141             1631
   12:20 PM     12      0      23    0                0      0      0     0     0   37      6      0    20    35      0     0              133             1635
   12:25 PM     16      0      25    0                0      0      0     0     0   27     17      0    33    34      0     0              152             1663
   12:30 PM     21      0      24    0                0      0      1     0     0   30      9      0    20    32      0     0              137             1690
   12:35 PM     15      0      30    0                0      0      0     0     0   31      8      0    14    30      0     0              128             1682
   12:40 PM      7      0      17    0                0      0      0     0     0   33      8      0    16    33      0     0              114             1648
   12:45 PM     19      0      27    0                0      0      0     0     0   36      9      0    17    44      0     0              152             1657
   12:50 PM     16      0      24    0                0      0      0     0     0   31     10      0    21    40      0     0              142             1637
   12:55 PM     20      0      22    0                0      0      0     0     0   31      7      0    29    33      0     0              142             1652
     1:00 PM    22      0      22    0                0      0      0     0     0   37     13      0    22    42      0     0              158             1671
     1:05 PM     9      0      20    0                0      0      0     0     0   36     12      0    16    31      0     0              124             1661
     1:10 PM     9      0      17    0                0      0      0     0     0   38      4      0    18    38      0     0              124             1647
     1:15 PM    11      0      18    0                0      0      0     0     0   36      4      0    25    38      0     0              132             1638
     1:20 PM    18      0      20    0                0      0      0     0     0   25      3      0    24    39      0     0              129             1634
     1:25 PM    13      0      28    0                0      0      0     0     0   35      5      0    18    36      0     0              135             1617
     1:30 PM    19      0      19    0                0      0      0     0     0   33      9      0    18    40      0     0              138             1618
     1:35 PM    14      0      24    0                0      0      0     0     0   36      6      0    26    40      0     0              146             1636
 Peak 15-Min              Northbound                          Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right       U              Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right     U
  All Vehicles 232      0    272     0                0      0      0     0     0  396    120      0   288   460      0     0                      1768
 Heavy Trucks    8      0       4                     0      0      0           0    0      0            0    12      0                             24
  Pedestrians          12                                    0                       0                         4                                    16
    Bicycles     1      0       0                     0      0      0           0    0      0            0     1      0                              2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:46 PM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- Existing Site Dwy near City Hall                                                           QC JOB #: 10772124
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                      372 0.82 476                        Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                                    0.5        1.1

                       0   258 114
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 12:20 PM -- 12:35 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.8 0.0

       0       0                     80    126
                                                                                                              0.0    0.0                     0.0   0.0
        0.00   0           0.88       0   0.85
                                                                                                                     0.0                     0.0
       0       0                     46    174
                                                                                                              0.0    0.0                     0.0   0.0

                       0   396 60
                                                                                                                            0.0 1.3 0.0

                      304 0.92 456
                                                                                                                            0.7        1.1



                            6                                                                                                0    3    0


                                                                                                                     0                        0

               0                     13                                                                              0                        0

                                                                                                                     0                        0


                            0                                                                                                0    1    0




                           NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                    NA                                                                              NA                      NA




                           NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count            SW Martinazzi Ave            SW Martinazzi Ave
     Period                                                                Existing Site Dwy near City Hall
                                                                                                        Existing Site Dwy near City Hall
                          (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                                                                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                       (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)             Total
                    Left Thru Right       U      Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right        U     Left Thru Right       U                  Totals
   11:40 AM           0     31      10    0       11     22      0     0      0      0      0      0        2     0      5      0        81
   11:45 AM           0     32       7    0        8     21      0     0      0      0      0      0        2     0      5      0        75
   11:50 AM           0     31       5    0       13     23      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0      8      0        84
   11:55 AM           0     32       4    0        7     17      0     0      0      0      0      0        2     0      7      0        69        831
   12:00 PM           0     33       3    0        9     19      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0      3      0        71        845
   12:05 PM           0     23       4    0        7     22      0     0      0      0      0      0        2     0      4      0        62        843
   12:10 PM           0     30       4    0        9     26      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0     10      0        82        864
   12:15 PM           0     35       9    0        8     14      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      6      0        75        877
   12:20 PM           0     28       6    0       15     18      0     0      0      0      0      0        5     0      6      0        78        885
   12:25 PM           0     38       6    0       17     28      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0     11      0       104        913
   12:30 PM           0     39       3    0       14     21      0     0      0      0      0      0        5     0      6      0        88        939
   12:35 PM           0     34       4    0        6     17      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0      6      0        71        940
   12:40 PM           0     21       9    0        2     20      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      5      0        60        919
   12:45 PM           0     38       2    0        7     18      0     0      0      0      0      0        6     0      6      0        77        921
   12:50 PM           0     37       5    0       13     18      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      5      0        81        918
   12:55 PM           0     32       5    0        8     28      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      9      0        85        934
     1:00 PM          0     37       2    0        5     31      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0      6      0        85        948
     1:05 PM          0     27       5    0       10     19      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      4      0        68        954
     1:10 PM          0     21       3    0        3     19      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      7      0        56        928
     1:15 PM          0     25       5    0        7     25      0     0      0      0      0      0        1     0      6      0        69        922
     1:20 PM          0     31       6    0        4     21      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      3      0        68        912
     1:25 PM          0     34       5    0        7     16      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0      9      0        75        883
     1:30 PM          0     31       6    0        6     20      0     0      0      0      0      0        3     0      4      0        70        865
     1:35 PM          0     33       5    0       11     22      0     0      0      0      0      0        4     0      7      0        82        876
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                  Southbound                  Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                             Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U      Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right        U     Left Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        0    420      60    0      184    268      0     0      0      0      0      0      56      0     92      0            1080
 Heavy Trucks         0      4       0             0      4      0            0      0      0               0     0      0                     8
  Pedestrians                0                            0                          0                            8                            8
    Bicycles          0      0       0             0      0      0            0      0      0               0     0      0                     0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:46 PM                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- SW Seneca St                                                                       QC JOB #: 10772122
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                          DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                   300 0.87 449                        Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                               0.7        1.1

                   44 256    0
                                                      Peak 15-Min: 12:45 PM -- 1:00 PM
                                                                                                                    0.0 0.8 0.0

      125     35                   0      0
                                                                                                       1.6   0.0                       0.0      0.0
       0.84   0       0.94         0   0.00
                                                                                                             0.0                       0.0
      77      42                   0      0
                                                                                                       0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0

                   81 414    0
                                                                                                                    2.5 1.2 0.0

                   298 0.88 495
                                                                                                                    0.7        1.4



                       10                                                                                            0    3    0


                                                                                                             0                          0

              1                   14                                                                         0                          0

                                                                                                             1                          0


                        4                                                                                            0    4    0




                       NA                                                                                                 NA




              NA                  NA                                                                         NA                        NA




                       NA                                                                                                 NA



 5-Min Count       SW Martinazzi Ave              SW Martinazzi Ave          SW Seneca St              SW Seneca St
     Period          (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At Left Thru Right                                                                                                         Total
                                     U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                        Totals
   11:40 AM      4     35      0     0          0     28      0     0     2     0      3      0     0    0      0         0           72
   11:45 AM      4     41      0     0          0     24      1     0     3     0      2      0     0    0      0         0           75
   11:50 AM      5     36      0     0          0     18      1     0     3     0      3      0     0    0      0         0           66
   11:55 AM     10     28      0     0          0     15      2     0     2     0      0      0     0    0      0         0           57              764
   12:00 PM      5     32      0     0          0     23      5     0     3     0      7      0     0    0      0         0           75              776
   12:05 PM      8     26      0     0          0     24      2     0     0     0      2      0     0    0      0         0           62              778
   12:10 PM     10     35      0     0          0     22      2     0     4     0      6      0     0    0      0         0           79              801
   12:15 PM      3     42      0     0          0     17      3     0     1     0      6      0     0    0      0         0           72              808
   12:20 PM      5     29      0     0          0     19      3     0     4     0      2      0     0    0      0         0           62              816
   12:25 PM      5     43      0     0          0     26      4     0     3     0      1      0     0    0      0         0           82              829
   12:30 PM      8     33      0     0          0     21      3     0     3     0      5      0     0    0      0         0           73              845
   12:35 PM      4     32      0     0          0     14      5     0     5     0      2      0     0    0      0         0           62              837
   12:40 PM      3     25      0     0          0     22      5     0     4     0      1      0     0    0      0         0           60              825
   12:45 PM      9     42      0     0          0     24      3     0     3     0      1      0     0    0      0         0           82              832
   12:50 PM      6     41      0     0          0     21      0     0     1     0      5      0     0    0      0         0           74              840
   12:55 PM     10     33      0     0          0     25      7     0     0     0      2      0     0    0      0         0           77              860
     1:00 PM     8     33      0     0          0     23      4     0     1     0      7      0     0    0      0         0           76              861
     1:05 PM    10     26      0     0          0     22      5     0     6     0      4      0     0    0      0         0           73              872
     1:10 PM     5     28      0     0          0     15      3     0     2     0      4      0     0    0      0         0           57              850
     1:15 PM     6     29      0     0          0     22      4     0     5     0      8      0     0    0      0         0           74              852
     1:20 PM     8     33      0     0          0     21      3     0     3     0      5      0     0    0      0         0           73              863
     1:25 PM     5     40      0     0          0     14      6     0     3     0      6      0     0    0      0         0           74              855
     1:30 PM     7     26      0     0          0     19      4     0     1     0      6      0     0    0      0         0           63              845
     1:35 PM     6     37      0     0          0     21      6     0     3     0      3      0     0    0      0         0           76              859
 Peak 15-Min              Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                Westbound
                                                                                                                                             Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right       U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles 100    464      0     0          0    280    40      0    16     0     32      0     0    0      0         0                  932
 Heavy Trucks    4     16      0                0      0      0           0     0      0            0    0      0                            20
  Pedestrians           8                             12                        4                       28                                   52
    Bicycles     0      2      0                0      1      0           0     0      0            0    0      0                             3
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:46 PM                               SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- Existing Site Dwy                                                                        QC JOB #: 10772120
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                      299 0.91 503                         Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                                 1.0        1.4

                       0   296    3
                                                          Peak 15-Min: 12:45 PM -- 1:00 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 1.0 0.0

       0       0                      25     29
                                                                                                             0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0
        0.00   0           0.90        0   0.73
                                                                                                                   0.0                       0.0
       0       0                       4     13
                                                                                                             0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0

                       0   478 10
                                                                                                                          0.0 1.5 0.0

                      300 0.87 488
                                                                                                                          1.0        1.4



                            2                                                                                              0    2    0


                                                                                                                   0                          0

               3                      19                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                   0                          0


                            0                                                                                              0    1    0




                           NA                                                                                                   NA




               NA                     NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count            SW Martinazzi Ave             SW Martinazzi Ave         Existing Site Dwy           Existing Site Dwy
     Period               (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                    Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right         U                        Totals
   11:40 AM           0     39       1    0         0     31      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       1      0           72
   11:45 AM           0     44       0    0         0     26      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       1      0           71
   11:50 AM           0     35       0    0         0     23      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       5      0           63
   11:55 AM           0     37       2    0         0     16      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       2      0           57              725
   12:00 PM           0     35       1    0         0     29      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       3      0           69              738
   12:05 PM           0     34       0    0         0     24      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0           58              736
   12:10 PM           0     41       1    0         0     28      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       2      0           72              761
   12:15 PM           0     49       2    0         1     22      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0           74              772
   12:20 PM           0     33       1    0         1     21      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       1      0           58              781
   12:25 PM           0     43       0    0         0     28      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       3      0           74              789
   12:30 PM           0     37       1    0         0     25      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       4      0           67              800
   12:35 PM           0     33       2    0         0     16      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       2      0           54              789
   12:40 PM           0     31       0    0         0     24      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       1      0           56              773
   12:45 PM           0     50       0    0         0     25      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       2      0           77              779
   12:50 PM           0     45       1    0         1     25      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       4      0           76              792
   12:55 PM           0     42       2    0         0     27      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       2      0           73              808
     1:00 PM          0     37       0    0         0     29      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       2      0           69              808
     1:05 PM          0     37       0    0         0     26      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       2      0           66              816
     1:10 PM          0     26       0    0         0     19      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       2      0           47              791
     1:15 PM          0     34       0    0         0     32      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0           66              783
     1:20 PM          0     43       1    0         0     26      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       0      0           71              796
     1:25 PM          0     41       0    0         1     18      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0       3      0           63              785
     1:30 PM          0     33       0    0         0     25      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       1      0           60              778
     1:35 PM          0     41       0    0         0     24      0     0     0      0       0      0     1      0       0      0           66              790
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                   Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles        0    548      12    0         4    308      0     0     0      0       0      0     0      0      32      0                  904
 Heavy Trucks         0     20       0              0      0      0           0      0       0            0      0       0                         20
  Pedestrians                0                             4                        12                          36                                 52
    Bicycles          0      1       0              0      1      0           0      0       0            0      0       0                          2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:46 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- Existing Right-Out Only Dwy                                                               QC JOB #: 10772118
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                      318 0.85 474                         Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                                  0.9        1.7

                       0   317    1
                                                          Peak 15-Min: 12:50 PM -- 1:05 PM
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.9 0.0

       0       0                       8      8
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0
        0.00   0           0.94        0   0.50
                                                                                                                    0.0                       0.0
       0       0                       0      1
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0

                       0   466    0
                                                                                                                           0.0 1.7 0.0

                      317 0.95 466
                                                                                                                           0.9        1.7



                            0                                                                                               0    3    0


                                                                                                                    0                          0

               1                      13                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                    0                          0


                            0                                                                                               0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                    NA




               NA                     NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count            SW Martinazzi Ave             SW Martinazzi Ave     Existing Right-Out Only Dwy Existing Right-Out Only Dwy
     Period               (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                    Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right        U    Left Thru Right        U                         Totals
   11:40 AM           0     35      0     0         0     30      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            65
   11:45 AM           0     42      0     0         0     25      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            68
   11:50 AM           0     35      0     0         0     23      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            58
   11:55 AM           0     37      0     0         0     17      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      2     0            56              707
   12:00 PM           0     37      0     0         0     32      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            70              716
   12:05 PM           0     31      0     0         0     27      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            58              717
   12:10 PM           0     41      0     0         0     29      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      4     0            74              737
   12:15 PM           0     44      0     0         0     21      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            65              744
   12:20 PM           0     34      0     0         0     22      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            56              748
   12:25 PM           0     43      0     0         0     28      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            71              761
   12:30 PM           0     43      0     0         0     25      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            68              774
   12:35 PM           0     29      0     0         0     18      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            47              756
   12:40 PM           0     33      0     0         0     28      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            62              753
   12:45 PM           0     43      0     0         0     27      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            71              756
   12:50 PM           0     45      0     0         0     26      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            72              770
   12:55 PM           0     33      0     0         0     24      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            57              771
     1:00 PM          0     44      0     0         1     37      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      0     0            82              783
     1:05 PM          0     34      0     0         0     32      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            67              792
     1:10 PM          0     23      0     0         0     25      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            49              767
     1:15 PM          0     33      0     0         0     31      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            65              767
     1:20 PM          0     45      0     0         0     34      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            80              791
     1:25 PM          0     37      0     0         0     20      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      3     0            60              780
     1:30 PM          0     31      0     0         0     27      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      1     0            59              771
     1:35 PM          0     43      0     0         0     27      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      3     0            73              797
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                   Southbound                   Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right        U    Left Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles        0    488      0     0         4    348      0     0      0       0      0     0      0       0      4     0                   844
 Heavy Trucks         0     16      0               0      0      0            0       0      0            0       0      0                         16
  Pedestrians                0                             0                           4                          24                                28
    Bicycles          0      0      0               0      0      0            0       0      0            0       0      0                          0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:46 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- SW Tualatin-Sherwood Rd                                                                QC JOB #: 10772116
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                              DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                     569 0.92 271                          Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                               0.9        0.0

                     81 367 121
                                                          Peak 15-Min: 12:25 PM -- 12:40 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.8 1.7

      1273    63                       1   1096
                                                                                                           3.0   0.0                       0.0      3.5
       0.97   1126      0.95        1095   0.94
                                                                                                                 2.6                       3.5
      1326    137                      0   1465
                                                                                                           2.3   0.7                       0.0      2.3

                     97 207 218
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.9

                     504 0.90 522
                                                                                                                        0.8        0.4



                          6                                                                                              0    2    1


                                                                                                                 0                          0

              3                       23                                                                         0                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          0


                          0                                                                                              0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                   NA




              NA                     NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                         NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count       SW Martinazzi Ave                  SW Martinazzi Ave     SW Tualatin-Sherwood Rd   SW Tualatin-Sherwood Rd
     Period          (Northbound)                       (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At Left Thru Right                                                                                                             Total
                                     U            Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U                         Totals
   11:40 AM      8     25      16    0             11     29      9     0     6    84     10     0      0    82      0     0             280
   11:45 AM      6     14      27    0             10     38      6     0     7    83      9     0      0   100      0     0             300
   11:50 AM     12     20      20    0              9     26      9     0     5   111     21     0      0    80      0     0             313
   11:55 AM      6     14      23    0              8     24      8     0     6    87      7     0      0   104      0     0             287             3388
   12:00 PM     14     10      19    0             10     30      9     0     1    97     14     0      0    85      1     0             290             3416
   12:05 PM      3     17      23    0              8     35      9     0     1    88      7     0      0    86      0     0             277             3411
   12:10 PM     10     15      16    0             15     25      3     0     4    98     14     0      0    74      0     0             274             3429
   12:15 PM     10     16      12    0              9     46      5     0     6    93     10     0      0   106      0     0             313             3450
   12:20 PM      5     19      15    0              2     29    12      0     5    80      6     0      0    95      1     0             269             3452
   12:25 PM     10     13      19    0              5     35      9     0     7   114     17     0      0    90      0     0             319             3511
   12:30 PM     11     24      21    0             17     39      2     0     7    81     15     0      0    96      0     0             313             3547
   12:35 PM      8     18      21    0             14     29      4     0     6    87      8     0      0    97      0     0             292             3527
   12:40 PM      7     14      16    0              5     29    10      0     3   113     11     0      0    89      0     0             297             3544
   12:45 PM      4     27      20    0             10     36      7     0     5    81     14     0      0    74      0     0             278             3522
   12:50 PM     11     10      18    0             12     20      5     0     7    95     13     0      0    98      0     0             289             3498
   12:55 PM      8     15      17    0              7     36      4     0     7    95      3     0      0    97      0     0             289             3500
     1:00 PM     5     16      24    0             12     26    14      0     3    75     15     0      0    88      0     0             278             3488
     1:05 PM     8     20      19    0             13     17      6     0     3   114     11     0      0    91      0     0             302             3513
     1:10 PM    15     15      22    0             16     37      5     0     4    91     10     0      0    73      0     0             288             3527
     1:15 PM    10     13      12    0             11     39      4     0     5    74      7     0      0    75      0     0             250             3464
     1:20 PM     7     17      22    0             14     36      8     0     9   115     10     0      0   107      0     0             345             3540
     1:25 PM     7     11      16    0             11     30      4     0     6   102     16     0      0   108      0     0             311             3532
     1:30 PM    11     20      25    0              9     44      6     0     6    88      9     0      0    72      0     0             290             3509
     1:35 PM    14     17      19    0              9     25      5     0     4   108      8     0      0   104      0     0             313             3530
 Peak 15-Min              Northbound                        Southbound                Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right       U            Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U
  All Vehicles 116    220    244     0            144    412    60      0    80 1128     160     0      0 1132       0     0                     3696
 Heavy Trucks    0      0       4                   4      4      0           0    44      0            0    24      0                            80
  Pedestrians           0                                  8                        8                         4                                   20
    Bicycles     0      0       0                   0      0      0           0     0      0            0     0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:46 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Martinazzi Ave -- SW Nyberg St                                                                                QC JOB #: 10772114
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                      310 0.88 470                          Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                                   1.0        1.7

                       8   301    1
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 12:20 PM -- 12:35 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 1.0 0.0

       63      16                     226    475
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                       3.5      2.5
        0.87   1           0.95        32   0.89
                                                                                                                      0.0                       0.0
       80      63                     217     33
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                       1.8      0.0

                       23 228 31
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                      581 0.90 282
                                                                                                                             1.2        0.0



                            2                                                                                                 0    3    0


                                                                                                                      0                          1

               3                       16                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                            0                                                                                                 0    1    0




                           NA                                                                                                      NA




               NA                     NA                                                                              NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count            SW Martinazzi Ave              SW Martinazzi Ave            SW Nyberg St                SW Nyberg St
     Period               (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                    Left Thru Right       U        Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right        U                      Totals
   11:40 AM           1     17       2    0          0     30      1     0     1       0      4      0    15       3     20        0           94
   11:45 AM           2     16       5    0          0     27      0     0     1       0      5      0    25       4     22        0          107
   11:50 AM           5     17       1    0          0     23      0     0     1       0      4      0    15       5     17        0           88
   11:55 AM           2     15       2    0          0     19      0     0     1       0      7      0    15       3     23        0           87             1043
   12:00 PM           0     16       1    0          0     28      0     0     1       0      3      0    19       4     22        0           94             1052
   12:05 PM           0     15       0    0          0     32      0     0     1       0      7      0    16       4     16        0           91             1059
   12:10 PM           0     17       4    0          0     27      1     0     1       0      2      0    22       6     25        0          105             1086
   12:15 PM           4     26       1    0          1     22      2     0     3       0      6      0    11       2     11        0           89             1087
   12:20 PM           1     13       1    0          0     22      0     0     0       0      8      0    22       4     21        0           92             1107
   12:25 PM           2     21       4    0          0     25      1     0     3       0      2      0    21       1     18        0           98             1123
   12:30 PM           2     27       1    0          0     29      0     0     2       0      5      0    26       4     17        0          113             1151
   12:35 PM           1     17       1    0          0     16      0     0     1       0      9      0    22       1     12        0           80             1138
   12:40 PM           5     14       3    0          0     24      2     0     1       0      5      0    27       0     18        0           99             1143
   12:45 PM           2     21       7    0          0     26      0     0     0       1      6      0    14       4     22        0          103             1139
   12:50 PM           1     24       1    0          0     24      0     0     1       0      6      0    11       1     21        0           90             1141
   12:55 PM           3     16       1    0          0     30      1     0     3       0      3      0    14       1     26        0           98             1152
     1:00 PM          0      9       2    0          0     29      0     0     1       0      6      0     9       3     22        0           81             1139
     1:05 PM          2     23       5    0          0     27      1     0     0       0      5      0    18       5     13        0           99             1147
     1:10 PM          2     12       1    0          0     22      0     0     1       0      9      0    23       1     11        0           82             1124
     1:15 PM          1     18       1    0          0     31      0     0     1       0      3      0    25       1     15        0           96             1131
     1:20 PM          1     22       0    0          0     32      0     0     2       0      5      0    16       6     18        0          102             1141
     1:25 PM          0     24       4    0          0     18      0     0     1       0      6      0    27       5     12        0           97             1140
     1:30 PM          0     12       4    0          0     24      2     0     1       1      7      0    16       2     18        0           87             1114
     1:35 PM          1     24       2    0          0     28      2     0     2       1      4      0    16       2     18        0          100             1134
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                    Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U        Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles       20    244      24    0          0    304      4     0    20       0     60      0   276      36   224         0                  1212
 Heavy Trucks         0      0       0               0      4      0           0       0      0            8       0      8                            20
  Pedestrians                0                              0                          4                           0                                    4
    Bicycles          0      0       0               0      0      0           0       0      0            0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:46 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Unsignalized Site Dwy -- SW Nyberg St                                                                            QC JOB #: 10772112
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                       53 0.70 76                           Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                                   0.0        0.0

                       53    0     0
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 12:20 PM -- 12:35 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

       487     24                       52    486
                                                                                                                2.7   0.0                       0.0      2.7
        0.55   0            0.91       434   0.93
                                                                                                                      0.0                       3.0
       24      0                         0      0
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.0

                       0     0     0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                       0    0.00   0
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                             4                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

               0                         0                                                                            0                          2

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                             0                                                                                                0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                      NA                                                                             NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count         Unsignalized Site Dwy           Unsignalized Site Dwy          SW Nyberg St                SW Nyberg St
     Period              (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                    Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right        U                        Totals
   11:40 AM           0     0      0     0            0     0      2     0     2       0      0      0     0      34      2        0           40
   11:45 AM           0     0      0     0            0     0     10     0     2       0      0      0     0      37      5        0           54
   11:50 AM           0     0      0     0            0     0      3     0     3       0      0      0     0      31      4        0           41
   11:55 AM           0     0      0     0            0     0      0     0     1       0      0      0     0      40      1        0           42              481
   12:00 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      6     0     1       0      0      0     0      39      3        0           49              497
   12:05 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      5     0     1       0      0      0     0      27      2        0           35              488
   12:10 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      3     0     2       0      0      0     0      48      4        0           57              508
   12:15 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      0     0     2       0      0      0     0      35      4        0           41              515
   12:20 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      8     0     1       0      0      0     0      33      5        0           47              527
   12:25 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      9     0     2       0      0      0     0      38      6        0           55              540
   12:30 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      2     0     2       0      0      0     0      43      5        0           52              557
   12:35 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      8     0     1       0      0      0     0      28      4        0           41              554
   12:40 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      7     0     2       0      0      0     0      34      4        0           47              561
   12:45 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      4     0     5       0      0      0     0      34      3        0           46              553
   12:50 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      4     0     3       0      0      0     0      35      4        0           46              558
   12:55 PM           0     0      0     0            0     0      4     0     3       0      0      0     0      35      4        0           46              562
     1:00 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      2     0     1       0      0      0     0      42      4        0           49              562
     1:05 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      2     0     0       0      0      0     0      29      5        0           36              563
     1:10 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      4     0     0       0      0      0     0      29      6        0           39              545
     1:15 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      5     0     1       0      0      0     0      31      5        0           42              546
     1:20 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      7     0     1       0      0      0     0      32      4        0           44              543
     1:25 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      7     0     2       0      0      0     0      40      9        0           58              546
     1:30 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      4     0     5       0      0      0     0      39      2        0           50              544
     1:35 PM          0     0      0     0            0     0      3     0     4       0      0      0     0      31      5        0           43              546
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                     Southbound                  Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles        0     0      0     0            0     0     76     0    20       0      0      0     0     456     64        0                  616
 Heavy Trucks         0     0      0                  0     0      0           0       0      0            0      16      0                           16
  Pedestrians               0                               4                          0                           0                                   4
    Bicycles          0     0      0                  0     0      0           0       0      0            0       0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:46 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Fred Meyer/Site Dwy -- SW Nyberg St/SW Tualatin-Sherwood Rd                                                      QC JOB #: 10772110
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                      256 0.88 176                           Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                                  1.2        2.3

                       62    40 154
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 12:25 PM -- 12:40 PM
                                                                                                                             1.6 0.0 1.3

       1570    50                      101   1809
                                                                                                                3.1   4.0                     1.0   2.8
        0.97   1335         0.94      1451   0.94
                                                                                                                      2.5                     3.3
       1444    59                      257   1739
                                                                                                                2.5   0.0                     0.4   2.1

                       57    25 248
                                                                                                                             0.0 4.0 0.4

                      354 0.81 330
                                                                                                                             0.3        0.6



                             4                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                      0                        0

               9                         0                                                                            1                        1

                                                                                                                      0                        0


                             0                                                                                                0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                     NA




               NA                      NA                                                                             NA                      NA




                            NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count           Fred Meyer/Site Dwy             Fred Meyer/Site Dwy
     Period                                                                    SW Nyberg St/SW Tualatin-Sherwood
                                                                                                          SW Nyberg
                                                                                                                 Rd St/SW Tualatin-Sherwood Rd
                          (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                                                                           Hourly
Beginning At                                                                         (Eastbound)               (Westbound)            Total
                    Left Thru Right       U         Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U                 Totals
   11:40 AM           3      3      19     0         12      4      3      0     3   110      4     0      18   114      4     0      297
   11:45 AM           4      2      21     0         10      2      4      0     4   101      6     0      18   143      9     1      325
   11:50 AM           3      1      12     0         10      6      1      0     5   133      1     0      13   110      5     0      300
   11:55 AM           4      2      20     0         14      3      5      0     6   118      5     0      21   124     13     1      336         3590
   12:00 PM           3      2      17     0         12      3      3      0     2   108      9     0      26   128      7     0      320         3602
   12:05 PM           3      1      12     0         13      3      3      0     5   115      4     0      17   106      9     0      291         3617
   12:10 PM           5      4      26     0          9      3      5      0     5   104      9     0      29   130     13     0      342         3663
   12:15 PM           1      1      15     0         14      3      7      0     5    99     10     0      20   122     10     0      307         3687
   12:20 PM           8      2      26     0         14      1     10      0     6    92      2     0      26   120     10     0      317         3717
   12:25 PM           7      2      17     0         14      3      4      0     4   127      3     0      19   130      8     0      338         3776
   12:30 PM           7      1      32     0         15      4      6      0     5   105      3     0      25   121     11     2      337         3803
   12:35 PM           6      3      27     0         17      6      2      0     4   113      5     0      20   129     10     0      342         3852
   12:40 PM           4      1      16     0         14      3      6      0     4   117      5     0      13   113      9     0      305         3860
   12:45 PM           4      3      23     0         19      1      4      0     4   102      4     0      26   103      4     0      297         3832
   12:50 PM           4      1      19     0         11      3      7      0     0   129      5     0      21   135      8     0      343         3875
   12:55 PM           3      2      19     0         11      4      2      0     6   102      4     0      13   131      5     0      302         3841
     1:00 PM          5      2      16     0          9      4      6      0     4   112      3     0      22   101      5     0      289         3810
     1:05 PM          3      3      12     0          7      5      3      0     3   133      6     0      21   116      8     0      320         3839
     1:10 PM          7      2      21     0         11      5      2      0     9   117      2     0      24   106      4     0      310         3807
     1:15 PM          4      0      21     0          8      4      4      0     3   105      7     0      19   108      7     0      290         3790
     1:20 PM          6      1      19     0         13      2      2      0     5   125      6     0      18   140     11     0      348         3821
     1:25 PM          1      1      17     0         12      0      4      0     5   134      2     0      12   137      5     0      330         3813
     1:30 PM          9      0      14     0         10      4     10      0     0   101      3     0      25   119     11     0      306         3782
     1:35 PM          5      1      18     0          4      3      4      0     3   126     10     0      22   121      5     0      322         3762
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                            Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right       U         Left Thru Right       U    Left Thru Right      U     Left Thru Right      U
  All Vehicles       80     24    304      0        184     52     48      0    52 1380      44     0     256 1520     116     8            4068
 Heavy Trucks         0      0       0                4      0      0            8    48      0             4    40      0                   104
  Pedestrians                0                               4                        12                          0                          16
    Bicycles          0      0       0                0      0      0            0     0      0             0     0      0                    0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:45 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW 75th Ave -- SW Nyberg St                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10772108
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                    DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                           5   0.63 48                            Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                              0.0        0.0

                           5    0     0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 12:25 PM -- 12:40 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

       1779    0                            48   1822
                                                                                                                 2.6   0.0                       0.0      2.5
        0.93   1737            0.93       1774   0.93
                                                                                                                       2.1                       2.6
       1737    0                             0   1737
                                                                                                                 2.1   0.0                       0.0      2.1

                           0    0     0
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

                           0   0.00   0
                                                                                                                              0.0        0.0



                                6                                                                                              0    0    0


                                                                                                                       0                          0

               0                             0                                                                         1                          0

                                                                                                                       0                          0


                                0                                                                                              0    0    0




                                NA                                                                                                  NA




               NA                          NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                                NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count                   SW 75th Ave                      SW 75th Ave            SW Nyberg St              SW Nyberg St
     Period                    (Northbound)                    (Southbound)             (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                      Totals
   11:40 AM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   141      0      0     0   147      6        0          294
   11:45 AM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   132      0      0     0   167      6        0          305
   11:50 AM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   155      0      0     0   137      5        0          297
   11:55 AM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   152      0      0     0   155      2        0          309             3418
   12:00 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   137      0      0     0   161      1        0          299             3435
   12:05 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   140      0      0     0   137      3        0          280             3449
   12:10 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   139      0      0     0   157      5        0          301             3464
   12:15 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   128      0      0     0   161      0        0          289             3510
   12:20 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   132      0      0     0   145      2        0          280             3502
   12:25 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   158      0      0     0   161      3        0          322             3554
   12:30 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   152      0      0     0   164      4        0          321             3588
   12:35 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   157      0      0     0   150      7        0          314             3611
   12:40 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   147      0      0     0   125      4        0          277             3594
   12:45 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   144      0      0     0   132      5        0          281             3570
   12:50 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   159      0      0     0   159      2        0          321             3594
   12:55 PM           0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   132      0      0     0   156      5        0          293             3578
     1:00 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   137      0      0     0   114      6        0          258             3537
     1:05 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   152      0      0     0   150      5        0          307             3564
     1:10 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   149      0      0     0   133      5        0          287             3550
     1:15 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   134      0      0     0   133      6        0          273             3534
     1:20 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   157      0      0     0   165      4        0          326             3580
     1:25 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     0   163      0      0     0   138      7        0          309             3567
     1:30 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     0   125      0      0     0   152      3        0          280             3526
     1:35 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      2    0     0   148      0      0     0   133      5        0          288             3500
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles        0           0      0     0          0       0      4    0     0 1868       0      0     0 1900      56        0                  3828
 Heavy Trucks         0           0      0                0       0      0          0    52      0            0    44      0                            96
  Pedestrians                     0                               4                       0                         0                                    4
    Bicycles          0           0      0                0       0      0          0     0      0            0     0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:45 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 SB Ramp Terminal -- SW Nyberg St                                                                            QC JOB #: 10772106
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Sat, Jun 16 2012
                      1438 0.93     0                           Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                              1.7        0.0

                      833    3     602
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 12:50 PM -- 1:05 PM
                                                                                                                            2.2 0.0 1.0

       1821    0                           0   1175
                                                                                                               2.5   0.0                       0.0      2.7
        0.87   1337         0.95         988   0.92
                                                                                                                     1.9                       2.8
       1942    605                       187   1939
                                                                                                               2.5   3.8                       2.1      1.6

                       0     0      0
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

                      795 0.00      0
                                                                                                                            3.4        0.0



                             21                                                                                              0    0    0


                                                                                                                     0                          0

               0                           0                                                                         1                          2

                                                                                                                     0                          0


                             0                                                                                               0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                    NA




               NA                        NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count          I-5 SB Ramp Terminal              I-5 SB Ramp Terminal         SW Nyberg St              SW Nyberg St
     Period                (Northbound)                      (Southbound)             (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                    Left Thru Right        U          Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                      Totals
   11:40 AM           0       0      0     0           39       0    82     0     0    80     57      0     6    77      0        0          341
   11:45 AM           0       0      0     0           32       1    49     0     0   100     44      0    13    87      0        0          326
   11:50 AM           0       0      0     0           54       0    90     0     0   103     55      0    10    80      0        0          392
   11:55 AM           0       0      0     0           39       0    68     0     0    99     49      0    15    75      0        0          345             4077
   12:00 PM           0       0      0     0           30       0    58     0     0   109     52      0    12    99      0        0          360             4127
   12:05 PM           0       0      0     0           47       0    57     0     0    81     53      0    17    59      0        0          314             4126
   12:10 PM           0       0      0     0           47       0    75     0     0   136     50      0    11    92      0        0          411             4197
   12:15 PM           0       0      0     0           41       0    71     0     0   105     41      0    18   100      0        0          376             4216
   12:20 PM           0       0      0     0           49       0    74     0     0    90     44      0    19    79      0        0          355             4287
   12:25 PM           0       0      0     0           44       0    63     0     0   115     43      0    12    74      0        0          351             4287
   12:30 PM           0       0      0     0           55       1    55     0     0    90     54      0    20    60      0        0          335             4250
   12:35 PM           0       0      0     0           54       1    74     0     0   127     47      0    12    93      0        0          408             4314
   12:40 PM           0       0      0     0           51       0    67     0     0   112     54      0    15   102      0        0          401             4374
   12:45 PM           0       0      0     0           55       0    72     0     0   105     51      0    22    57      0        0          362             4410
   12:50 PM           0       0      0     0           39       0    64     0     0   144     60      0    13    89      0        0          409             4427
   12:55 PM           0       0      0     0           68       0    71     0     0   106     54      0    19    69      0        0          387             4469
     1:00 PM          0       0      0     0           34       1    58     0     0   131     62      0     8   103      0        0          397             4506
     1:05 PM          0       0      0     0           65       0    89     0     0    76     45      0    18    70      0        0          363             4555
     1:10 PM          0       0      0     0           48       1    67     0     0   102     64      0    10    89      0        0          381             4525
     1:15 PM          0       0      0     0           50       0    67     0     0    95     50      0    19    75      0        0          356             4505
     1:20 PM          0       0      0     0           64       0    74     0     0    92     56      0    13    63      0        0          362             4512
     1:25 PM          0       0      0     0           53       0    68     0     0   105     44      0    11    95      0        0          376             4537
     1:30 PM          0       0      0     0           59       0    74     0     0   112     49      0    11    81      0        0          386             4588
     1:35 PM          0       0      0     0           60       0    87     0     0    89     51      0    21    57      0        0          365             4545
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                       Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right        U          Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles        0       0      0     0          564       4   772     0     0 1524     704      0   160 1044       0        0                  4772
 Heavy Trucks         0       0      0                  4       0     8           0    24     16            4    24      0                            80
  Pedestrians                 0                                16                       0                         0                                   16
    Bicycles          0       0      0                  0       0     0           0     1      0            0     0      0                             1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:45 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: I-5 NB Ramp Terminal -- SW Nyberg St                                                                             QC JOB #: 10772104
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Sat, Jun 16 2012
                      0    0.00 646                           Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                                 0.0        1.1

                      0     0      0
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 12:45 PM -- 1:00 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

      1174    0                         646   1246
                                                                                                                3.1   0.0                       1.1      1.4
       0.87   1039         0.93         600   0.92
                                                                                                                      1.0                       1.7
      1924    885                         0   1252
                                                                                                                1.4   1.9                       0.0      1.1

                     574    0     213
                                                                                                                             4.5 0.0 1.9

                     885 0.93 787
                                                                                                                             1.9        3.8



                            0                                                                                                 0    0    0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

              1                           2                                                                           1                          2

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                            1                                                                                                 0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                      NA




              NA                        NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                           NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count     I-5 NB Ramp Terminal                  I-5 NB Ramp Terminal         SW Nyberg St                SW Nyberg St
     Period           (Northbound)                          (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At Left Thru Right                                                                                                                  Total
                                      U              Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right        U                      Totals
   11:40 AM     40       0      23    0                0       0     0     0     0    55     62      0     0      43     50        0          273
   11:45 AM     63       0      19    0                0       0     0     0     0    62     58      0     0      36     57        0          295
   11:50 AM     49       0      15    0                0       0     0     0     0    82     72      0     0      42     58        0          318
   11:55 AM     35       0      20    0                0       0     0     0     0    83     69      0     0      50     36        0          293             3449
   12:00 PM     63       0      17    0                0       0     0     0     0    69     66      0     0      46     55        0          316             3498
   12:05 PM     36       0      15    0                0       0     0     0     0    71     61      0     0      51     61        0          295             3558
   12:10 PM     55       0      17    0                0       0     0     0     0    82     81      0     0      40     50        0          325             3605
   12:15 PM     67       0      13    0                0       0     0     0     0    86     63      0     0      48     43        0          320             3616
   12:20 PM     36       0      15    0                0       0     0     0     0    82     64      0     0      62     41        0          300             3654
   12:25 PM     38       0      22    0                0       0     0     0     0    79     64      0     0      45     66        0          314             3687
   12:30 PM     28       0      13    0                0       0     0     0     0    99     63      0     0      58     66        0          327             3705
   12:35 PM     57       0      21    0                0       0     0     0     0    87     79      0     0      44     50        0          338             3714
   12:40 PM     60       0      13    0                0       0     0     0     0    83     57      0     0      55     55        0          323             3764
   12:45 PM     33       0      21    0                0       0     0     0     0   101     95      0     0      47     56        0          353             3822
   12:50 PM     53       0      25    0                0       0     0     0     0    66     91      0     0      41     60        0          336             3840
   12:55 PM     40       0      20    0                0       0     0     0     0   101     97      0     0      59     56        0          373             3920
     1:00 PM    59       0      15    0                0       0     0     0     0    84     73      0     0      48     44        0          323             3927
     1:05 PM    48       0      18    0                0       0     0     0     0    89     58      0     0      53     59        0          325             3957
     1:10 PM    42       0      18    0                0       0     0     0     0    72     72      0     0      47     51        0          302             3934
     1:15 PM    51       0      13    0                0       0     0     0     0    89     39      0     0      45     46        0          283             3897
     1:20 PM    41       0      23    0                0       0     0     0     0   100     81      0     0      43     59        0          347             3944
     1:25 PM    51       0      21    0                0       0     0     0     0    79     67      0     0      41     43        0          302             3932
     1:30 PM    49       0      15    0                0       0     0     0     0    91     67      0     0      43     49        0          314             3919
     1:35 PM    37       0      22    0                0       0     0     0     0   104     74      0     0      48     50        0          335             3916
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                           Southbound               Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates    Left Thru Right        U              Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles 504       0    264     0                0       0     0     0     0 1072 1132         0     0     588   688         0                  4248
 Heavy Trucks   16       0       4                     0       0     0           0     8     16            0      24      8                            76
  Pedestrians            4                                     0                       4                           4                                   12
    Bicycles     0       0       0                     0       0     0           0     1      0            0       0      0                             1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:45 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Signalized Entrance to Nyberg Woods -- SW Nyberg St                                                         QC JOB #: 10772102
 CITY/STATE: Tualatin, OR                                                                                              DATE: Sat, Jun 09 2012
                      434 0.86 636                     Peak-Hour: 12:10 PM -- 1:10 PM                                   0.5        1.1

                      322 11 101
                                                      Peak 15-Min: 12:35 PM -- 12:50 PM
                                                                                                                        0.6 0.0 0.0

       1097    524                    101    788
                                                                                                           1.3   1.1                       1.0      1.5
        0.89   544        0.96        672   0.79
                                                                                                                 1.7                       1.6
       1125    57                      15    657
                                                                                                           1.3   0.0                       0.0      1.4

                      103 11     12
                                                                                                                        1.0 0.0 0.0

                       83 0.93 126
                                                                                                                        0.0        0.8



                           8                                                                                             0    0    0


                                                                                                                 0                          0

               1                        2                                                                        1                          1

                                                                                                                 0                          0


                           2                                                                                             0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                  NA




               NA                     NA                                                                         NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count                                                                   SW Nyberg St                SW Nyberg St
     Period           Signalized Entrance to NybergSignalized
                                                    Woods Entrance to Nyberg Woods
                                                                                (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At              (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                                                                      Total
                    Left Thru Right        U     Left Thru Right       U  Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right        U                      Totals
   11:40 AM           3       0       1    0      13       0    21     0   41    41      4      0     1      49      8        0          182
   11:45 AM           3       4       0    0       9       2    20     0   22    45      4      1     0      46     17        0          173
   11:50 AM           7       1       0    0       8       0    23     0   32    43      5      0     2      54     12        0          187
   11:55 AM           7       1       1    0       5       0    25     0   45    44      6      0     0      55      7        0          196             2141
   12:00 PM          10       1       1    0       6       3    31     0   27    47      3      0     0      64     11        0          204             2170
   12:05 PM           8       0       2    0       8       2    19     0   58    44      7      1     1      77     10        0          237             2239
   12:10 PM          12       1       0    0       5       0    28     0   34    38      4      0     0      82     11        0          215             2310
   12:15 PM           9       2       0    0       6       2    26     0   41    34      3      0     1      77      6        0          207             2327
   12:20 PM           5       1       0    0      13       1    28     0   46    39      6      0     1      56     14        0          210             2348
   12:25 PM           9       0       3    0       8       1    28     0   32    44      4      0     2      62     13        0          206             2377
   12:30 PM           8       2       2    0       5       0    26     0   39    42      6      0     0      53      8        0          191             2393
   12:35 PM           8       0       1    0      10       0    29     0   61    37      7      0     3      51     15        0          222             2430
   12:40 PM          11       1       1    0      13       1    33     0   44    54      4      0     1      42      8        0          213             2461
   12:45 PM           5       1       1    0       8       0    30     0   42    43      6      0     2      67      4        0          209             2497
   12:50 PM          10       1       0    0      11       1    29     0   57    53      2      0     1      33      8        0          206             2516
   12:55 PM           2       0       1    0       4       1    15     0   43    55      7      0     0      58      4        0          190             2510
     1:00 PM         12       1       2    0      12       2    25     0   44    51      3      0     2      42      5        0          201             2507
     1:05 PM         12       1       1    0       6       2    25     0   41    54      5      0     2      49      5        0          203             2473
     1:10 PM         10       3       3    0       5       0    31     0   34    50      2      0     0      38      6        0          182             2440
     1:15 PM          9       3       0    0       8       0    24     0   34    54      7      0     2      52      9        0          202             2435
     1:20 PM          5       2       1    0       2       1    32     0   46    47      1      0     2      48     12        0          199             2424
     1:25 PM         10       0       0    0       8       1    25     0   45    50      5      0     1      36     10        0          191             2409
     1:30 PM          6       1       1    0       5       0    32     0   26    58      1      0     2      44      5        0          181             2399
     1:35 PM          5       2       0    0       6       0    28     0   29    45      6      0     0      45      6        0          172             2349
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                  Southbound              Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right        U     Left Thru Right       U  Left Thru Right       U   Left    Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles       96       8      12    0    124        4   368     0 588    536     68      0    24     640   108         0                  2576
 Heavy Trucks         0       0       0            0       0     0          8     4      0            0      20      0                            32
  Pedestrians                 4                           16                      0                           8                                   28
    Bicycles          0       0       0            0       0     0          0     0      0            0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: N
Report generated on 6/19/2012 3:45 PM                               SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
