                                           PLANNING COMMISSION
                                            Meeting Agenda (Revised)
                                             Monday – May 12, 2014
                                                     7:00 PM
                                    City Council Chambers – 155 NW 2nd Avenue

                                    Commissioner Tyler Smith (Chair)
Commissioner John Savory (Vice Chair)                           Commissioner Shawn Hensley
Commissioner John Serlet                                        Commissioner Larry Boatright
Commissioner (Vacant)                                           Commissioner (Vacant)

       1.      CALL TO ORDER

       2.      CITIZEN INPUT ON NON-AGENDA

       3.      MINUTES

                 a. Approval of Planning Commission Minutes for April 14, 2014.

       4.      PUBLIC HEARING

                 a. Public Hearing to approve a Site & Design Review for a proposed rebuild of the existing
                    McDonald’s Restaurant located at 709 SW 1st Avenue and for the Classic Pool & Spa property
                    located at 701 SW 1st Avenue. The proposed McDonald’s includes a new building that will
                    encompass both tax lots, with added site improvements, drive aisles, and drive-thru lanes. (DR 14-
                    03/LLA 14-02)

                 b. Continued from April 28, 2014, City Staff is requesting consideration of a text amendment to
                    streamline, clarify, and update the development review process for industrially zoned land in the
                    Canby Pioneer Industrial Park. (Code Streamlining Industrial Development TA 12-02)

       5.      NEW BUSINESS

       6.      FINAL DECISIONS
               (Note: These are final, written versions of previous oral decisions. No public testimony.)

                 a. Dinsmore Estates (SUB 14-02)
                 b. Emerald Garden Townhomes (PUD 14-01/SUB 14-01)
                 c. McDonald’s Rebuild (DR 14-03/LLA 14-02)

       7.      ITEMS OF INTEREST/REPORT FROM STAFF

                 a. Special Planning Commission, Wednesday, May 28, 2014

       8.      ITEMS OF INTEREST/GUIDANCE FROM PLANNING COMMISSION

       9.     ADJOURNMENT

 The meeting location is accessible to persons with disabilities. A request for an interpreter for the hearing impaired or
      for other accommodations for person with disabilities should be made at least 48 hours before the meeting at
             503-266-7001. A copy of this agenda can be found on the City’s web page at www.ci.canby.or.us
  City Council and Planning Commission Meetings are broadcast live and can be viewed on OCTS Channel 5.
                        For a schedule of the playback times, please call 503-263-6287.
                                      PUBLIC HEARING FORMAT

The public hearing will be conducted as follows:
      STAFF REPORT
      QUESTIONS                     (If any, by the Planning Commission or staff)
      OPEN PUBLIC HEARING FOR TESTIMONY:
                  APPLICANT          (Not more than 15 minutes)
                  PROPONENTS         (Persons in favor of application) (Not more than 5
                              minutes per person)
                  OPPONENTS (Persons opposed to application) (Not more than 5
                       minutes per person)
                  NEUTRAL            (Persons with no opinion) (Not more than 5 minutes per person)
                  REBUTTAL           (By applicant, not more than 10 minutes)
      CLOSE PUBLIC HEARING          (No further public testimony allowed)
      QUESTIONS                     (If any by the Planning Commission)
      DISCUSSION                    (By the Planning Commission)
      DECISION                      (By the Planning Commission)

All interested persons in attendance shall be heard on the matter. If you wish to testify on this matter,
please step forward when the Chair calls for Proponents if you favor the application; or Opponents if
you are opposed to the application; to the microphone, state your name address, and interest in the
matter. You will also need to sign the Testimony sheet at the microphone with your name and address.
You may be limited by time for your statement, depending upon how many people wish to testify.

EVERYONE PRESENT IS ENCOURAGED TO TESTIFY, EVEN IF IT IS ONLY TO CONCUR WITH
PREVIOUS TESTIMONY. All questions must be directed through the Chair. Any evidence to be
considered must be submitted to the hearing body for public access.
Testimony and evidence must be directed toward the applicable criteria listed on the wall.
Failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision-maker
and interested parties an opportunity to respond to the issue, may preclude appeal to the City Council
and the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue.
Failure of the applicant to raise constitutional or other issues relating to proposed conditions of approval
with sufficient specificity to allow the local government to respond to the issue may preclude an action
for damages in circuit court.

Before the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, any participant may ask the hearings body for
an opportunity to present additional relevant evidence or testimony that is within the scope of the
hearing. The Planning Commission shall grant such requests by continuing the public hearing or
leaving the record open for additional written evidence or testimony. Any such continuance of extension
shall be subject to the limitations of the 120-day rule, unless the continuance or extension is requested
or agreed to by the applicant.

If additional documents or evidence are provided by any party, the Planning Commission may, if
requested, allow a continuance or leave the record open to allow the parties a reasonable opportunity
to respond. Any such continuance or extension of the record requested by an applicant shall result in
a corresponding extension of the 120-day time period.




                                                                                                   1 of 388
                    City of Canby
                    Site and Design Review Staff Report

                        File #: DR 14-03/LLA 14-02

       Prepared for the May 12, 2014 PLANNING Commission Meeting

LOCATION:     701 and 709 SW 1ST Avenue
TAX LOT:      31E33CC6100 and 6101




LOT SIZE:     +/- 0.89 acre combined size of both tax lots, or approximately
              38,768 square feet..
ZONING:       C-M Heavy Commercial with OHC Outer Highway Commercial
              overlay within the DCO Downtown Canby Overlay zone.
OWNER:        Greentree Enterprises, Inc. (TL 6100)
              8655 SW Citizens Drive, Suite 201
              Wilsonville, OR 97070

              and




                                                                               2 of 388
                Classic Pool & Spa Distributor (TL 6101)
                701 SW 1st Avenue
                Canby, OR 97013
APPLICANT:      McDonald’s USA, LLC ATTN: Doug Bates
                12131 113th Avenue NE, Suite 103
                Kirkland, WA 98034
APPLICANT’S
REPSRESENTATIVE:
              Cardno ATTN: Michael Cerbone
              5415 SW Westgate Drive, Suite 100
              Portland, OR 97221
APPLICATION TYPE:
              Site & Design Review and Lot Line Adjustment
              (Lot Consolidation) – a combined Type III process.
CITY OF CANBY FILE NUMBER:
              DR 14-03/LLA 14-02


I.      PROJECT OVERVIEW & EXISTING CONDITIONS

Description of the Project:
The proposal is a rebuild of the existing McDonald’s restaurant located at 709 SW 1st
Avenue, at the corner of SW 1st Avenue and SW Birch Street in the City of Canby, Oregon.
The existing McDonald’s building and adjacent Pool & Spa building will be demolished.
The proposed McDonald’s includes a new building that will encompass both Tax Lots
6100 and 6101, with added site improvements, drive aisles, and drive-thru lanes.
The proposed rebuild will include a 4,597 SF building with 37 parking stalls, drive aisles,
landscaping, and pedestrian accessways. Access is proposed onto both SW 1st Avenue
(Highway 99E) and SW 2nd Avenue.

According to notes provided at the time of Pre-App, this proposal is subject to a
Type III Site and Design Review application, as well as a Lot Line Adjustment to
consolidate the two parcels. The Type III process is triggered as the proposal
does not meet the 0.25 floor-to-area ratio (FAR) requirement for the downtown
overlay district and the requirement for 40-percent of the building frontage
within a 10-foot setback.

Site Condition:
The 0.89 acre site is a combination of two adjacent tax lots located at the
intersection of Birch and 1st Avenue (HWY99E). Both lots are through lots to 2nd
Avenue, but only McDonald’s has access on both 1st and 2nd Avenues. The site is
roughly rectangular in shape, and both lots are currently fully developed. Both
lots are flat and level, with no topographic relief. The current McDonald’s has
extensive paved parking area and drive through facilities. The Classic Pool & Spa
is primarily a hard surfaced area with a building and extensive outdoor storage.




                                                                                              3 of 388
Vehicle Access:
 The existing McDonald’s has a restricted right-out only access on 1st Avenue
(Hwy99E) and a full service access on 2nd Avenue. Classic Pool & Spa shares a
full access driveway with the neighboring use to the north, Fisher’s Pump and
Supply. Changes to the access for the new consolidated property and
McDonald’s development is described in the Traffic Impact Analysis prepared by
DKS, which is an attachment to this staff report.

Building Use:
Both existing buildings (McDonald’s and Classic Pool & Spa) will be demolished
and a new McDonald’s will be built on the combined site. The existing
McDonald’s is 3,314 sf and the new building will be 4,597 sf. Because the
Classic Pool & Spa building will be completely demolished, size (square footage)
is immaterial. Parking, internal circulation, access, and site landscaping will
largely be reconfigured.

Construction Materials:
As described in the application, McDonald’s intends to use quality materials in a
more modern design. The following entries from the application generally
describe the character and materials for the new building.

The proposed McDonald’s materials include a log cabin colored hardie plank for
the primary horizontal surfacing, with cultured stone for the secondary material.
Both materials help define a sense of place and quality design that fits within the
Canby design aesthetic. The colors and materials evoke a sense of timelessness,
permanence, quality, and strength.

The street-facing building entry door is the front side, with an entry door that is
95% transparent glass. This entry door also includes flanking and transom
windows on the side and above the entry. The building entries feature yellow
metal canopies and aluminum trellises, with cultured stone façades to create a
visually appealing and pedestrian-scaled entry. The cultured stone will project
from the hardie plank siding to create an additional architectural feature that
enhances the primary entry.

As shown on the architectural elevations provided under Exhibit B, the ground
floor of the street facing façade does incorporate cohesive and repetitive
architectural elements that tie into downtown Canby’s traditional architectural
vernacular. The log cabin colored hardie plank siding creates a sense of the
agricultural or pastoral element of Canby’s architectural vernacular, while the
cultured stone provides a timeless yet traditional architectural vernacular that
fits in well with the downtown Canby sense of place. The architectural elements
are cohesive and repetitive, while also meeting the goal of proper pedestrian
scale.

The primary material selected for the Canby McDonald’s is a log cabin colored
hardie plank siding, which is an allowed material as listed above. The hardie




                                                                                      4 of 388
plan encompasses 56% of the building façade, excluding windows and
transparent doors. The secondary material is cultured stone, which
encompasses 16% of the building façade. Accent materials are the metal and
aluminum canopies and parapet trellises that comprise 28% of the building
façade. The taller parapet is needed to effectively screen the rooftop
mechanical units.

Site Utilities:
The subject site is fully served with sanitary sewer and water. Storm water
management is a combination of onsite detention and treatment, and offsite
collection of waters released from the site. No specific information was
provided in the application regarding utilities, both public and private.
However, it does not appear that any specific information be provided. The City
of Canby’s Public Works Department, and the individual utility providers, will
determine if services are adequate for the proposed new land use situation.
There requirements will be reflected in the final construction drawings and any
associated public improvement plans.


II.    ATTACHMENTS
       The following exhibits are part of the applicant’s package:
       A.      Exhibit A        Land Use Applications
       B.      Exhibit B        Plan Set (8 sheets)
       C.      Exhibit C        Clackamas County Tax Map
       D.      Exhibit D        Stormwater Report
       E.      Exhibit E        Geotechnical Report
       F.      Exhibit F        Phase I ESA
       G.      Exhibit G        Traffic Impact Analysis
       H.      Exhibit H        Neighborhood Meeting Materials
       I.      Exhibit I        Pre-Application Notes
       J.      Exhibit J        Public and Agency Comments



III.   SIGNIFICANT ISSUES FOR PLANNING COMMISSION CONSIDERATION
       A.       The primary reasons why this land development project is in a
       Type III process is because the owner/applicant cannot meet the
       required FAR of 0.25 as dictated by the DCO/OHC overlay. Typically,
       drive through restaurants will not have a high FAR, and this is the typical
       case;
       B.       A second reason for this being a Type III process is the inability
       to meet the required “40% of the building frontage be within a 10 foot
       setback”. Once again, drive through commercial restaurants typically
       will not meet this standard;
       C.       Staff is concerned about the owner/applicant’s approach to
       preserving some sidewalks from the previous McDonald’s, as opposed
       to re-doing all the sidewalks to meet current landscaping requirements




                                                                                     5 of 388
          for planting strips with street trees. However, the west end of the
          property is able to mostly stay intact since the parking in this area is
          being retained as designed. Discussions with ODOT officials revealed
          some concern with planter strips adjacent to the highway curb due to
          possible sight distance issues with street trees that close to the highway
          although this design was adopted in the Gateway Design Plan that was
          vetted with ODOT and received their approval;
          D.      According to the owner/applicant, no new signs are planned at
          this time, and there is an intent to retain the existing pole sign. No new
          internal signage is proposed. The Planning Commission may wish to
          discuss the issue of future signs with the owner/applicant to insure that
          future signage is in keeping with this updated design;

IV.       APPLICABLE CRITERIA & FINDINGS
          Criteria used in evaluating this application are contained in the following
          Chapters of the City of Canby Land Development and Planning
          Ordinance (“Zoning Ordinance”):
         Chapter 16.08 General Provisions
         Chapter 16.10 Off Street Parking & Loading
         Chapter 16.30 C-M, Heavy Commercial/Manufacturing Zone
         Chapter 16.41 Downtown Canby Overlay (DCO) Zone
         Chapter 16.43 Outdoor Lighting Standards
         Chapter 16.49 Site and Design Review
         Chapter 16.58 Lot Line Adjustment

Chapter 16.08             General Provisions

16.08.020        Zoning Map
Finding:         As designated on the official zoning map of the City of Canby,
the site is zoned C-M Heavy Commercial with OHC Outer Highway Commercial
overlay within the DCO Downtown Canby Overlay zone.

16.08.090(A) Sidewalks Required
Finding:         The subject site currently has eight (8) foot sidewalks and five
(5) foot planting strips along the 1st Avenue (Hwy99E), Birch, and 2nd Avenue
sides, except along 2nd avenue on the “backside” of the Classic Pool & Spa site,
where no sidewalk exists. Plans submitted for the project indicate that
sidewalks and planting strips along ALL of the 1st Avenue (Hwy99E), Birch and
2nd Avenue frontages will be maintained or constructed. Therefore, this
standard has been met.

16.08.150        Traffic Impact Study (TIS)
Finding:         A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) for this project has been
conducted by DKS, and indicates that there is a minimal increase in site
generated traffic, such that the proposed expansion project is acceptable in
terms of overall traffic generation. As such, this standard is satisfied.




                                                                                        6 of 388
16.08.160         Safety and Functionality Standards
Finding:          Based on the plans submitted by the applicant for the
redevelopment of the subject site, all requirements for A, B, C, D, E, and F of
this section of the Zoning Ordinance have been, or will be satisfied. Therefore,
this standard is fulfilled.

Chapter 16.10           Off-Street Parking and Loading
16.10.010       Off-Street Parking Required – Exceptions
A.     At the time of establishment of a new structure or use, change in use, or
       change in use of an existing structure, within any planning district of the city,
       off-street parking spaces and off-street loading berths shall be as provided in
       this and following sections, unless greater requirements are otherwise
       established by the conditional use permit or the site and design review
       process, based upon clear and objective findings that a greater number of
       spaces are necessary at that location for protection of public health, safety
       and welfare. A lesser number of spaces may be permitted by the Planning
       Commission based on clear and objective findings that a lesser number of
       parking spaces will be sufficient to carry out the objective of this section.
C.       At the time of enlargement of an existing structure or use, the
         provisions of this section shall apply to the enlarged structure or use
         only.
Finding:           This project will require off-street parking in accordance with
this section and other applicable and appropriate sections of the Zoning
Ordinance. As illustrated on Exhibit B of the applicant’s submittal package, all
requirements for off-street parking will be met. While the Planning Commission
has the authority to require off-street parking capacity in excess of that required
by the Zoning Ordinance, no additional capacity should be required. Further,
the Planning Commission has the authority to allow fewer spaces than required.
However, no request has been made to allow fewer parking spaces on the
subject site, and a reduction should not be considered. Therefore, this standard
will be satisfied.

16.10.030        General Requirements
A.       Should the owner or occupant of a structure change the use to which
the building is put, thereby increasing parking or loading requirements, the
increased parking/loading area shall be provided prior to commencement of
the new use.
Finding:         The proposed project will require additional off-street parking
than what existed for the current use. As illustrated on Exhibit B of the
applicant’s submittal package, all requirements for off-street will be met.
Therefore, this standard will be fulfilled.

E.     Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable
passenger automobiles or residents, customers, patrons, and employees and




                                                                                           7 of 388
shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of
trucks used in conducting the business.
Finding:          According to a statement made in the applicant’s narrative for
this project, “All proposed off-street parking stalls will be available for the
parking of customers, patrons, and employees of the business establishment,
and will not be used for storage of vehicles or materials.” Based on this
statement, this standard will be met.

F.       Institution of on-street parking shall not be allowed for off-street
parking, where none is previously provided, and shall not be done solely for
the purpose of relieving crowded parking lots in commercial or industrial
planning districts.
Finding:          The applicant’s parking plan indicates that there will be no on-
street parking proposed or required as part of the overall parking plan.
Therefore, this standard will be satisfied.

G.       Parking facilities may be shared by users on adjacent parcels if all of
the following standards are met, or the Planning Commission determines a
lesser combination meets the intent of the ordinance:
Finding:         The two lots on which the project will be built will be
consolidated through a Lot Line Adjustment application, which is part of the
overall application package. Therefore, no shared parking is proposed, or
required, and this standard will be fulfilled.

H.       The number of vehicular spaces required in Table 16.10.050 may be
reduced by up to 10% if one of the following is demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Planning Director or Planning Commission:
Finding:         This standard does not apply because the applicant is not
requesting a reduction in the number of parking spaces required as set forth in
Table 16.10.050.

16.10.040        Prohibited Near Intersections
In no case will off-street parking be allowed within a vision clearance area of
an intersection.
Finding:         There is no on-site off-street parking proposed in any clear
vision area of the subject site, based on review of plans in Exhibit B of the
applicant’s submittal package. Therefore, this standard is met.

16.10.050         Parking Standards Designated
The parking standards set out in Table 16.10.050 shall be observed.
Finding:          Based on the listings in Table 16.10.050 for a Take-out
restaurant (Commercial, j.), the proposed use shall be required to have eight (8)
spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of floor area. The new building, at 4,597
square feet, will be required to have 36.78 parking spaces, rounded up to 37
spaces. As illustrated on the plan sheets of Exhibit B, there will be a total of 37
parking spaces, two (2) of which will be for handicapped users. Some parking
stalls are at a 60 degree angle, and some are 90 degree stalls. Two-way drive




                                                                                      8 of 388
aisles are 24 feet in width, and one-way drive aisles are 18 feet in width. See
16.10.070. As such, this standard is satisfied.

16.10.060       Off-street Loading Facilities
Finding:        The applicant has not provided any off-street loading facilities,
arguing that deliveries are made during off-peak times. Trucks will use various
portions of the off-street parking areas of the developed site. Based on the
table under 16.10.060.A on page 5 of this chapter, because the building is less
than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area, no (0) off-street loading berths are
required. Review of other McDonald’s stores indicates that no off-street
loading space(s) are provided, thus depending on the corporate schedule of off-
peak hour deliveries. Therefore, this standard can be satisfied.

16.10.070        Parking Lots and Access
A. Parking Lots – A parking lot, whether as accessory or principal use,
intended for the parking of automobiles or trucks, shall comply with the
following:
Finding:         As required in 1. Of this section, all dimensions of the proposed
parking lot area meets the standards set forth in Table 16.10.070 for 60 degree
spaces and for 90 degree spaces.

Per item 2. Under this section, no compact parking spaces are requested.

As required by item 3. Of this section, all parking lot, driveway and access apron
materials will be paved with either asphalt or concrete. Under a., the Planning
Director is not being asked to approve alternative systems for storage or non-
required parking areas.

Under b. of this item 3., no use of permeable materials for any part of the
parking area, driveways, or access aprons has been proposed.

In accordance with item 4., all driveways will be paved for their full widths.

Item 5. Does not apply to this proposed use.

Under item 6., the design of the parking area will not result in any vehicle
backing or maneuvering within any portion of a public street right of way.

For item 7., design of the parking area(s), and the accesses to the parking
area(s) will meet the standards of the City of Canby, subject to the review by
Curran-McLeod, the city’s contract engineer, in the memorandum to Angie
Lehnert, Associate Planner from Hassan Ibrahim, P.E. of Curran-McLeod. This
memorandum is contained in Exhibit J. of II. ATTACHMENTS.

For item 8., although not illustrated in the plan set identified as Exhibit B, the
applicant states:




                                                                                     9 of 388
“Curb stops are proposed for those parking spaces located on the west side of
the restaurant, for those parking stalls that abut the pedestrian walkway with
access to the primary entrance. Curbs are proposed for all stalls adjacent to site
landscaping.”
This statement commits the applicant to placing wheel bumpers as identified in
the verbage. Other wheel bumpers or curb stops may be required as the
discretion of the Planning Commission.

As illustrated in the plan set identified as Exhibit B, handicapped accessible
spaces are provided adjacent to the main entry area. There are two (2)
handicapped accessible parking spaces will fulfill the necessary ADA
requirement in accordance with item 9.

Based on this review, the applicant has met all of the requirements of this
section, subject to the comments made by Hassan Ibrahim, P.E. of Curran-
McLead, dated April 24, 2014 and incorporated into this Staff Report by
inclusion as Exhibit J of II. ATTACHMENTS.

B.      Access
There are ten (10) sub-items to this section, and each appropriate and
applicable sub-item has been addressed by the applicant.

Item 3. requires that “all ingress and egress shall connect directly with public
streets.” As noted in the plan set identified as Exhibit B, all driveways shall
ingress and egress directly from either 1st Avenue (Hwy.99E) or 2nd Avenue.
There is no direct vehicular access to Birch Street.

Item 6. Deals with sidewalks. The site currently has sidewalks, but changes in
site plans may result in the need to re-construct any damaged or sub-standard
portions. The applicant illustrates the sidewalks on pages of the plan set
identified as Exhibit B, and discusses sidewalks throughout this application.
Plus, they are required by the Zoning Ordinance. As such, the applicant will
fulfill the requirements for sidewalks, as well as other portions of the public
right of way, and internal connectivity, as part of the city’s process for all
reviews, approvals, and permits.

Item 7. Makes clear that the standards are minimum standards, and may be
increased.

There has always been knowledge that there are one-way and two-way drive
aisles as part of the site plan. All drive aisles will be constructed to a minimum
width of 18 feet of paved width. This will satisfy item 8.

Item 9. is about maximum driveway widths. Plans prepared for the re-
development of the subject site indicate that driveway widths are less than 40
feet, and that no part of a driveway is closer than 5 feet to any adjacent
property line.




                                                                                     10 of 388
The applicant has provided sufficient narrative and graphic information to allow
the conclusion that all distances between driveways and intersections meet this
standard (Item 10.).

After review of all of the above items, this total standard will be satisfied.

16.10.090         Drive-up Uses
Because the re-built McDonald’s will have a drive through facility, there is a
requirement that this standard be met. Based on illustrations in the plan set
identified as Exhibit B, where it is proposed that there be queuing distance to
allow for five (5) vehicles. It is believed that McDonald’s, operating on the
premise that they want to keep people moving, would likely have five or fewer
vehicles in the queue line. As such, the applicant satisfies the standard.

16.10.100        Bicycle Parking
Bicycle parking shall be provided for all multi-family residential, institutional,
commercial, and industrial uses.
Finding:         As a drive-in restaurant, this facility will be required to have
bicycle parking at a rate of one (1) bicycle parking space for every 1,000 square
feet of floor area (from TABLE 16.10.100). With 4,597 square feet of floor area
in the new facility, the requirement is 4.6 spaces, rounded up to five (5). As
illustrated on the sheets of the plan set identified as Exhibit B, the five spaces
are located as required by the dimensional standards as contained in
16.10.100.A., B., and C. Therefore, this standard is fulfilled.

Chapter 16.30            C-M Heavy Commercial Manufacturing
Zone
16.30.010        Uses Permitted Outright
       A.        A use permitted outright in a C-2 zone, other than dwelling
                 units;
Finding:         Chapter 16.28.010.E. identifies “Restaurant, including drive-in”
as a use permitted outright in the C-2 zone. This means that a restaurant,
including drive-in is an allowed use permitted outright in the C-M zone.
Therefore, this application meets this standard.

16.30.030        Development Standards
The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the
C-M zone:
         A.      Minimum Lot Area
         B.      Minimum width and frontage
         C.      Minimum Yard Requirements
Finding:         Since there are no minimum lot area, width or frontage
requirements, subsections A. and B. do not apply. Minimum yard requirements
(subsection C.) do apply and have been met based on review of the plan set
identified as Exhibit B of the applicant’s submittal package. This review
indicates that the minimum setback of the street yard is not less than 25 feet




                                                                                     11 of 388
from the 1st Avenue (HWY99E) curb line, thus meeting the requirement for the
C-M zone. However, the Downtown Canby Overlay (DCO) requires a setback
that is different, requiring a setback whereby at least 40% of the building
frontage is within 10 feet of the streetside property line. With the setback of
not less than 25 feet from the 1st Avenue (Hwy99E) curb line, this setback
requirement is met by the project, but not the DCO setback of not less than 10
feet for at least 40% of the building frontage. Therefore, standard C. is not
satisfied relative to the DCO setback requirement, and must be reviewed by the
Planning Commission in a Type III public hearing process.

         D.       Maximum Building Height
Finding:          Proposed building height of the new structure will be 20 feet, 9
and one half inches (20’ 9 ½”), which is well within the standard of 45 feet
maximum building height. For freestanding signs on the site, the maximum
height is thirty (30) feet. There is no identification of the existing freestanding
pole sign, which reportedly, will remain in place. Until there is some discussion
of this sign, the standard identified in 16.30.030.D.!. is not satisfied.

          E.      Maximum Lot Coverage
Finding:          The maximum lot coverage allowed is sixty percent (60%). The
site is 0.89 acre, or 38,768 square feet. With the new building being 4,597
square feet, lot coverage is just under 12%. Therefore, this standard is satisfied.

        F.        Other Regulations
Finding:          For subsection 1. where vision clearance distances shall be 15
feet from any alley or driveway and 30 feet from any other street or railroad,
the Landscape Plan (sheet L1.0 of the plan set identified as Exhibit B in the
applicant’s submittal package) illustrates that the vision clearance for ALL
streets is at least 30 feet. Therefore, this standard is fulfilled.

For standard 2.b. where sidewalks along Hwy99E (1st Avenue) are required to be
8 feet in width, the existing sidewalk meets that requirement. Sidewalks along
Birch and 2nd Avenue are 6 feet, meeting the city’s standard along local streets.
Therefore, this standard is also fulfilled.

Chapter 16.41            Downtown Canby Overlay (DCO) Zone
16.41.010          Purpose
A.      Encourage more intense development in the Core Commercial area
and allow for more intensive development in the Transitional Commercial area
over time. . . . . .
B.      Create a pedestrian friendly environment in the Core Commercial and
Transitional Commercial areas while allowing for a more auto-oriented focus
in the Outer Highway Commercial area. . . . . .
C.      Ensure that building sizes reflect desired uses in the Core Commercial
and Transitional Commercial areas. . . . . . Maximum building footprints are
much larger in the Outer Highway Commercial area.




                                                                                      12 of 388
D.       Ensure compatibility among adjacent uses within the Transitional
Commercial area as it changes over time. . . . . .
E.       Maintain an attractive, visually pleasing environment that is relatively
free of structures or activities that detract from it. . . . . . .
F.       Ensure adequate accessibility to and within sites by a variety of travel
modes, along with attractively designed parking and loading areas. . . . . . .
Finding:         This project is a complete rebuild of the existing McDonald’s
drive-through restaurant on an expanded site using a more current design, and
site features that are more in tune with today’s development patterns and
practices. Because the subject site is located within the Downtown Canby
Overlay (DCO) area along Hwy99E (1st Avenue), the orientation to the
automobile user, the McDonald’s is well placed. The new McDonald’s will be
more intense than its predecessor, and will promote a more pedestrian friendly
environment than its predecessor, while improving site landscaping and internal
pedestrian movement. Although the footprint of the new building will be
smaller than perhaps envisioned for the Outer Highway Commercial area, the
drive-through style appears to remain a primary focus of the McDonald’s
business plan, thus improving visibility and the onsite pedestrian experience.
With the new design style of today’s McDonald’s, the attractive, visually
pleasing environment is more closely achieved. As such, this project meets and
satisfies the Purpose statements that are applicable and appropriate.

16.41.020     Applicability
A.3.   Outer Highway Commercial area

Finding:          The subject site is located in the Outer Highway Commercial
subarea od the Downtown Canby Overlay plan area, where “the design focus in
this area is less about creating a high-quality pedestrian experience, and more
about ensuring the automobile-oriented design is built to the highest standard
possible.” The proposed rebuild of the existing McDonald’s provides a bit of
high quality pedestrian environment on the subject site, but also a higher
quality auto oriented design that will improve the overall visual appearance of
this portion of the intersection of Birch and Hwy99E. Therefore, this standard is
satisfied.

B.       The DCO zone has the following effect with regard to other chapters of this
ordinance:
1.       Permits land uses which are permitted by the underlying zone districts, with
         some exceptions, as set forth in Sections 16.41.030 and 16.41.040.
2.       Replaces selected development standards in the underlying zone districts, as
         set forth in Section 16.41.050.
3.       Sets forth alternative design review standards and criteria tailored to
         implement the goals of the overlay zone, as set forth in Section
         16.41.060. (Ord. 1296, 2008)
Finding:         The applicant has taken note of these standards and has abided
by them where practical and feasible. As a drive-in restaurant, the use is




                                                                                        13 of 388
      permitted outright in the C-M zone, the C-2 zone, and therefore, the Outer
      Highway Commercial area of the DCO zone.

      16.41.030       Uses Permitted Outright
      Unless modified pursuant to the following Subsection, uses permitted outright
      in the underlying base zones are permitted outright in the DCO zone, subject
      to the respective zone district boundaries.
      Finding:        As addressed within the C-M zone, permitted uses defined
      under 16.30.010, a restaurant with drive-thru is permitted outright. As defined
      within the DCO provision, uses permitted outright in the underlying base zones
      are permitted outright in the DCO zone. Therefore, this standard is satisfied.

      16.41.050        Development Standards
      The following subsections indicate development standards required in the
      DCO zone. These standards supplement, and in some cases replace, the
      development standards in the underlying base zones. Where the standards
      set forth in the following subsections conflict with standards in the underlying
      base zone, the DCO development standards set forth below supersede the
      base zone standards.
      A.      Setbacks, Floor Area Ratio, Building Footprint and Height Requirements.
      1.      Setbacks. Minimum and maximum setbacks for each DCO subarea are
              described in Table 1 and must meet the following requirements:
      a.      Mechanical units used for the heating/cooling of dwelling units are
      exempt from interior yard and rear yard setback requirements.
      b.      At least x% of the length of each lot frontage shall be developed with a
      building(s) built at the minimum setback from the street lot line (see Table 2
      and Figure 12).
      c.      Where feasible, buildings should be located at one or both street-
      facing corners of a lot.
      d.      At the street intersections identified as gateways in Figure 11
      (Downtown Canby Overlay Zone Map), any new building shall be located at
      the corner of the lot facing the intersection.
Table 1. Setback Requirements

Standards                       CC subarea           TC subarea          OHC subarea

Minimum setback                 0 feet               0 feet              10 feet

Maximum setback from street 10 feet                  15 feet             --
lot lines

Table 2. Street Lot Minimum Setback Requirements

Standards                        CC subarea          TC subarea          OHC subarea

Minimum percentage (x)           60%                 60%                 40%




                                                                                         14 of 388
      Finding:          Taken from pages 18 and 19 of the applicant’s narrative statement
      where this section of the Zoning Ordinance is addressed. As noted under
      16.41.050.A(1)(b.), at least 40-percent of the length of each lot frontage shall be
      developed with a building built at the minimum setback from the street lot line. The
      applicant is seeking a deviation from this standard as part of the Type III process. The
      intent of the base zone and the OHC subarea is to provide a more automobile oriented
      design. Automobile oriented design usually features buildings setback from the
      roadway to allow for off-street parking between the building and the roadway, so that
      parking is easily accessed for automobiles. Additionally, with a drive-thru restaurant,
      vehicle access into and through the order and queuing lanes is essential to insure that
      customers receive their food in a timely and orderly manner. These higher-volume
      vehicle supported uses must allow for easy vehicle access. Therefore, the proposed site
      layout is more conducive to vehicle access into and through the site, versus a layout
      which would meet the building and setback requirements established under the DCO
      overlay standards. Additional landscape screening and pedestrian connectivity into the
      site will create a quality pedestrian experience while also meeting the needs of
      McDonald’s and patrons of the restaurant. Based on this statement and other
      information contained in the applicant’s submittal package, it is recommended that the
      Planning Commission allow the requested deviation in the setback standard for the
      Outer Highway Commercial area of the DCO.


      2.      Floor area ratio, building footprint, and building height. Minimum
      floor area ratio, maximum building footprint, and maximum building height
      requirements for each DCO subarea are described in Table 3 and illustrated in
      Figures 13, 14, and 15. Footprints are exclusive of exterior displays or
      merchandise (e.g., garden centers).
Table 3. Floor Area Ratio Requirements

Standards                        CC subarea          TC subarea          OHC subarea

Minimum floor area ratio         0.8, C-1 zone only 0.4                  0.25

Maximum building footprint 30,000 total              20,000 total        80,000 per use
(square feet)                                                            100,000 all uses
                                                                         within footprint if
                                                                         more than 1 use
                                                                         (see Figure 13)

Maximum building height (see 60 feet                 45 feet             45 feet
Figure 14)
      Finding:         Taken from page 19 of the applicant’s narrative statement. Based on
      the proposed 4,597 SF McDonald’s building footprint and the 0.89 acre site, the
      proposed FAR is 0.12, well below the minimum FAR required under the DCO overlay.
      The applicant is seeking a deviation from the FAR standard as part of the Type III
      process. The requested deviation from the FAR standard is necessary in order to
      adequately site the building and required parking and landscaping elements within the




                                                                                                 15 of 388
0.89 acre site. If the site were to be developed to an FAR of 0.25, the 9,692 SF building
would require 77.5 parking stalls, more than double the proposed parking stalls shown
on the Site Plan. There is not enough area to surface park that many stalls within the
site, necessitating structured parking. This would not be an economically feasible
alternative to the proposed use. The site is too physically constrained to meet the FAR
requirements of the DCO zone. Based on information in the applicant’s submittal
package, including the plan set identified as Exhibit B, staff recommends that the
Planning Commission allow the requested deviation in the FAR requirement of the OHC
subarea pf the DCO zone. This is in recognition of the type of use proposed and the
individual site circumstances.


3.       Screening. All exterior garbage collection areas, recycling collection areas and
mechanical equipment shall be screened with a site obscuring fence, landscaping on
all sides, wall, other enclosure, or architectural element per the requirements below
(see Figure 16 for examples of good screening design).
a.      Location. Wherever possible, locate screened areas away from the street.
b.       Materials. Materials used to construct screening structures shall be consistent
and compatible with the exterior materials on adjacent buildings located on the same
lot as the screened area or located on a contiguously-owned abutting lot, and shall be
consistent with the material requirements of Section 16.41.070.E and 16.41.070.F.
c.       Buffering. Screening structures shall be buffered from surrounding areas on
all sides with landscaping or other buffering elements.
Finding:         As illustrated on the Site Plan and the Landscape Plan of the plan set
identified as Exhibit B of the applicant’s submittal package, the trash enclosure is
located to the rear of the site, on the 2nd avenue site. The material of which the trash
enclosure is made is CMU that will be painted in colors that match those of the primary
restaurant building. In addition, the trash enclosure structure will be landscaped on
three (3) sides to buffer the enclosure from full visibility. Therefore, this standard is
satisfied.
d.       Rooftop structures. Rooftop mechanical structures shall be screened
and not visible from any visible public right-of-way at the same elevation as,
or lower than, the base of the building. Screening structures should be
compatible with the overall building design and may include the following
elements or approaches:
(1)      By providing parapets as tall as the tallest part of the equipment with
a minimum height of 3 feet and 6 inches;
(2)      By incorporating an architectural screen around all sides of the
equipment;
(3)      By setting the equipment back from the building edge with a setback
of at least 3 feet for every 1 foot of building height.
Finding:         All rooftop mechanical equipment will be screened from view
by a parapet on the top of the building. The parapet will be an aluminum trellis
approximately 5 feet, 2 inches in height. This parapet is clearly illustrated on
the Building Elevations sheet of the plan set identified as Exhibit B of the




                                                                                            16 of 388
applicant’s submittal package. The use of this parapet seems to be a standard
feature of the newer McDonald’s and is used on other newly remodeled or
rebuilt McDonald’s. Use of this parapet fulfills the standards of this section of
the chapter.

4.       Parking. Parking areas shall meet the following standards in addition
to all other applicable requirements.
b.       Side of building parking areas. In the CC, TC, and OHC subareas,
parking shall be permitted between a building and an interior lot line that is
not a rear lot line, provided the following standards are met:
(1)`     Parking and maneuvering areas shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from the front lot line;
(2)      A minimum 5 foot wide landscaped strip shall surround and abut the
perimeter of the parking and maneuvering area, except where vehicular
driveways and pedestrian accessways are permitted to interrupt the
landscaped strip, and except where the parking and maneuvering area is part
of a larger parking area in which case a perimeter landscaping strip is not
required between the side of building parking area and the remainder of the
parking area;
(3)      Parking and maneuvering areas, including accessways and driveways,
must not exceed 40 percent of a lot frontage in the TC and CC subareas, or 60
percent of a lot frontage in the OHC subarea;

Finding:           The parking area and drive aisle located at the eastern edge of
the property line should qualify as a parking area between a building and an
interior lot line that is not a rear lot line. This parking area is set back from the
front lot line by approximately 15-feet, although the angled parking does create
a smaller setback distance at the northeast corner of the parking area. To meet
the intent of the landscape strip buffer, a laurel hedge (32 plants) is proposed
along the perimeter of the parking area that abuts the interior lot line.
Combined with the existing fence, the hedge will provide an effective screen
while also allowing access from the adjacent property. The primary driveway
and drive aisle with access from SW 1st Avenue does front a large portion of the
lot frontage, but is setback approximately 5-feet from the ROW. It is
recommended that the Planning Commission approve a small deviation from
the 15-foot setback at the northeast corner of the site, where the parking area
on that side is located. All other standards have been met.


c.       Off-street vehicle parking space reduction. The minimum number of
off-street vehicle parking spaces required for all uses located on a lot, as set
forth in Chapter 16.10, may be reduced by the total number of on-street
vehicle parking spaces located within the width of the frontage of the lot on
which the use or uses are located. Such reduction shall be calculated on a
one-for-one basis, and shall include only parking spaces located on the same
side of the street as the lot frontage. Where an on-street parking space is
located adjacent the frontage of two abutting lots, only the lot adjacent the




                                                                                        17 of 388
larger portion of the parking space may count the entirety of the parking
space towards its off-street parking requirement.

Finding:        There are no specifically proposed on-street vehicle parking
spaces to be used for this project. Therefore, no off-street vehicle parking
reduction is sought, and this standard does not apply.

16.41.060        DCO Site and Design Review Guidelines
A.       Findings and Objectives
Finding:         The Findings and Objectives set forth in the Zoning Ordinance
express the direction the City Council wishes to see for style and design of land
uses and buildings in the commercial areas. With the complete re-build of the
McDonald’s on a larger site, the updated design and more current expression of
the McDonald’s persona will likely be an addition to the overall downtown
character of Canby. Use of materials that are more contemporary will assist in
upgrading the property values in this area of downtown Canby, plus adding
integrity to the downtown area and a sense of place for this use. The use of
pedestrian oriented design within the site, and connections to surrounding
areas helps to define the subject site as an integral landmark within the
downtown area. The architectural elements such as consistency of materials,
colors and patterns, and the upgrading of the overall landscape character of the
site design help give the site an important value that leads to a quality
environment in downtown Canby.
From the applicant’s narrative, the following statements address these Findings
and Objectives. “The proposed McDonald’s materials include a log cabin colored
Hardie plank for the primary horizontal surfacing, with cultured stone for the
secondary material. Both materials help define a sense of place and quality
design that fits within the Canby design aesthetic. The colors and materials
evoke a sense of timelessness, permanence, quality, and strength.”

Through the design, and the explanation of how the new design meets the
appropriate objectives, the applicant has addressed the Findings and Objectives
such that these Findings and Objectives are satisfied.

B.       Applicability
1.       General Applicability
Finding:         Under this section of the Zoning Ordinance, the Design
Standards referenced in this section apply to the proposed McDonald’s re-build.
2.       Sub-Areas
c.       Outer Highway Commercial Sub-Area (OHC)
Outer Highway Commercial Sub-Area (OHC). The design focus in this area is
less about creating a high-quality pedestrian experience, and more about
ensuring that automobile-oriented design is built to the highest standard
possible. While this goal will be largely accomplished through the
development standards (i.e., locating parking lots next to and behind building
and the street, requiring high quality landscaping, particularly in front
setbacks and around parking areas, and requiring that buildings orient to




                                                                                    18 of 388
            walkways), architectural design standards will also aid in this effort. The result
            will be automobile-oriented highway uses that demonstrate high-quality
            design and that evoke a sense of permanence (see Figure 27).
            Finding:         The site of the proposed re-build of McDonald’s is located
            basically the same location as McDonald’s has been located within Canby for
            many years. This site is within the Outer Highway Commercial Sub-Area (OHC),
            which is focused on automobile-oriented highway uses that demonstrates high-
            quality design.

            16.41.070        DCO Site and Design Review Standards
            The following design standards provide a framework for how a building        should
            look, function, and feel. The standards are organized by topic and   consist of the
            following elements:
                    Intent Statement - the big idea or the goal to be accomplished (ex. "protect
                     pedestrians from sun, wind, and rain"). In addition to providing context for
                     specific standards, these statements are used to evaluate applications as part
                     of an alternative review process administered by the City's Design    Review
                     Board (see Section 16.49.035).
                    Standards which provide clear, objective guidance related to specific design
                     elements, in many cases providing options for how to meet a specific goal, and
                     varying by sub-area.
                 Illustrative graphics, including photos and diagrams, with an emphasis
                     on examples of good design found in Canby and other communities.
            Finding:         The applicant acknowledges the purpose of the Intent
            Statement, and the use of Standards and Illustrative graphics within the chapter
            of the Zoning Ordinance is the clear form of guidance in designing a viable
            project that is an asset to the City of Canby.

            A.       Pedestrian oriented ground floor design standards.
            1.       Intent. Design standards in this section are intended to help create an active,
                     inviting street and sidewalk-facing storefronts and entryways that are friendly
                     and easily accessible to passersby. They also will help ensure that the ground
                     floor promotes a sense of interaction between activities in the building and
                     activities in the public realm.
            Finding:          The proposed McDonald’s rebuild portends to convey a sense of
            place through the use of architectural treatments and on-site amenities in the
            form of additional landscaping and pedestrian connections. Furthermore, the
            site has been designed for both vehicle access and pedestrian accessibility into
            and through the site.

            2.       Design standards and applicability.
Standards                                                                                          Applicability

1.   Ground floor windows

   a. Visible transmittance. All commercial ground floor windows must have a Visible Transmittance CC, TC, OHC
(VT) of 0.6 or higher, with the exception of medical and dental offices which may have tinted windows.




                                                                                                                   19 of 388
    b.    Primary Street facing façade - primary façade coverage. Transparent windows shall be used CC: x=60%
along a minimum of x% of the length of the ground-level primary street-facing façade, and along x%
ground-level primary street-facing wall area (See Figure 34). Ground level walls include all exterior wall TC: x=50%
areas up to 10 feet above the finished grade. Primary and secondary street facing facades are defined
in section 16.41.060.                                                                                      OHC: x=50% for buildings with
                                                                                                           less than 6,000 square feet of
                                                                                                           floor area and 25% for
                                                                                                           buildings with more than 6,000
                                                                                                           square feet of floor area or
                                                                                                           located more than 75 feet from
                                                                                                           a lot line.

   c. Secondary Street facing façade - secondary façade coverage. Transparent windows shall be used CC: x=50%
along a minimum of x% of the length of the ground-level secondary street-facing façade, and along x%
of the overall secondary street-facing wall area (See Figure 35). Ground level walls include all exterior TC: x=45%
wall areas up to 10 feet above the finished grade.
                                                                                                          OHC: x=40% for buildings with
                                                                                                          less than 6,000 square feet of
                                                                                                          floor area; 25% for buildings
                                                                                                          with more than 6,000 square
                                                                                                          feet of floor area or located
                                                                                                          more than 75 feet from a lot
                                                                                                          line.

   d.     Alley facing façade coverage. Facades facing alleys shall provide windows along x% of the CC, TC: x=50%; y=25%
length of the alley-facing façade and along y% of the overall wall area of the alley-facing façade. Wall
area shall be measured to a height of 10'-0" above the finished grade.                                   OHC: x=30%; y=20%




            Finding:         As illustrated on the color elevations contained in the plan set
            identified as Exhibit B of the applicant’s submittal package, all glazing is
            described as “1” insulated clear glass”. This type of glass should achieve the
            required Visible Transmittance (VT) of at least 0.6. This will satisfy provision a.
            The primary street facing façade is depicted as the front elevation on the
            Architectural Elevations included under Exhibit B. The front elevation is 463 SF
            between 0 and 10-feet and includes 4 windows totaling and a primary entrance
            with glazing that totals 258 SF for a 56% coverage to meet the 50% primary
            façade coverage requirement of provision b. The secondary street facing façade
            is the non-drive thru side elevation with a total area of 1,030 SF. This side
            incorporates 4 windows and a glazed entrance for a total of 263 SF for coverage
            of 25.5%. This achieves the 25% requirement for buildings within the OHC
            subarea located more than 75-feet from a lot line (provision c.).
            Because there is no alley on or adjacent to the site, provision d. is not
            applicable. Staff concurs that the applicant has fulfilled the standards contained
            in this section.


Standards                                                                                                Applicability

2.   Building entries and doors

   a.    Orientation. All buildings shall have a prominent entry oriented to and directly connected to CC, TC
the sidewalk. When buildings are set back from the sidewalk, a direct, perpendicular connection
between the building and the sidewalk is required. Additional entries may be provided and serve as
principal entries (e.g., oriented to parking areas to the side or rear of buildings). (See Figure 36)




                                                                                                                                 20 of 388
   b.   Transparency. The street-facing building entry door on all buildings should be comprised of at CC, TC, OHC
least 40% transparent glass. The entry door includes any flanking or transom windows. (See Figure 37)

   c. Flanking or transom windows. Commercial and mixed-use building doors shall include flanking CC, TC, OHC
glass windows on either side of the principal door and/or clerestory/transom windows. (See Figure 38).

   d. Design features. Commercial and mixed-use building entries must comply with at least x of the CC: x=3;
following:
                                                                                                    TC: x=2;

                                                                                                           OHC: x=2

      (1)    Recessed entries. If recessed, principal entries shall be recessed a minimum of 3 feet into
the building façade (see Figure 39).

      (2)    Awnings or canopies. These may be used to provide weather protection and a visual
element and meet standards (see Figure 40).

      (3)     Architectural features. Principal entries may be reinforced with prominent architectural
features such as towers, turrets, increased heights, articulated parapets, large storefront windows and
doors, or entry awnings (see Figure 41).

      (4) Decorative features. Entries may be reinforced through the use of decorative exterior light
fixtures (i.e., wall sconces) or decorative features (see Figure 42).

       (5)   Engaged columns or piers may be used to reinforce and highlight entries (see Figure 43).

             Finding:         The following is taken from the applicant’s narrative description
             and response to the requirement of these standards.        “The prominent entry
             to McDonald’s is located on the central portion of the non-drive thru side. As
             shown on the Site Plan, the primary entry is connected to the proposed
             pedestrian access from SW 1st Avenue by a sidewalk along the building
             frontage that connects across the drive aisle to the existing attached
             sidewalk along SW 1st Avenue. The street-facing building entry door is the
             front side, with an entry door that is 95% transparent glass. This entry door also
             includes flanking and transom windows on the side and above the entry. The
             building entries feature yellow metal canopies and aluminum trellises, with
             cultured stone façades to create a visually appealing and pedestrian-scaled
             entry. The cultured stone will project from the hardie plank siding to create an
             additional architectural feature that enhances the primary entry.” Based on
             review of the color elevations as contained in the plan set identified as Exhibit B
             of the applicant’s submittal package, as well as the various narratives submitted
             by the applicant, staff finds that these standards have been met.

Standards                                                                                                  Applicability

3. Transition areas. One of the following design elements (a or b) is required for buildings that span CC only;
more than 75% of a city block or 350 feet. The City encourages smaller property owners to work
together to collaboratively provide similar features in other areas.

  a.     Arcades as defined in section 16.41.060 and that meet all of the following standards:             Encouraged but not required in
                                                                                                           the TC or OHC
      (1)    Front entries must be set back a minimum of 6' (clear) behind an arcade that is located at
the front property line or the adjusted property line.

       (2)    Spacing between columns and/or posts along building be a minimum of 10' (clear) and a




                                                                                                                                  21 of 388
maximum of 25' (clear). (See Figure 44)

     b.     Courtyards or plazas that meet all of the following standards (see Figure 45):

      (1) Courtyards or plazas shall be located along the sidewalk-facing façade of the building within
the front setback. Internal courtyards may be provided but will not satisfy these requirements.

     (2) Courtyard-facing facades shall include windows along a minimum of 50% of the length of the
ground level courtyard-facing façade, and along 25% of the overall courtyard-facing wall area.

          (3)   Courtyards/ plazas shall incorporate special paving (see Figure 46) and/or landscaping.

     (4) Courtyards/plazas shall provide seating, including but not limited to benches, tables, planter
boxes, and other design elements.

                Finding:          The proposed building alignment of the proposed re-build of
                the McDonald’s on the subject site only captures a small portion of the SW 1st
                Avenue city block, well below the 75% or 350-foot threshold. Therefore, staff
                finds that this provision does not apply.

4.              Additional Standards for residential-only buildings.
                Finding:         Because the proposed re-build of McDonald’s on the subject
                site does not include or involve any aspect of residential use, this standard does
                not apply.

                B.       Cohesive Architectural Elements Standards.
                1.       Intent. Build upon downtown Canby's traditional architectural
                         vernacular by incorporating cohesive and repetitive architectural
                         elements into the ground floor of street facing facades.
                Finding:         “As shown on the architectural elevations provided under
                Exhibit B, the ground floor of the street facing façade does incorporate
                cohesive and repetitive architectural elements that tie into downtown Canby’s
                traditional architectural vernacular. The log cabin colored hardie plank siding
                creates a sense of the agricultural or pastoral element of Canby’s architectural
                vernacular, while the cultured stone provides a timeless yet traditional
                architectural vernacular that fits in well with the downtown Canby sense of
                place. The architectural elements are cohesive and repetitive, while also
                meeting the goal of proper pedestrian scale.” This statement from the
                application narrative helps to demonstrate that the applicant recognizes
                Canby’s desire to have some standards to which developers will comply, making
                Canby an interesting, yet unique town. It is staff’s conclusion that the applicant
                will meet the city’s intent as stated above.

                2.         Design Standards and applicability


Standards                                                                                                 Applicability

1.        Architectural bays

                                                                                                          CC, TC: x=30;
                   a. Bay divisions. Ground floors of commercial and mixed-use buildings shall be
                divided into distinct street-facing architectural bays that are no more than x feet on    OHC: x=50
                center. (See Figure 48). For the purpose of this standard, an architectural bay is




                                                                                                                          22 of 388
            defined as the zone between the centerlines of two columns. Applicants are
            encouraged (but not required) to divide the ground floor into an odd (rather than
            even) number of architectural bays.


   b.     Height of bays. For large single-story buildings (greater than 6,000 square feet), taller than 16 OHC
feet, design and decorative elements required in sections 3, 4 and 5 will extend to the top of the ground
floor (i.e., just below the roof, cornice or parapet).

    c.    Design elements. Each architectural bay within a commercial or mixed-use building shall CC: x=3;
incorporate at least x of the following elements (see Figure 49):
                                                                                                  TC: x=2;

                                                                                                          OHC: x=2

     (1)    Engaged columns or piers.

     (2)    Transom windows over doorways.

     (3)    Storefront cornice or beltcourse

       (4)    Canopies, awnings, or overhangs provided along a minimum of 50 percent of the overall
street-facing building length.

     (5)    Storefront frieze or sign band.

     (6)    Bulkheads.

   d.    Decorative accents. Each architectural bay within a commercial or mixed-use building shall CC: x=3;
incorporate at least x of the following elements (See Figure 50):
                                                                                                    TC: x=2;

                                                                                                          OHC: x=2

     (1)    Projecting window sills (12 to 24 feet above grade).

     (2)    Horizontal and vertical window mullions.

       (3)      Building lighting (minimum of 2 lights), including wall sconces, pendants,
gooseneck fixtures, or lighting recessed into awnings. Wall-mounted fluorescent lights
and internally lit awnings are not permitted.

      (4)     Medallions (minimum of 2).

      (5)     Projecting or blade signs (8 to 12 foot clearance from bottom of sidewalk).

            Finding:         While the applicant has provided bays as an architectural
            feature of the new building, the height is not controlled as part of the standard
            because the building is less than 6,000 square feet in area. However, based on
            the applicant’s statement under this section, the necessary and required
            elements under c. of this table have been included in the overall design. “The
            front elevation and the non-drive-thru side elevations both feature bay divisions
            created by changes in material treatments to the building façade. The longest
            portion of the non-drive-thru side elevation without a bay division is
            approximately 40-feet. Each architectural bay along the building facade
            features an aluminum trellis that projects from the building by at least four-feet.
            All building entries feature a transom window over the doorway and there is a
            signature McDonald’s storefront sign band located on the upper portion of the
            front elevation that does project off the roof. Building lighting will include wall
            sconces and pendant lights to meet the decorative accents design standard.”
            The design includes the architectural bays required in this standard, which are
            not more than 50 feet in dimension.       The applicant’s design includes at least
            two (2) of the Design Elements and two (2) of the Decorative accents, thus
            meeting this standard.




                                                                                                                     23 of 388
C.      Integrated building façade standards.

         1.      Intent. Build upon Canby's traditional downtown architecture
         by creating an attractive and unified building façade that celebrates
         ground floor activities, the top of the building (where the edifice
         meets the sky), and everything in between.
Finding:         The design of the re-built McDonald’s does a reasonable job of
reflecting Canby’s traditional downtown architectural style, and bringing the
design of the McDonald’s up to date. The ground floor activities are the crux of
the McDonald’s activities throughout the site and the building design does a
good job of defining the top of the building. As such, staff believes that the
applicant has satisfied this standard.

        2.       Design standards and applicability.
Finding:         According to the applicant’s statement, “the vertical      and
horizontal treatments to the building provide a well defined base, middle,
and top of building. The vertical mass is broken up through changes in
material that transition from the primary hardie plank to glazing and
aluminum trellis parapets that are capped by a roofline of aluminum and metal.
These horizontal bands are changes in material that are more than 8-inches in
height, with projections created for the aluminum trellises and yellow canopies.
Staff agrees that the building is well defined in terms of its ground floor, middle
and top of the building, and the use of Hardy plank siding, plus decorative rock,
aluminum trellis, transom window over the doorways, and horizontal bands of
material changes all combine to satisfy this set of standards.

D.       Corner Intersection Standards
         Finding:        By the nature of the McDonald’s style, and the location
in the C-M zone, this standard does not apply to uses in the Outer Highway
Commercial subarea of the Downtown Canby Overlay. Therefore, this standard
does not apply.

E.      Materials standards.
1.       Intent. Use building materials that evoke a sense of permanence and
are compatible with Canby's business areas and the surrounding built
environment.
         Finding:        McDonald’s itself has become a permanent fixture in
neighborhood and auto oriented commercial places within most cities and
towns these days, and the re-building of this McDonald’s will continue to evoke
a feeling of permanence to this area of the Outer Highway Commercial subarea.
The building materials chosen for the McDonald’s rebuild do evoke a sense of
permanence that is compatible with Canby business areas and the surrounding
built environment. Staff concurs that the applicant has met the intent of this
standard.




                                                                                      24 of 388
2.      Design standards and applicability. Materials allowed in the CC, TC
and OHC sub-areas are summarized in the following table in terms of primary,
secondary and accent materials. Other materials may be permitted through
the design review process described in Chapter 16.49.
                 Standards                                   OHC

        Primary materials – 70% or             Brick
        more of building façade,
        excluding windows and                  Stone
        transparent doors.
                                               Stucco/EIFS

                                               Wood siding

                                               Hardy Plank

                                               Split-face CMU

                                               Tilt-up concrete

                                               Spandrel glass curtain walls

        Secondary materials – up to            Brick
        25% of building façade,
        excluding windows and                  Stone
        transparent doors.
                                               Stucco/EIFS

                                               CMU (split and ground face)

                                               Concrete

                                               Wood siding

                                               Hardy Plank

                                               Spandrel glass curtain walls

        Accent materials – up to 10%           Brick
        of building façade, excluding
        windows and transparent                Stone
        doors.
                                               Stucco/EIFS

                                               CMU (split and ground face)

                                               Concrete

                                               Wood siding

                                               Hardy Plank

                                               Spandrel glass curtain walls

                                               Metal




                                                                               25 of 388
                                                 Ceramic tile

                                                 Wood, vinyl and/or metal for
                                                 trim

        Roof materials (sloped roofs             Metal
        only)
                                                 Wood shingles

                                                 Tile



        Finding:        The applicant describes the use of primary and
secondary materials, plus accent materials and roof materials in the following
excerpt. Staff agrees with the applicant that the proposed design meets this set
of standards. “The primary material selected for the Canby McDonald’s is a
log cabin colored hardie plank siding, which is an allowed material as listed
above. The hardie plank encompasses 56% of the building façade,
excluding windows and transparent doors. The secondary material is
cultured stone, which encompasses 16% of the building façade. Accent
materials are the metal and aluminum canopies and parapet trellises that
comprise 28% of the building façade. The taller parapet is needed to effectively
screen the rooftop mechanical units.”

F.      Color palette

1.       Intent. Use colors on buildings that are generally compatible with
Canby's business areas and the surrounding built environment.
2.       Design standards and applicability. Applicants are strongly
encouraged to use colors from, or consistent with, the Sherwin-Williams Arts
and Crafts color palette (i.e. with the same paint color codes). Additional
information about this color palette is available from the City of Canby, Canby
Business Development and/or the Sherwin-Williams Web site.
         Finding:         The use of colors for the Hardy plank siding and the
accent rock, plus the door and window frames can generally be found in the
desired color palette examples. As stated by the applicant, “aside from the
yellow metal canopies, the selected colors are generally subdued and earth-
tone to create a look and feel that is compatible and complementary to the
existing Canby business areas and surrounding built environment. The applicant
will work with the City to address any color palette concerns during the Site and
Design Review process.” To this point, the applicant has made a good faith
effort to satisfy the color standards.

Chapter 16.43 – Outdoor Lighting Standards

16.43.030        Applicability.
The outdoor lighting standards in this section apply to the following:
A.     New uses, buildings, and major additions or modifications:




                                                                                    26 of 388
1.      For all proposed new land uses, developments, buildings, and
structures that require a building permit, all outdoor lighting fixtures shall
meet the requirements of this Code.
        Finding:        The re-built McDonald’s is required by this section of
the Zoning Ordinance to meet the standards for outdoor lighting. Through the
design of the new building, and the site layout of the subject site, the applicant
will meet these standards, as illustrated in the plan set identified as Exhibit B of
the submittal package.

16.43.040        Lighting Zones.
A.      Zoning districts designated for residential uses (R-1, R-1.5 and R-2) are
designated Lighting Zone One (LZ 1). All other zoning districts are designated
Lighting Zone Two (LZ 2).
        Finding:         By virtue of the fact that the subject site is totally within
the C-M zone, the site is designated Lighting Zone Two (LZ-2).

B.        The designated Lighting Zone of a parcel or project shall determine the
          limitations for lighting as specified in this ordinance.


 Table 16.43.040 Lighting Zone descriptions



 Zone              Ambient Illumination       Representative Locations


 LZ 1              Low                        Rural areas, low-density urban neighbor-hoods and districts, residential historic
                                              districts. This zone is intended to be the default for residential areas.



 LZ 2              Medium                     High-density urban neighborhoods, shopping and commercial districts, industrial
                                              parks and districts. This zone is intended to be the default condition for
                                              commercial and industrial districts in urban areas.




        Finding:        Since the site is within the C-M zoning district, and is
designated by the Lighting Zone Two (LZ-2), the Ambient Illumination should be
at a “medium” standard. Based on statements by the applicant, this standard
will be met.

16.43.050        Exempt Lighting.
        Finding:         The proposed re-build on the subject site does not
include any lighting from any of the A. through J. listings of this section.
Therefore, this section will not be applicable since no exempt lighting is part of
the overall design plan.

16.43.060         Prohibited Light and Lighting
         Finding:         After a review of the Zoning Ordinance and the plan set
identified as Exhibit B, as well as the written narrative, the proposed re-build of




                                                                                                                  27 of 388
McDonald’s does not include any prohibited light or lighting. Therefore, this
section is not applicable to the application.

16.43.070         Luminaire Lamp Wattage, Shielding, and Installation
Requirements.
A.       All outdoor lighting shall comply with the limits to lamp wattage and
the shielding requirements in Table 16.43.070 per the applicable Lighting
Zone. These limits are the upper limits. Good lighting design will usually
result in lower limits.
         Finding:        The applicant states an understanding of these
requirements and has provided a Lighting Plan with detail cut sheets for the
lights. The Lighting Plan is included under Exhibit B. Cut sheets for the fixture
head and the pole are also included. The Lighting Plan indicates that the
proposed lighting fixtures for the site will be satisfactory and will meet all
required standards.

B.       The city may accept a photometric test report, lighting plan,
demonstration or sample, or other satisfactory confirmation that the
luminaire meets the requirements of the shielding classification.
         Finding:       The applicant has included a photometric plan as part of
the Lighting Plan under Exhibit B. This photometric plan displays the luminaire
and foot candling throughout the site. This photometric plan appears to meet
the city’s requirements and standards.

C.      Such shielded fixtures must be constructed and installed in such a
manner that all light emitted by the fixture complies with the specification
given. This includes all the light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the
lamp or by a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from
any part of the fixture. Any structural part of the fixture providing this
shielding must be permanently affixed.
        Finding:          A photometric plan is included as the Lighting Plan
under Exhibit B. This photometric plan displays the luminaire and foot candling
throughout the site. As such, the selected fixtures proposed as part of the
Lighting Plan and cut sheets should meet the city’s requirements and standards.

D.        All canopy lighting must be fully shielded. However, indirect upward
light is permitted under an opaque canopy provided that no lamp or vertical
element of a lens or diffuser is visible from beyond the canopy and such that
no direct upward light is emitted beyond the opaque canopy.
          Finding:         The applicant states an understanding of these
requirements and has provided a Lighting Plan with detail cut sheets for the
lights. The Lighting Plan is included under Exhibit B. As such, the proposed
lighting plan appears to meet the city’s requirements and standards.

E.      Landscape features shall be used to block vehicle headlight trespass
while vehicles are at an external point of service (i.e. drive-thru aisle).




                                                                                      28 of 388
                  Finding:       The Landscape Plan does not identify any plantings that
         would block vehicle headlight trespass onto Hwy99E and the properties across
         that street. However, the stopping point for the drive-through window may be
         set far enough back that vehicle headlights may be dispersed enough so as to
         not be a major problem. However, this may be an issue the Planning
         Commission wishes to discuss at further length with the applicant.

         F.       All facade lighting must be restricted to the facade surface. The
         margins of the facade shall not be illuminated. Light trespass is prohibited. The
         sides of commercial buildings without a customer entrance shall not be lit.
                  Finding:         The applicant states, “All façade lighting will be
         restricted to the façade surface and light trespass will be restricted.” However,
         there is no discussion of how the façade lighting will be restricted. The Planning
         Commission may wish a more extensive addressing of this standard.

         Table 16.43.070             Luminaire Maximum Lumens and Required Shielding
                        Table 16.43.070 – Luminaire Maximum Wattage and Required Shielding

Lighting Zone   Fully Shielded     Shielded            Partly                          Unshielded
                                                      Shielded      (Shielding is highly encouraged. Light trespass is
                                                                                       prohibited.)

                                                 None             Low voltage landscape lighting and temporary
LZ 1                 150              60
                                                 Permitted        holiday lighting.


                                                                  Landscape and facade lighting 100 watts or less;
LZ 2                 450             100         60
                                                                  ornamental lights of 60 watts or less.

                  Finding:          “As shown on the Lighting Plan under Exhibit B and the
         attached cut sheets, the proposed fixtures are RSB/RCS 320 watt metal halides.
         The light is fully shielded to meet the maximum wattage constraints listed in the
         table above.” Based on review of the Lighting Plan and the head and pole cut
         sheets, the LZ-2 lighting zone limits the fully shielded fixture head to 450
         wattage. The applicant will be using 320 watt fixtures and lighting, thus meeting
         this standard.

         16.43.080       Height Limits
         Pole and surface mounted luminaires under this section must conform with
         Section 16.43.070.
         A.      Lighting mounted onto poles or any structures intended primarily for
                 mounting of lighting shall not exceed a mounting height of 40% of the
                 horizontal distance of the light pole from the property line, nor a maximum
                 height according to Table 16.43.080, whichever is lower. The following
                 exceptions apply:
         1.       Lighting for residential sports courts and pools shall not exceed 15 feet above
                  court or pool deck surface.
         2.       Lights specifically for driveways, and then only at the intersection of the road




                                                                                                                         29 of 388
           providing access to the site, may be mounted at any distance relative to the
           property line, but may not exceed the mounting height listed in Table
           16.43.080.
3.          Mounting heights greater than 40% of the horizontal distance to the property
           line but no greater than permitted by Table 16.43.080 may be used provided
           that the luminaire is side-shielded toward the property line.
4.       Landscape lighting installed in a tree. See the Definitions section.
5.       Street and bicycle path lights.
         Finding:         The Lighting Plan under Exhibit B illustrates the
location of lighting within the McDonald’s parking area, drive aisles, and
pedestrian accesses. There is no lighting proposed for street and bicycle paths,
although those off-site features are generally lit by the city’s own street light
system. When combined with McDonald’s “spill over” or “trespass” of the
lighting on the subject site, it appears that the adjacent streets, pedestrian
pathways and sidewalks, and any designated bicycle path will be lit.

Table 16.43.080 – Maximum Lighting Mounting Height in Feet

Lighting                    Lighting                  Lighting                      All Other
Zone                        for                       for                           Lighting
                            Driveways                 Walkways
                            , Parking                 , Plazas
                            and                       and other
                            Transit                   Pedestria
                                                      n Areas

LZ 1                        35.0                      18.0                          8.0

LZ 2                        37.5                      18.0                          15.0


           Finding:        As noted on the Lighting Plan included under Exhibit B, the
           proposed mounting height is 21-feet, well below the maximum height
           allowance for driveways, parking and transit of 37.5 feet in the LZ-2 Lighting
           Zone. These lights do spill over into pedestrian walkways, although no specific
           lighting is proposed along pedestrian sidewalks. This “spill over” into the
           pedestrian walkways will provide some light in addition to local street lights.
           The Planning Commission may ask the applicant about this “spill over” lighting,
           how much it might be expected to be, and how far it might extend, in a useful
           sense.




                                                                                                30 of 388
Figure 16.43.2:




       16.43.090         Lighting Controls
       The city strongly recommends the use of timers and/or motion detectors on
       outdoor lighting, and that motion detectors be set to minimize unnecessary
       activation. For example, motion detectors for entryway or driveway lights
       should not activate for off-site pedestrians or cars.
                Finding:         Staff can find no discussion of Lighting Controls, and the
       issues that are contained in the statement above. Understanding that there
       must be some controls of these lights, the Planning Commission might inquire of
       the applicant about Lighting Controls.

       16.43.100       Exceptions to Standards
              Finding:          None of the lighting at the proposed re-build of the
       McDonald’s drive through restaurant is one of the “excepted” lighting standards
       contained in this section. As such, this section does not apply.

       16.43.110       Lighting Plan Required
       A lighting plan shall be submitted with the development or building permit
       application and shall include:
       A.       A site plan showing the location of all buildings and building heights, parking,
       and pedestrian areas.
       B.      The location and height (above grade) of all proposed and existing luminaires
       on the subject property.
       C.      Luminaire details including type and wattage of each lamp, shielding and
       cutoff information, and a copy of the manufacturer’s specification sheet for each
       luminaire.
       D.      Control descriptions including type of control (time, motion sensor, etc.), the
       luminaire to be controlled by each control type, and the control schedule when
       applicable.




                                                                                                   31 of 388
E.       Any additional information necessary to demonstrate compliance with the
standards in this section. (Ord.1338, 2010)
         Finding:         A Lighting Plan is required and provided under Exhibit B
of the applicant’s overall application package. The Lighting Plan does show the
location of all buildings and the height of all proposed luminaires. Luminaire
details are shown on the spec sheet also included under Exhibit B. Fixture
information is included as cut sheets as part of the Lighting Plan. Under D.
above, no control plan has been submitted, and there is no information about
how the on-site lighting will be controlled, timed, etc. The Planning Commission
may wish to discuss this issue with the applicant.

Chapter 16.49 – Site and Design Review

16.49.035      Application for Site and Design Review
A.     For projects in the Downtown Canby Overlay Zone, applicants may choose one
       of the following two processes:

1.       Type II – If the applicant meets all applicable site and design review
standards set forth in Chapters 16.41 and 16.49; applicant shall submit a Type
II application for approval pursuant to the approval criteria set forth in
16.49.040.2; or
2.       Type III – If the applicant proposes the use of alternative methods or
materials to meet the intent of the site and design review standards set forth
in Section 16.41.070, the applicant shall submit a Type III application for
approval pursuant to the approval criteria set forth in 16.49.040.3. The
applicant must still meet all applicable requirements of Chapter 16.49.
         Finding:          The applicant is submitting for a Type III Site and Design
Review. A Type III process is proposed in order to address: (1 )the FAR and (2)
building setback requirements, as well as (3) the building material coverage
requirements established within the Downtown Canby Overlay provisions.

16.49.040      Criteria and standards.
A.     In review of a Type III Site and Design Review Application described in Section
       16.49.035.B, the Board shall, in exercising or performing its powers, duties or
       functions, determine whether there is compliance with the following A
       through D, and with Criteria 4, 5, and 6 below:
1.      The proposed site development, including the site plan, architecture,
landscaping and graphic design, is in conformance with the standards of this
and other applicable city ordinances insofar as the location, height and
appearance of the proposed development are involved; and
2.      The proposed design of the development is compatible with the
design of other developments in the same general vicinity; and
3.      The location, design, size, color and materials of the exterior of all
structures and signs are compatible with the proposed development and
appropriate to the design character of other structures in the same vicinity.
        Finding:        This Type III submittal package includes a response to
applicable ordinance requirements, with supporting studies and plans as




                                                                                         32 of 388
supporting background documents to reflect a site design that considers
architectural elements, vehicle access into and through the site, pedestrian
connection into and through the site, as well as site landscaping and lighting to
meet the code standards.

The proposed McDonald’s rebuild is compatible with the design of other similar
developments in the general vicinity. Drive through restaurants are well
represented along Hwy99E in Canby, and are a unique type of site plan and
design that has become a part of every highway commercial development.

The proposed building and site improvements are designed with
complementary design elements including paving patterns, landscaping, and
pedestrian accessways that are typical of the drive through restaurant
commercial style to create a viable and recognizable pedestrian environment.
The project design elements are complementary to the outer highway
commercial subarea which caters to vehicle uses.

4.      The proposed development incorporates the use of LID best
management practices whenever feasible based on site and soil conditions.
LID best management practices include, but are not limited to, minimizing
impervious surfaces, designing on-site LID stormwater management facilities,
and retaining native vegetation.
        Finding:        The project uses a combination of LID rain gardens and
stormwater catch basins that connect to a main in SW 1st Avenue. Stormwater
design and BMPs are outlined in the Stormwater Report prepared by Cardno
included under Exhibit D.

5.       The Board shall, in making its determination of compliance with
subsections B through D above, use the matrix in Table 16.49.040 to
determine compatibility unless this matrix is superseded by another matrix
applicable to a specific zone or zones under this title. An application is
considered to be compatible, in regards to subsections B, C, and D above, if
the following conditions are met:
a.       The development accumulates a minimum of 70 percent of the total
possible number of points from the list of design criteria in Table 16.49.040;
and
b.       At least 15 percent of the points used to comply with (a) above must
be from the list of LID Elements in Table 16.49.040. (Ord. 1338, 2010).
         Finding:         Table 16.49.040 is reproduced below from the
applicant’s submittal package with the proposed scoring that coincides with the
project highlighted in black. The applicant proposes a total of 45 points to be
awarded with 13 points being derived from the LID elements. A total of 45
points represent 63.3-percent of the total with 28.8-percent of the total derived
from LID elements consistent with this requirement. Staff has review Table
16.49.040 and agrees with the point totals the applicant has assigned to the
project.




                                                                                    33 of 388
Staff has reviewed the various documents submitted by the applicant, as well as
the narrative responses to the criteria, requirements and standards and has
determined that the design meets the intent of the various sections of the
Zoning Ordinance.

C.       In review of a Type III Site and Design Review Application, the Board
shall, in exercising or performing its powers, duties or functions, determine
whether there is compliance with the INTENT of the design review standards
set forth in this Ordinance.
         Finding:         As addressed in this narrative and all supporting
documents, this Type III Site and Design Review application is in compliance
with the intent of the design review standards set forth in this ordinance. Staff
believes the general intent of the DCO and the OHC are met by the proposed
layout and site amenities shown on-site. Therefore, this standard has been met.

D.      The Board shall, in making its determination of compliance with the
above requirements, be guided by the objectives and standards set forth in
this Ordinance. It must be demonstrated that all required public facilities and
services are available, or will become available through the development, to
adequately meet the needs of the proposed development. If the site and
design review plan includes utility facilities or public utility facility, then the
City Planner shall determine whether those aspects of the proposed plan
comply with applicable standards.
        Finding          This project is a re-build of an existing McDonald’s drive
through restaurant, where all previous public facilities were extended to the
site. This proposed redevelopment only enhances the existing facilities by
providing greater access, additional landscaping, site lighting, and a more
contemporary building design with architectural treatment to better convey a
sense of place.

E.      The Board shall, in making its determination of compliance with the
requirements set forth, consider the effect of its action on the availability and cost of
needed housing. The Board shall not use the requirements of this section to exclude
needed housing types. However, consideration of these factors shall not prevent the
Board from imposing conditions of approval necessary to meet the requirements of
this section. The costs of such conditions shall not unduly increase the cost of housing
beyond the minimum necessary to achieve the purposes of this ordinance.
        Finding:         Because housing is not a part of the project, this standard does
not apply to this application.

F.      As part of the site and design review, the property owner may apply for
approval to cut trees in addition to those allowed in Chapter 12.32, the city Tree
Ordinance. The granting or denial of said application will be based on the criteria in
Chapter 12.32. The cutting of trees does not in and of itself constitute change in the
appearance of the property which would necessitate application for site and design
review. (Ord. 848, Part III, section 2, 1991; Ord. 955 section 24 & 25, 1996; Ord 1237,
2007, Ord 1296, 2008)




                                                                                            34 of 388
                   Finding:       There are no proposed impacts to any public trees located
          within the public ROW. The trees located along the eastern property will be removed to
          facilitate the melding of the McDonald’s rebuild into the existing adjacent Classic Pool
          and Spa site. The trees located along the southern property boundary adjacent to SW
          2nd Avenue will be removed to facilitate the drive-throughs, rain garden, and trash
          enclosure area. Therefore, since no public trees are involved, this standard is not
          applicable.

          The following Table 16.59.040 Site Design Review Menu has been completed by the
          applicant, and is taken from the applicant’s overall application package. Staff has
          reviewed the scorings created by the applicant, and basically agree with those scorings.

                                      Table 16.49.040 Site Design Review Menu
       Required for approval: 70% of total possible points (15% of which must be from LID elements)
  Design Criteria                                                Possible Points

Parking                         0                         1                           2            3   4
 Screening of loading
  facilities from public
            right-of-way   Not screened           Partially screened            Fully screened     -   -
   Parking lot lighting
             provided           No                       Yes                           -           -   -
      Parking location
    (behind building is
                  best)       Front                      Side                       Behind         -   -
   Number of parking
spaces provided (% of
   minimum required)          >120%                   101-120%                      100%           -   -
Screening       of
Storage Areas and
Utility Boxes                   0                         1                           2            3   4
     Trash storage is
  screened from view
 by solid wood fence,
      masonry wall or
          landscaping           No                       Yes                          --           -   -

     Trash storage is
   located away from          0-10 feet
    adjacent property      from adjacent                                         >25 feet from
                lines.        property     11-25 feet from adjacent property   adjacent property   -   -



     Utility equipment,
     including rooftop
          equipment, is
  screened from view.      Not screened           Partially screened            Fully screened

Access                          0                         1                           2            3   4
Distance of access to
 nearest intersection.       ≤70 feet                71 - 100 feet                 >100 feet       -   -
                                                                                   Walkways
                                                                                 connecting all
                                                                                     public
 Pedestrian walkways                                                           streets/sidewalks
  from public street to    One entrance                                            to building
     building entrance.     connected.                     -                       entrances       -   -




                                                                                                           35 of 388
                                      Table 16.49.040 Site Design Review Menu
        Required for approval: 70% of total possible points (15% of which must be from LID elements)
   Design Criteria                                               Possible Points


                                                                                   Walkways
                                                                                 connecting all
 Pedestrian walkways                                                            parking areas to
   from parking lot to                                                              building
   building entrance.       No walkways        Walkway next to building            entrances

Tree Retention                   0                         1                           2               3           4



  Percentage of trees
            retained           <10%                     10-50%                      51-75%           >75%          -
 Replacement of trees
   removed (percent of
  those recommended
        for retention in
       arborist report)        <50%                      ≥50%                           -              -           -

Signs                            0                         1                           2               3           4
   Dimensional size of
  sign (% of maximum
            permitted)         >75%                     50-75%                       <50%              -           -
Similarity of sign color
      to building color      Not similar           Somewhat similar                  Similar           -           -

        Pole sign used          Yes                       No                            -              -           -
Building
Appearance                       0                         1                           2               3           4




        Style (similar to                  Somewhat similar (1 or 2 points possible depending on
         surroundings)       Not similar                    level of similarity)                       -           -
  Color (subdued and
             similar to
surroundings is better)       Neither             Similar or subdued                  Both             -           -
   Material (concrete,
   wood and brick are
                 best)        Either 1 or 2 points may assigned at the descretion of the Site and Design Review Board

       Size of building      >20,000
     (smaller is better)    square feet           ≤20,000 square feet                   -              -           -
Provision of public art
 (i.e. murals, statues,
fountains, decorative
       bike racks, etc)          No                                                                              Yes

Landscaping                      0                         1                           2               3           4




        Number of non-
         required trees                     At least one tree per 500 square
              provided            -                feet of landscaping.                 -              -           -
 Amount of grass (less
  grass is better) (% of
total landscaped area)         >50%                     25-50%                       <25%              -           -




                                                                                                                        36 of 388
                                   Table 16.49.040 Site Design Review Menu
       Required for approval: 70% of total possible points (15% of which must be from LID elements)
   Design Criteria                                          Possible Points
Low          Impact
Development (LID)             0                      1                            2           3          4
      Use of pervious
paving materials (% of
     total paved area)     <10%                      -                         10-50%      51-75%      >75%
                                                                                                        Park
                                                                                                       (public
                                                                                                           or
                                                                                                      privately
                                                                                                       owned
   Provision of park or                                                                                   for
  open space area for                                                                                   public
            public use      None                     -                        Open space      -          use)
        Use of drought
   tolerant species* in     <25%                                                           51-75%      >75%
    landscaping (% of      drought                                       25-50% drought    drought    drought
           total plants)   tolerant                  -                       tolerant      tolerant   tolerant
Provision of additional
    interior parking lot
    landscaping (% of
   minimum required)       100%                  101-110%                     111-120%     >120%          -
  Provision of an eco-
roof or rooftop garden
 (% of total roof area)    <10%                      -                            -        10-50%      >50%
   Parking integrated
        within building
      footprint (below-
     grade, structured
parking, or tuck-under
   parking) (% of total
       on-site parking)    <10%                      -                            -        10-50%      >50%
        Disconnecting
 downspouts from city
  stormwater facilities
    (existing buildings                                                   All downspouts
                  only)     None        Some downspouts disconnected       disconnected       -           -
  Shared parking with
     adjacent uses or
        public parking
  structure (% of total
      required parking
              spaces)       None                   <50%                         ≥50%          -           -
      Provision of rain
 gardens/bioretention
 areas for stormwater
     runoff (% of total
   landscaped area)         None                     -                         10-50%      51-75%      >75%
*Drought    tolerant
species per Metro's
list.                                                Total Possible Points = 71




                                                                                                                  37 of 388
Total Points Earned: __________45______ (42.6 points required for 60%)

Total LID Points Earned: _____13_______(7.1 required for 10%)

16.49.050         Conditions placed on site and design review approvals
A.      A site and design review approval may include restrictions and
conditions. These restrictions and conditions shall be reasonably conceived
to:
1.      Protect the public from the potentially deleterious effects of the
proposal; and/or
2.      Fulfill the need for services created, increased or in part attributable to
the proposal, and/or
3.      Further the implementation of the requirements of the Canby
Municipal Code.
        Finding:          It is both practical, reasonable, and necessary to place
some conditions on the approval of this project in order to insure complete
compliance with all requirements and standards. Such conditions are included
at the conclusion of this staff report.

B.       The following types of conditions may be contemplated, and the
listing below is intended to be illustrative only and not to be construed as a
limitation of the authority granted by this section.
1.       Development Schedule;
2.       Dedications, Reservation;
3.       Construction and Maintenance Guarantees;
4.       Plan Modification;
5.       Off-site Improvements;
6.       Other Approvals;
7.       Access Limitation; and
8.       Screening.
         Finding:        Conditions in these and other categories may be added
at the behest of the Planning Commission, provided that the conditions are
clear and objective and are based on facts in the record.

16.49.065       Bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
Developments coming under design review shall meet the following standards:
A.       The internal walkway system shall be extended to the boundaries of
the property to adjoining properties developed or zoned for commercial,
public, or multi-family uses. The walkway shall connect to an existing walkway
system on adjoining property or be located so as to provide for development
of a logical connection in the future when the adjoining property is developed
or redeveloped.
         Finding:        As illustrated on the Site Plan and Landscape Plan under
Exhibit B, the internal walkway system is extended to the boundaries of the
property to connect to the existing attached sidewalks located along SW 1st
Avenue (Hwy99E), Birch Street, and SW 2nd Avenue. Thus the pedestrian and
bicycle routes to and through the immediate vicinity are connected, and are




                                                                                      38 of 388
usable by patrons, employees and customers of McDonald’s, as well as the
general public moving through this area.

B.       On-site facilities shall be provided to accommodate safe and
convenient pedestrian and bicycle access within new subdivisions, multi-
family developments, planned development, shopping centers, and
commercial districts, and connecting to adjacent residential areas and
neighborhood activity centers. Residential developments shall include streets
with sidewalks and accessways.
         Finding:           As illustrated on the Site Plan and Landscape Plan under
Exhibit B, on-site facilities are provided to accommodate safe and convenient
pedestrian and bicycle access through the site and to adjacent properties. The
primary pedestrian and bicycle access runs from the SW 1st Avenue (Hwy99E)
frontage into the site, where five bicycle parking stalls are located within the
required distance of the primary McDonald’s entrance.

C.       For new office parks and commercial development:
1.       At least one sidewalk connection between the proposed development
         and each abutting commercial or office property shall be provided.
         One connection shall also be provided to each neighborhood.
2.       Walkways shall be provided to the street for every 300 feet of
         developed frontage.
3.       Walkways shall be direct with minimal driveway crossings.
4.       Walkways shall be linked to the internal circulation of the building.
5.       Walkways shall be at least five feet wide and shall be raised, or have
different paving materials when crossing driveways or other vehicle
maneuvering areas. (Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000).
         Finding:        As illustrated on the Site Plan and Landscape Plan under
Exhibit B, primary pedestrian and bicycle access runs from the SW 1st Avenue
(Hwy99E) frontage into the site, where five bicycle parking stalls are located
within a minimal distance of the primary McDonald’s entrance. This pedestrian
and bicycle path into the site connects to the attached sidewalk along SW 1st
Avenue (Hwy99E), which then continues and connects to the Birch Street and
SW 2nd Avenue attached sidewalk. The internal pedestrian access is 5-feet and
does show a striped pattern when crossing the vehicle drive aisle just north of
the building. Thus, the requirements and standards of this section appear to
have been satisfied.

D.      Use of permeable surfacing materials for walkways is encouraged
whenever site and soil conditions make it feasible. Permeable surfacing
includes, but is not limited to, paving blocks, turf blocks, and porous asphalt.
All permeable surfacing shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in
accordance with the Canby Public Works Design Standards. (Ord. 1339, 2010)
        Finding:          According to this standard, use of permeable surfacing
for walkways is encouraged, but is not mandatory. McDonald’s plans to use
standard paving materials for the walkways, with painted striping where these




                                                                                       39 of 388
walkways cross vehicle routes. Use of permeable surfacing tends to be a high
cost maintenance item, and may not be practical for all types of developments.

16.49.080         General provisions for landscaping.
A.       The standards set forth in this section are minimum standards for
landscaping.
         Finding:         The standards provided by the applicant as part of the
overall application reflect that these landscaping standards are satisfied.

C.      The minimum area requirement for landscaping for developments coming
under design review shall be the percentage of the total land area to be developed as
follows:
1.    Fifteen (15) percent for all industrial and commercial zones (except the
Downtown-Commercial zone, but including the Commercial-Residential zone).
2.      Seven and one-half (7.5) percent for the Downtown-Commercial zone.
3.       Thirty (30) percent for all residential zones.
         Finding:        The subject site is in the C-M (Heavy Commercial
Manufacturing) zone, creating the requirement that the minimum area
requirement for landscaping is 15-percent (item 1. Above). As illustrated on the
Site Plan and Landscape Plan, the total landscape area is 7,750 SF or nearly 19
percent (actually 19.99 percent), well above the minimum requirement of 15
percent, or 5,815 square feet. As such, this standard is fulfilled.

D.       LID stormwater management facilities, such as rain gardens and
bioretention areas, may be counted toward the minimum landscaping
requirement when they are located on private property. LID facilities in the
public right-of-way cannot be counted toward the minimum landscaping
requirement. The integration of LID stormwater management facilities within
required landscaping must be approved by the city and shall comply with the
design and construction standards set forth in the Canby Public Works Design
Standards.
         Finding:          A LID rain garden is proposed along the southeast
corner of the site, directly adjacent to the proposed drive-thru. This rain garden
is on private property, along the 2nd Avenue property line and sidewalk. As
illustrated on the Utility Plan under Exhibit B, a cross-section of the LID garden
shows the proposed materials and design of the rain garden. This rain garden
satisfies tis standard.

E.       Trees and other plant materials to be retained shall be identified on
the landscape plan. The Site and Design Review Board encourages the
retention, to the extent practicable, of existing healthy trees and vegetation.
         Finding:        Trees and other plant materials to be retained are
illustrated on the Landscape Plan (Sheet L1.0) under Exhibit B. Several healthy
trees and frontage landscaping are proposed to be retained along the corner of
SW 2nd Avenue and Birch Street, as well as a tree located along SW 1st Avenue
(Hwy99E).




                                                                                        40 of 388
F.      During the construction process:
1 through 6 on page 15 of Chapter 16.49 of the Zoning Ordinance.
        Finding:        The applicant has not addressed this section of the
Zoning Ordinance regarding how retained on site trees are to be treated. The
Planning Commission needs some acknowledgement that during the
construction process the retained on site trees are protected in accordance
with items 1 through 6 of this section.

G.      Landscaping under preserved trees . . . . .
        Finding:         The Landscape Plan and other plans, indicate that
preserved trees will be fully integrated into the total landscape plan by doing
landscaping completely around the preserved tree. This is generally indicated
on the Landscape Plan and other plans.

H.      Moving a preserved tree . . . . .
        Finding:        There is no indication that any retained trees on the site
are to be moved. Therefore, this standard does not apply, unless the applicant
indicates that one or more preserved trees will be moved.

I.        Any required landscaped area shall be designed, constructed, installed
and maintained so that within three (3) years, the ground shall be covered by
living grass or other plant material. (The foliage crown of trees shall not be
used to meet this requirement.) A maximum of five percent of the landscaped
area may be covered with bark chips, mulch, or other similar materials. A
maximum of five percent of the landscaped area may be covered with rock,
stones, walkways, or other similar material acceptable to the Board. Required
sidewalks shall not be used to meet the landscaping requirements. Plant size
and spacing shall follow the Oregon Department of Transportation standards.
          Finding:        The applicant states the he is aware of the landscape
requirements and will work with the Landscape Architect and installer to insure
that any landscaped area is designed, constructed, installed and maintained so
that ground will be covered by living grass and plant material within three years
of install. McDonald’s has always been good with its onsite care of grounds and
landscaping of their sites, and there is no reason to believe that this new re-built
site will be any different. One part of the above standard that is not addressed
is the “maximum of 5% of the landscaped area may be covered with rock,
stones, walkways, or other similar material acceptable to the Board.” The
Planning Commission may wish to ask the applicant to provide the amount of
landscaped area is covered with these materials. Otherwise the overall
standard is satisfied.

J.      All trees and plant materials shall be healthy, disease-free, damage-
free, well-branched stock, characteristic of the species. The use of tree and
plant species native to the Pacific Northwest is encouraged. Any new tree
planted must be included on the city’s list of approved tree species.




                                                                                       41 of 388
        Finding:         The applicant commits to providing healthy, disease-
free, damage-free, and well-branched trees that are characteristic of the
species. All trees and plant materials used on-site are summarized on the
Landscape Plan included under Exhibit B. The plant list was developed with
consideration of native plantings and the City of Canby’s list of approved tree
species. This standard is or will be satisfied.

K.      Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the
most recent edition of the Sunset Western Garden Book.
        Finding:           According to the applicant’s statements in the
application narrative, “Landscaping will be installed according to the most
recent edition of the Sunset Western Garden Book.” By this commitment, the
applicant will satisfy this standard.

L.      The following guidelines are suggested to insure the longevity and continued
vigor of plant materials:
1.      Select and site permanent landscape materials in such a manner as to produce
a hardy and drought-resistant landscaped area.
2.       Consider soil type and depth, spacing, exposure to sun and wind, slope
and contours of the site, building walls and overhangs, and compatibility with
existing native vegetation preserved on the site or in the vicinity.
         Finding:         As noted on the Landscape Plan notes Sheet L1.0 of the
plan set identified as Exhibit B), the landscape plantings will conform to the
standards established under by the City of Canby. The plant beds will have a 3-
inch depth of bark mulch, as well as an underground automatic irrigation
system. These elements will work to insure the longevity and continued vigor of
all plant materials on-site. By this commitment, the applicant will satisfy this
standard.

16.49.090       Specifications for tree and plant materials.
A.      Deciduous Trees. Deciduous shade and ornamental trees shall be a minimum
of two inch (2”) caliper, measured six inches (6”) above ground, balled and burlapped.
Bareroot trees will be acceptable to plant during their dormant season. Trees shall be
well branched and characteristically shaped specimen.
B.     Coniferous Trees. Coniferous trees shall be a minimum five feet (5’) in height
above ground, balled and burlapped. Trees shall be well branched and
characteristically shaped specimen.
C.       Evergreen and Deciduous Shrubs. Evergreen and deciduous shrubs
shall be at least one (1) to five (5) gallon size. Shrubs shall be characteristically
branched. Side of shrub with best foliage shall be oriented to public view.
         Finding:         As illustrated on the Landscape Plan (Sheet L1.0 of the
plan set), the proposed Capital Flowering Pear and Vine Maple (deciduous tree)
will be a minimum of 2-inch caliper, which will satisfy this standard. The
proposed Coast Windswept Pines coniferous tree) are proposed to be five to six-




                                                                                         42 of 388
feet, which meets the minimum specifications. The applicant will follow the
processes and procedures contained in A., B. and C. above.

D.       Ground covers. Ground covers shall be fully rooted and shall be well
branched or leafed.
         Finding:        By making the following statement, “All ground cover
will be fully rooted and well branched or leafed.”, the applicant will meet this
standard wherever ground cover is located.

E.      Lawns. Lawns shall consist of grasses, including sod, or seeds of
acceptable mix within the local landscape industry. Lawns shall be 100 percent
coverage and weed free. (Ord. 890 section 46, 1993; Ord. 848, Part IV, section
3, 1990)
        Finding:         There will be some lawn areas within the site. The
applicant’s statement, “As shown on the Landscape Planting Plan included
under Exhibit B, there are lawns which will have 100% coverage and meet
industry standards for installation”, the applicant commits to providing lawn
areas that meet this standard.

16.49.100         Landscaping installation and maintenance
A.       Landscaping prior to Certificate of Occupancy
         Finding:        The applicant has not made a statement regarding
when the landscaping will be completed. Since no “temporary certificate of
occupancy” has been requested, it is assumed that all landscaping will be
completed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
B.       Temporary certificate of occupancy
         Finding:        The applicant has not made a statement regarding
when the landscaping will be completed. Since no “temporary certificate of
occupancy” has been requested, it is assumed that all landscaping will be
completed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
C.       Landscaping continually maintained
         Finding:        The applicant needs to make a statement of
understanding that all site landscaping approved by the Planning Commission
shall be installed and continually maintained in accordance with this standard.

16.49.120        Parking lot landscaping standards
A.      General Provisions. In addition to the objectives stated in section 2 of this
ordinance, goals of parking lot standards are to create shaded areas in parking lots to
reduce glare, enhance the visual environment, and encourage the use of LID practices.
The design of the parking area shall be the responsibility of the developer and should
consider visibility of signage, traffic circulation, comfortable pedestrian access, and
aesthetics. Trees shall not be cited as a reason for applying for or granting a variance
on placement of signs.
B.      Application. Parking lot landscaping standards shall apply to any
surface passenger vehicle parking area of ten (10) spaces or more, or to any
paved vehicular use area 3,500 square feet or larger on the same tax lot or on




                                                                                           43 of 388
contiguous tax lots under common ownership. Any paved vehicular area
which is used specifically as a utility storage lot or a truck loading area shall be
exempt from landscaping requirements within a parking lot.
        Finding:         The parking lot has been planned and designed with
almost 20% of landscaping. This exceeds the 15% minimum standard required
of code. The overall design of the parking area of the site will satisfy these
standards of this section.

C.      Landscaping Within a Parking Lot.
1.      Area within a parking lot shall include the paved parking and
maneuvering area, as well as any paved area within ten (10) feet of any
exterior face of curb surrounding the paved parking and maneuvering area.
2.      Each interior landscaped area shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide,
unless the area is added to the required perimeter landscaping.
3.      The use of LID best management practices in parking lots is
encouraged whenever site and soil conditions make it feasible. Such practices
include, but are not limited to, permeable surfacing materials, and integrating
LID stormwater management facilities into the required landscaping areas.
        Finding:         Based on calculations provided by the applicant, the
parking lot is approximately 15,367 SF, which would require 2,305 SF of
landscaping to meet the 15% minimum threshold. As summarized on the Site
Plan, proposed parking lot landscaping is 2,915 SF, which encompasses almost
19% of the site area, thus exceeding the code requirement in the C-M zone.

E.      All parking areas with more than 16 spaces shall include landscape islands to
break up the parking area into rows of not more than 8 contiguous parking spaces.
1.      Landscape islands shall have a minimum area of 48 square feet and a
minimum width of six (6) feet.
2.       Landscape islands shall contain at least one tree that meets the standards in
subsection (6) below.
3.      Landscape islands may be counted toward the minimum parking lot
landscaping requirements.
        Finding:         All internal landscape islands are in excess of six feet in
width and minimum area of 48 SF, with at least one tree that meets the
standards outlined in subsection (6) below. The most contiguous parking spaces
provided on-site is 9 spaces at the Birch Street frontage. Staff finds that this
“separation” of parking spaces into smaller clusters throughout the site is an
admirable design element, reducing the “sea of asphalt” of a large single parking
area to more aesthetically pleasing internal features. The increase in
landscaped area to a level well above the minimum also helps to shape and
accent the hard surfaced parking areas. Overall, the design meets these
standards.

F.      Criteria for Trees in Parking Lots. Deciduous, evergreen and/or shade
trees shall meet the following criteria:




                                                                                         44 of 388
          Finding:        The seven (7) sub-items of the list above, includes the
desirable characteristics of (Sheet L1.0) included under Exhibit B, the trees
proposed within the parking lot area are well suited to the application and listed
on the City’s approved tree list. The trees proposed will include Pear, Wind
Swept Pines and Vine Maples. The proposed trees do, indeed, meet most of the
list of seven (7) sub-items. As such, the proposed landscape plan, including new
and existing trees, meets this set of standards.

G.      Perimeter of Parking and Loading Areas:
1.       Screening of parking and loading areas is required. Within three (3) years of
planting, screening shall be of such height and density as to shield vehicle headlights
from head-on visibility.
2.       In addition, one (1) deciduous, evergreen and/or shade tree shall be
planted every forty (40) feet, minimum, along the required setback of the
vehicular use area.
         Finding:        Perimeter landscaping is illustrated on the Landscape
Plan (Sheet L1.0 of the plan set identified as Exhibit B) along all property lines
that do not have pedestrian or vehicle accessways. All proposed trees are
planted every 40-feet along the required setback of the vehicular use area.
However, the applicant has not stated that item 1. above can be met within
three (3) years, given the type of trees proposed. Review of the Landscape Plan
indicates that the screening and buffering proposed for the site does a good job
of satisfying item 1. above.

H.      Irrigation System or Available Water Supply Required. Landscaped
areas shall be provided with automatic irrigation systems or a readily available
water supply with at least one (1) outlet located within 150 feet of all plant
materials to be maintained. (Ord. 890 section 49, 1993; Ord. 848, Part IV,
section 6, 1990, Ord 1296, 2008; Ord. 1338, 2010)
        Finding:        As noted on the Landscape Plan (Sheet L1.0) under note
#3, landscape areas shall have complete underground automatic irrigation
systems with full head-to-head coverage. This serves to meet this standard.

16.49.150        Parking lots or paving projects.
All new paving or parking lot projects which create over 2,500 square feet of
impervious surface and any new paving added to existing paving areas which
creates a total of more than 2,500 square feet of impervious surface must
meet City storm drainage requirements, parking lot landscaping standards and
the drainage and access standards of the Oregon Department of
Transportation (if applicable). Applicants for such paving projects must submit
an application to the Planning Department. Application procedures shall be as
described in Chapter 16.89. (Ord. 1019 section 3, 1999; Ord. 1080, 2001)
        Finding:         According to the applicant, “The proposed rebuild of
the McDonald’s site will create a total of more than 2,500 SF of impervious
surface. A stormwater report is included under Exhibit D to address the water
quantity and quality standards for stormwater treatment on-site. All proposed
stormwater will be conveyed to stormfilter catch basins or the rain garden




                                                                                          45 of 388
before connecting to the existing manhole located within the SW 1st Avenue
ROW.” This would appear to satisfy this standard, subject to approval of the
stormwater report by the city engineer.

Chapter 16.58 Lot Line Adjustment
16.58.030 Review by Planner and Engineer.
The City Planner and City Engineer shall review the proposed lot line adjustment
and shall determine whether the following criteria have been met:
A.      Each of the remaining parcels and any structures located thereon shall be in
full compliance with all regulations of this title, including the setback requirements of
Division III. Except, however, that lot line adjustments are permitted on
nonconforming lots and lots with nonconforming structures provided that the
nonconforming lots and structures will be no less in conformity as a result of the lot
line adjustment.
B.      No new lots or parcels will be created as a result of the lot line adjustment
without receiving approval as a partition or subdivision.
C.      If the City Planner or city engineer deems it necessary to assure the accuracy
of recorded information, a survey may be required of the applicant. Such a survey will
be at the applicant's cost.
D.      Lot line adjustments shall not be permitted where the result will be the
creation of additional building sites in known hazardous locations or where the
appropriate development or extension of public facilities will be impaired as a result.
(Ord. 740 section 10.4.20(B), 1984)
        Finding:         The consolidated parcel that will result from the proposed lot
line adjustment will meet all of the requirements of the C-M zone. Two lots will become
one, which will be the site of the re-built McDonald’s. The applicant has done the
background work for the proposed lot line adjustment, and no portion of the resulting
parcel will be in a hazard zone. Therefore, the application meets these requirements.

16.58.040        Approval procedure – City Planner responsibility
The City Planner is authorized to approve lot line adjustments in compliance
with the requirements of section 16.58.030. In any case where the City
Planner determines that the requirements of section 16.58.030 cannot or may
not be met, the application shall be scheduled for the consideration of the
commission, with a recommendation from staff. In any case where the City
Planner determines that a lot line adjustment will significantly alter the design
and appropriate development of a subdivision or partition which has
previously been approved by the city or other nearby property, the City
Planner shall schedule the application for consideration by the commission.
(Ord. 740 section 10.4.20(C), 1984)
        Finding:          The proposed lot line adjustment will consolidate the
two lots into a single lot. The consolidation will create a single lot that is in
conformance with the lot dimensional standards required within the C-M zone.
Although all requirements of section 16.58.030 can be met, this lot line
adjustment application will be consolidated with the Site and Design Review




                                                                                            46 of 388
application before the Planning Commission. Otherwise, this application for a
lot line adjustment could be approved by the city planner.

16.58.050 Approval procedure – Commission responsibility.

The commission shall review the information submitted and shall make a
decision approving, modifying or denying the proposal so as to assure
compliance with the requirements of the Land Development and Planning
Ordinance. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision of the
commission and the reasons therefore. One copy of the proposed plan shall be
returned to the applicant labeled “approved,” “denied,” or “modified.” An
additional copy shall be kept on file for future reference. (Ord. 740 section
10.4.20(D), 1984)
        Finding:        This lot line adjustment application will be consolidated
with the Site and Design Review application before the Planning Commission,
and the Planning Commission will make the decision regarding the lot line
adjustment based on the information, material, and facts before it. Because all
requirements and standards for the lot line adjustment have or can be met, this
application can be approved by the Planning Commission.

16.58.060         City liability - compliance.
In acting on an application for lot line adjustment, the city assumes no liability
for the applicant's actions. Applicants for lot line adjustments shall bear full
responsibility for compliance with all applicable state and local regulations
and for the following:
         Finding:          No sub-items of this section will create any liability for
the city, based on the actions of the application. There are no public or private
easements that will be altered as a result of the proposed lot consolidation (A).
The consolidation will not create any additional tax lots (B). Pending preliminary
approval, the applicant will record the deed descriptions of the properties
involved with Clackamas County, done within one year of the final approval (D).
If an extension of time is necessary for this lot line adjustment, the Planning
Director has the authority to grant a one-year extension to this application (E).
Therefore, the requirements and standards of this section will be satisfied.

Division VII – Street Alignments

Chapter 16.86            Regulations

16.86.020         General Provisions
A.      The Transportation System Plan shall be used to determine which streets are
to be arterials, collectors, and neighborhood connectors. All new streets are required
to comply with the roadway design standards provided in Chapter 7 of the TSP. The
city may require right-of-way dedication and/or special setbacks as necessary to
ensure adequate right-of-way is available to accommodate future road widening
projects identified in the TSP.




                                                                                         47 of 388
       Finding:        No additional ROW or frontage improvements are proposed
       with the McDonald’s rebuild. Existing driveways will be rebuilt and pedestrian
       accesses will connect to the existing attached sidewalks along SW 1st Avenue
       (Hwy99E), Birch Street, and SW 2nd Avenue.
B.     Right-of-way widths and cross section standards for new streets shall be in
conformance with the Canby Transportation System Plan and the Public Works Design
Standards.
       Finding:         No new streets are proposed with this rebuild. Therefore, this
       standard is not applicable to this application.
C.     The Public Works Director shall be responsible for establishing and updating
appropriate alignments for all streets.
       Finding:        This standard is not applicable because no new streets will be
       created, and no alignments of existing streets will be changed.
D.      No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a new structure
within the planned right-of-way of a new street, or the appropriate setback from such
a street as established in Division III.
       Finding:         Based on the plans and other information and materials
       submitted by the applicant, no new buildings will be built within the right of way
       of any public street bounding the property. Therefore, this standard is satisfied.
E.     Existing structures which were legally established within a planned road
alignment or abutting setback shall be regarded as nonconforming structures.
       Finding:        Because the existing structures will both be removed from the
       site and replaced by a re-built McDonald’s building solely within the site area,
       this standard will be satisfied.
F.     Bikeways and bike lanes shall be provided consistent with the Bicycle Plan
element of the Transportation System Plan.
       Finding:         No bikeways or bike lanes are proposed as part of this project.
       Bicycle parking is provided at the building frontage that will then allow bicyclists
       to connect to the proposed pedestrian path to the SW 1st Avenue (Hwy99E)
       attached sidewalk.
G.      Pedestrian facilities shall be provided consistent with the Pedestrian Plan
element of the Transportation System Plan. (Ord. 740 section 10.7.20, 1984; Ord. 1043
section 3, 2000; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1338, 2010; 1340, 2011)
       Finding:       Pedestrian facilities provided on-site include sidewalks and a
       pedestrian path that connects the primary building entrance to the SW 1st
       Avenue (Hwy99E) attached sidewalk.

16.86.040      Recommended Roadway Standards
Specific standards for roadway design are located in the Transportation System
Plan and Canby Public Works Design Standards. (Ord. 1338, 2010)




                                                                                              48 of 388
        Finding:         No additional ROW or frontage improvements are proposed
        with the McDonald’s rebuild. Existing pavement widths and ROW are shown on
        the Site Plan under Exhibit B for all streets abutting the McDonald’s property.
        There is no other part of this application that is impacted by this standard.
        Therefore, this standard has been satisfied.
16.86.060       Street Connectivity
When developing the street network in Canby, the emphasis should be upon a
connected continuous grid pattern of local, collector, and arterial streets
rather than discontinuous curvilinear streets and cul-de-sacs. Deviation from
this pattern of connected streets shall only be permitted in cases of extreme
topographical challenges including excessive slopes (35 percent plus), hazard
areas, steep drainage- ways and wetlands. In such cases, deviations may be
allowed but the connected continuous pattern must be reestablished once the
topographic challenge is       passed. (Ord. 1340, 2011)
        Finding:        There is no additional work proposed within the existing Canby
        street network. Therefore, this section does not apply.
Chapter 16.89 Application and Review Procedures
 16.89.020 Description and Summary of Processes.
     All land use and development applications shall be decided by using the
     procedures contained in this Chapter. Specific procedures for each type of
     permit are contained in Sections 16.89.030 through 16.89.060. The
     procedure type assigned to each permit governs the decision-making
     process for that permit. Additional requirements may be found in the
     individual chapters governing each permit type. The four types of
     procedure are described below. Table 16.89.020 lists the City’s land use
     and development applications and their required procedures.
A.       Type I Procedure (Ministerial). Type I decisions are made by the
Planning Director without public notice and without a public hearing. The
Type I procedure is used when there are clear and objective approval criteria
and applying those criteria requires no use of discretion.
B.       Type II Procedure (Administrative). Type II decisions are made by the
Planning Director with public notice and an opportunity for a public hearing.
The appeal of a Type II decision is heard by the Planning Commission.
C.       Type III Procedure (Quasi-Judicial/Legislative). Type III decisions are
made by the Planning Commission after a public hearing, with appeals
reviewed by the City Council. Type III procedures generally use discretionary
approval criteria.
         Finding:        The proposed McDonald’s rebuild is subject to a Type III
Site and Design Review procedure. A Type III decision is triggered because the
proposed site layout does not meet the minimum FAR requirement and building
setback provision established under the DCO overlay zone. By virtue of the lot
line adjustment application being included with the overall application as
submitted, the lot line adjustment is also subject to a Type III decision making
process. Therefore, this proposal is subject to Planning Commission review and
decision.




                                                                                          49 of 388
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: McDonalds Dwy -- SW 2nd Ave                                                                                      QC JOB #: 11483701
 CITY/STATE: Canby, OR                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Nov 26 2013
                    51          111                       Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                      0.0        1.8

                    42    0     9
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 7:35 AM -- 7:50 AM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       92    75                       36   86
                                                                                                               7.6   1.3                       2.8       9.3
             29          0.87         50
                                                                                                                     24.1                     14.0
       104   0                         0   38
                                                                                                               7.7   0.0                       0.0      18.4

                     0    0     0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0          0
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                          1                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                     0                           0

             0                         6                                                                             0                           0

                                                                                                                     0                           0

                          0                                                                                                   0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                       NA                                                                             NA                        NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          McDonalds Dwy                 McDonalds Dwy                   SW 2nd Ave                  SW 2nd Ave                    Total        Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right     U         Left Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       0     0      0     0          1      0      5     0         2      1      0      0    0        2     1     0                12
     7:05 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      1     0         1      0      0      0    0        1     0     0                 3
     7:10 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      1     0         3      1      0      0    0        4     0     0                 9
     7:15 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      2     0         2      1      0      0    0        2     1     0                 8
     7:20 AM       0     0      0     0          1      0      2     0         9      1      0      0    0        2     1     0                16
     7:25 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      4     0         2      2      0      0    0        5     6     0                19
     7:30 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      2     0         5      2      0      0    0        3     3     0                15
     7:35 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      2     0         7      4      0      0    0        7     3     0                23
     7:40 AM       0     0      0     0          1      0      3     0         5      1      0      0    0        5     3     0                18
     7:45 AM       0     0      0     0          1      0      6     0        13      3      0      0    0        3     2     0                28
     7:50 AM       0     0      0     0          1      0      1     0         6      5      0      0    0        4     3     0                20
     7:55 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      2     0         4      0      0      0    0        7     4     0                17              188
     8:00 AM       0     0      0     0          3      0      6     0         9      4      0      0    0        4     2     0                28              204
     8:05 AM       0     0      0     0          1      0      5     0         3      2      0      0    0        5     5     0                21              222
     8:10 AM       0     0      0     0          1      0      4     0         5      3      0      0    0        3     1     0                17              230
     8:15 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      5     0         7      2      0      0    0        2     3     0                19              241
     8:20 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      4     0         4      2      0      0    0        1     1     0                12              237
     8:25 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      3     0         3      4      0      0    0        2     3     0                15              233
     8:30 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      4     0         5      1      0      0    0        0     0     0                10              228
     8:35 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      2     0         3      5      0      0    0        2     2     0                14              219
     8:40 AM       0     0      0     0          1      0      0     0         1      4      0      0    0        3     1     0                10              211
     8:45 AM       0     0      0     0          1      0      2     0         5      2      0      0    0        1     1     0                12              195
     8:50 AM       0     0      0     0          0      0      1     0         3      1      0      0    0        2     2     0                 9              184
     8:55 AM       0     0      0     0          1      0      1     0         5      2      0      0    0        3     1     0                13              180
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right     U         Left Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     0     0      0     0          8      0     44     0      100      32      0      0    0       60    32     0                       276
 Heavy Trucks      0     0      0                0      0      0              0       8      0           0        4     4                              16
  Pedestrians            0                              0                             0                           0                                     0
    Bicycles       0     0      0                0      0      0              0       0      0           0        0     0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/3/2013 8:45 AM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                                                                                                        77 of 388
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: McDonalds Dwy -- SW 2nd Ave                                                                                     QC JOB #: 11483702
 CITY/STATE: Canby, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Nov 26 2013
                    35          69                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                     0.0        0.0

                    19    0     16
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 5:25 PM -- 5:40 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0


       90    56                      13    84
                                                                                                               2.2   0.0                      0.0       2.4
             104         0.82        71
                                                                                                                     4.8                      2.8
       160   0                        0   120
                                                                                                               3.1   0.0                      0.0       4.2

                     0    0     0
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0

                     0          0
                                                                                                                            0.0        0.0



                          5                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                     0                          0

             0                        5                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                     0                          0

                          2                                                                                                  0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                      NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count          McDonalds Dwy                 McDonalds Dwy                   SW 2nd Ave                  SW 2nd Ave                   Total       Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right     U         Left Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0     0      0     0           2     0      2     0        1      10      0      0    0        5     0     0               20
    4:05 PM        0     0      0     0           2     0      1     0        4       8      0      0    0        2     2     0               19
    4:10 PM        0     0      0     0           2     0      0     0        5       8      0      0    0        6     1     0               22
    4:15 PM        0     0      0     0           0     0      4     0        3      10      0      0    0        4     1     0               22
    4:20 PM        0     0      0     0           1     0      0     0        3       8      0      0    0        4     2     0               18
    4:25 PM        0     0      0     0           1     0      0     0        7       8      0      0    0        5     0     0               21
    4:30 PM        0     0      0     0           2     0      2     0        5       5      0      0    0        6     2     0               22
    4:35 PM        0     0      0     0           4     0      0     0        4       8      0      0    0        6     1     0               23
    4:40 PM        0     0      0     0           0     0      1     0        3       5      0      0    0        9     2     0               20
    4:45 PM        0     0      0     0           2     0      0     0        3      11      0      0    0        7     2     0               25
    4:50 PM        0     0      0     0           1     0      3     0        2      11      0      0    0        2     1     0               20
    4:55 PM        0     0      0     0           2     0      1     0        5       3      0      0    0        6     1     0               18              250
    5:00 PM        0     0      0     0           2     0      0     0        4      10      0      0    0        5     0     0               21              251
    5:05 PM        0     0      0     0           1     0      0     0        6       9      0      0    0        8     1     0               25              257
    5:10 PM        0     0      0     0           1     0      4     0        3      11      0      0    0        4     1     0               24              259
    5:15 PM        0     0      0     0           1     0      2     0        6       6      0      0    0        4     1     0               20              257
    5:20 PM        0     0      0     0           2     0      0     0        3       8      0      0    0        7     0     0               20              259
    5:25 PM        0     0      0     0           2     0      1     0        6      12      0      0    0        9     0     0               30              268
    5:30 PM        0     0      0     0           1     0      2     0        6       9      0      0    0        7     2     0               27              273
    5:35 PM        0     0      0     0           1     0      4     0        6       8      0      0    0        7     2     0               28              278
    5:40 PM        0     0      0     0           0     0      2     0        6       6      0      0    0        5     2     0               21              279
    5:45 PM        0     0      0     0           2     0      2     0        0      11      0      0    0        2     1     0               18              272
    5:50 PM        0     0      0     0           0     0      2     0        4       9      0      0    0        6     0     0               21              273
    5:55 PM        0     0      0     0           0     0      1     0        8       6      0      0    0        4     2     0               21              276
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right     U         Left Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0     0      0     0          16     0     28     0        72    116      0      0    0       92    16     0                      340
 Heavy Trucks      0     0      0                 0     0      0               0      4      0           0        0     0                             4
  Pedestrians            0                              4                             0                           0                                   4
    Bicycles       0     0      0                 0     0      0              0       0      0           0        0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/3/2013 8:45 AM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                                                                                                       78 of 388
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Pacific Hwy E -- McDonalds Dwy                                                                                     QC JOB #: 11483703
 CITY/STATE: Canby, OR                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Nov 26 2013
                         1          0                            Peak-Hour: 7:00 AM -- 8:00 AM                                 0.0        0.0

                         1    0     0
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:35 AM -- 7:50 AM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       756   0                             0   752
                                                                                                                  6.5   0.0                      0.0      6.5
             529             0.91        752
                                                                                                                        8.1                      6.5
       529   0                             0   569
                                                                                                                  8.1   0.0                      0.0      7.7

                         3    0     40
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 2.5

                         0          43
                                                                                                                               0.0        2.3



                              0                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

             0                             0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          0

                              0                                                                                                 0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                          NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count                 Pacific Hwy E                  Pacific Hwy E               McDonalds Dwy             McDonalds Dwy                 Total      Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       0            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0    33      0      0     0    78     0     0              112
     7:05 AM       0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0    39      0      0     0    60     0     0               99
     7:10 AM       0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0    36      0      0     0    57     0     0               95
     7:15 AM       0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0    39      0      0     0    61     0     0              100
     7:20 AM       0            0      0     0        0        0      1     0        0    64      0      0     0    60     0     0              125
     7:25 AM       0            0      7     0        0        0      0     0        0    38      0      0     0    67     0     0              112
     7:30 AM       1            0      6     0        0        0      0     0        0    42      0      0     0    56     0     0              105
     7:35 AM       0            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0    33      0      0     0    77     0     0              113
     7:40 AM       1            0      5     0        0        0      0     0        0    53      0      0     0    57     0     0              116
     7:45 AM       1            0      4     0        0        0      0     0        0    55      0      0     0    76     0     0              136
     7:50 AM       0            0      9     0        0        0      0     0        0    40      0      0     0    58     0     0              107
     7:55 AM       0            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0    57      0      0     0    45     0     0              105            1325
     8:00 AM       0            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0    24      0      0     0    48     0     0               75            1288
     8:05 AM       0            0      6     0        0        0      0     0        0    49      0      0     0    51     0     0              106            1295
     8:10 AM       0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0    36      0      0     0    38     0     0               76            1276
     8:15 AM       0            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0    42      0      0     0    52     0     0               97            1273
     8:20 AM       1            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0    47      0      0     0    48     0     0               99            1247
     8:25 AM       0            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0    45      0      0     0    51     0     0               99            1234
     8:30 AM       2            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0    37      0      0     0    49     0     0               90            1219
     8:35 AM       0            0      4     0        0        0      0     0        0    46      0      0     0    42     0     0               92            1198
     8:40 AM       0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0    41      0      0     0    52     0     0               93            1175
     8:45 AM       0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0    36      0      0     0    53     0     0               91            1130
     8:50 AM       1            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0    39      0      0     0    43     0     0               86            1109
     8:55 AM       2            0      2     0        0        0      1     0        0    52      0      0     0    41     0     0               98            1102
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles     8            0     48     0        0        0      0     0        0   564      0      0     0   840     0     0                     1460
 Heavy Trucks      0            0      0              0        0      0              0    52      0            0    56     0                            108
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                           0                         0                                   0
    Bicycles       0            0      0              0        0      0              0     0      0            0     0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/3/2013 8:45 AM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                                                                                                         79 of 388
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Pacific Hwy E -- McDonalds Dwy                                                                                      QC JOB #: 11483704
 CITY/STATE: Canby, OR                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Nov 26 2013
                         1          0                            Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                  0.0        0.0

                         0    0     1
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 4:35 PM -- 4:50 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0


       984   0                             0    984
                                                                                                                   3.5   0.0                      0.0      3.5
             976             0.97        984
                                                                                                                         3.0                      3.5
       976   0                             0   1003
                                                                                                                   3.0   0.0                      0.0      2.9

                         0    0     26
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                         0          26
                                                                                                                                0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

             0                             0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                              3                                                                                                  0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                          NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                 Pacific Hwy E                   Pacific Hwy E               McDonalds Dwy             McDonalds Dwy                 Total      Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0            0      2     0         0        0      0     0        0    68      0      0     0    71     0     0              141
    4:05 PM        0            0      3     0         0        0      0     0        0    77      0      0     0    96     0     0              176
    4:10 PM        0            0      2     0         1        0      1     0        0    60      0      0     0    78     0     0              142
    4:15 PM        0            0      2     0         0        0      0     0        0    76      0      0     0    77     0     0              155
    4:20 PM        0            0      2     0         0        0      0     0        0    76      0      0     0    82     0     0              160
    4:25 PM        0            0      4     0         0        0      0     0        0    79      0      0     0    72     0     0              155
    4:30 PM        0            0      3     0         0        0      0     0        0    74      0      0     0    82     0     0              159
    4:35 PM        0            0      4     0         0        0      0     0        0    82      0      0     0    92     0     0              178
    4:40 PM        0            0      1     0         0        0      0     0        0    89      0      0     0    77     0     0              167
    4:45 PM        0            0      3     0         0        0      0     0        0    80      0      0     0    86     0     0              169
    4:50 PM        0            0      2     0         0        0      0     0        0    80      0      0     0    74     0     0              156
    4:55 PM        0            0      0     0         0        0      0     0        0    87      0      0     0    73     0     0              160            1918
    5:00 PM        0            0      3     0         0        0      0     0        0    78      0      0     0    74     0     0              155            1932
    5:05 PM        0            0      3     0         0        0      0     0        0    79      0      0     0    80     0     0              162            1918
    5:10 PM        0            0      2     0         0        0      0     0        0    84      0      0     0    87     0     0              173            1949
    5:15 PM        0            0      2     0         1        0      0     0        0    71      0      0     0    95     0     0              169            1963
    5:20 PM        0            0      1     0         0        0      0     0        0    92      0      0     0    77     0     0              170            1973
    5:25 PM        0            0      2     0         0        0      0     0        0    80      0      0     0    87     0     0              169            1987
    5:30 PM        0            0      1     0         0        0      0     0        0    67      0      0     0    75     0     0              143            1971
    5:35 PM        0            0      2     0         0        0      0     0        0    78      0      0     0    75     0     0              155            1948
    5:40 PM        0            0      5     0         0        0      1     0        0    67      0      0     0    81     0     0              154            1935
    5:45 PM        0            0      3     0         0        0      0     0        0    71      0      0     0    50     0     0              124            1890
    5:50 PM        0            0      0     0         0        0      0     0        0    63      0      0     0    75     0     0              138            1872
    5:55 PM        0            0      4     0         0        0      0     0        0    81      0      0     0    63     0     0              148            1860
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                      Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles     0            0     32     0         0        0      0     0        0 1004       0      0     0 1020      0     0                     2056
 Heavy Trucks      0            0      0               0        0      0              0    32      0            0    36     0                            68
  Pedestrians                   0                               0                           0                         0                                   0
    Bicycles       0            0      0               0        0      0              0     0      0            0     0     0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/3/2013 8:45 AM                                            SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212

                                                                                                                                                          80 of 388
