~West Linn
22500 Salamo Road
West Linn, OR 97068



                                  STAFF REPORT
                         FOR THE PLANNING COMMISSION

FILE NUMBER:                  DR-12-08/VAR-12-01

HEARING DATE:                 June6,2012

REQUEST:                      Class II Design Review approval for construction of a 4,335 square
                              foot Chase Bank Branch with parking and remote three-lane drive
                              through at the rear of the building and a Class II Variance from the
                              transparency (window) requirements on the front and side
                              elevations.
APPROVAL
CRITERIA:                     Community Development Code (CDC) Chapter 55, Design Review;
                              Chapter 19, General Commercial; and Chapter 75, Variances.
STAFF REPORT
PREPARED BY:                  Peter Spir, Associate Planner


                               Planning Director's   Initia~'

                                      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
JP Morgan Chase Bank is applying to build a 4,335 square foot bank at 19080 Willamette Drive.
The 38,014 square foot site was formerly occupied by Kasch's Nursery. The site is flat for the
first 200 feet, drops down 10 feet, and then is flat to the rear lot line. There are no significant
trees or natural features on the property.
The proposed bank structure would be single story with a parapet height of 19 feet in height
that would effectively hides the heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment.
The peak of the building is proposed to be 26 feet high. A proposed 20-foot wide
sidewalk/plaza area with planters with seating ledge and the awnings along the bUilding face
would provide a quality pedestrian environment (see Exhibit PC 3, Sheet A 0.1). A 14-stall
parking lot and driveway are proposed to be located at the rear of the bank. Beyond that, the
applicant proposes three drive through lanes for two vacuum assisted tellers (VAT) and one
Automated Teller Machine (ATM).
To minimize occurrences of customers leaving the bank property, driVing 200 feet along
Willamette Drive, then turning into the shopping center immediately to the north of the bank




                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            1
property, the owner ofthat property has built a stub out driveway to allow easy vehicular
connection between the two parcels. This is expected reduce vehicle loads on Willamette Drive
and would also reduce potential turn conflicts on that street. The applicant's plans show this
driveway connection. A mutual access easement will be needed to allow use of the driveways
as provided for is Proposed Condition of Approval 5.

The proposal is generally compliant with applicable regulations. However the proposed building
design has insufficient windows per the design review standards. Therefore, the applicant
requests a variance. In researching this issue, staff found an example of a very similar Chase
Bank in Hillsdale that has more windows than the proposed West Linn version (see Finding 9).
Therefore, staff recommends Condition of Approval 3 which would require more windows.
There is also an issue regarding the building setback from the street. CDC Subsection 55.100(B)
(7) (c) calls for commercial buildings to be built as close to the adjacent right-of-way as
practical. However, a decades old covenant associated with the original plat prohibits
development from being within 60 feet of the centerline of the Willamette Drive right-of-way.
That translates into a setback from the property line of about 20 feet. Although other
development on adjacent and nearby parcels have ignored the covenant and built with no front
setbacks (see Finding 6), Chase insists on deferring to the covenant. Presumably, they do not
find violation of the covenant to be practical. This is arguable. While the City is not bound by
the covenant and could condition the project to reduce the front yard setback to as little as
zero, the proposed design solution of developing the setback area as a 20-foot wide
sidewalk/plaza area seems like a reasonable compromise.
Staff has reviewed the applicant's proposal relative to all other applicable CDC requirements
and finds that there are sufficient grounds for approval, subject to the conditions listed on page
10.




 ft
"     printed on recycled paper

                                    6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                           2
6/6/2012 PC Meeting
       3
                                           GENERAL INFORMATION
APPLICANT:                        JP Morgan Chase Bank

REPRESENTATIVE:                   Hans Christiansen
                                  Callison Architects
                                  1420 Fifth Avenue, Suite 2400
                                  Seattle, WA 98101

SITE LOCATION:                    19080 Willamette Drive (former Kasch's Nursery site)

LEGAL
DESCRIPTION:                      Clackamas County Assessor's Tax Lot 703 and 705 of Clackamas County
                                  Assessor's Map 2-1E-23AA

SITE SIZE:                        38,014 sq. ft.

ZONING:                           General Commercial (GC)

COMP PLAN
DESIGNATION:                      Commercial

120-DAY PERIOD:                   This application was deemed complete on April 19, 2012. The 120-day
                                  maximum application-processing period ends August 18, 2012.

PUBLIC NOTICE:                    Public notice was mailed to all neighborhood associations and to
                                  property owners within 500 feet of the site perimeter on May 3, 2012.
                                  The property was posted with a sign on May 11, 2012. In addition, the
                                  application has been posted on the City's website and was published in
                                  the West Linn Tidings on May 17, 2012. The notice requirements have
                                  been satisfied.



                                                    BACKGROUND
The applicant's site, at 19080 Willamette Drive, was occupied by a plant nursery for many
years; most recently, Kasch's.




-A
 .
..,   printed on recycled paper

                                                   6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                          4
Figure 1 Vicinity Map




Surrounding Land Use and Zoning: The site has apartments to the rear, commercial to the
north and south. The zoning is General Commercial.

Table 1 Surrounding Land Use and Zoning

       DIRECTION
                                                       LAND USE                          ZONING
       FROM SITE
                           Commercial center with vacant commercial pad immediately
  North                                                                                  GC
                           adjacent to proposed bank site.

  East                     Apartments/multi-family residential                           R-2.1

  South                    Commercial center                                             GC

  West                     (across Willamette Drive) City owned open space with stream   GC




-l\.
....    printed on recycled paper

                                            6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                   5
Figure 2: Zoning Map




Site Conditions: The site is 150 feet wide and averages 250 feet deep. It is flat for the first 200
feet adjacent to Willamette Drive followed by a cut bank that drops ten feet to another flat
area that extends to the north property line. Along the rear property line is a row of non-
significant trees, mostly cottonwoods. Many of these trees are located on an adjoining 20-foot
wide property to the north. There are no other trees or significant natural features (streams,
etc.) elsewhere on the property. The site is currently occupied by a parking area fronting on
Willamette Drive and structure that formerly housed the nursery.




Trees at the rear ofthe site


".
...   printed on recycled paper

                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            6
Project Description: Chase proposes a 4,335 square foot bank towards the front of the
property. A 20-foot wide sidewalk/plaza area with planters with seating ledge and the awnings
along the building face provide a quality pedestrian environment (see Exhibit PC 3, Sheet AO.l).
A 14-stall parking lot and driveway are proposed to be located at the rear of the bank. Beyond
that, the applicant proposes three drive through lanes for two vacuum assisted tellers (VAT)
and one Automated Teller Machine (ATM).
The northeast edge of the drive through area is delineated by a four foot high solid wood fence
which serves the dual purpose of blocking vehicle headlight glare and engine noise from the
apartments on the adjoining property. The existing steep grade change is proposed to be
softened beyond the fence to the northeast property line with a 3:1 graded and landscaped
slope that spans 50 to 70 feet (see Exhibit PC 3, Landscape Plan, Sheet L-l). This landscaping,
which includes a wooden fence and several evergreen trees (red cedar), coupled with the
existing trees along the real property line, is expected to provide screening of the apartments
to the northeast. Access to the site is proposed to be via a shared driveway that is currently
used by the commercial tenants to the south.




                                                               I



                                                               I
                                                               I~


                                                               ii~
                                                           I
                                                           I
                                                           I


                                                         JJ/fr
                                                           I
                                                           I


                                                           L

                       Proposed site/landscaping plan



o   printed on recycled paper

                                        6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                               7
The proposed bank structure, as depicted below, would be single story with a parapet height of
19 feet in height that would effectively hides the heating, ventilation and air conditioning
(HVAC) equipment. The peak of the building is proposed to be 26 feet high. The design offers
similar front and rear elevations to accommodate access from both the Willamette Drive side
and the parking lot in the rear. The bank is proposed to be predominantly constructed of brick
veneer with a stone veneered base. As proposed, the upper third will be clad with a beige
drivet/stucco. Four to six foot wide flat awnings would extend along most of the front
elevation.




To accommodate the front and rear access, most of the activity areas that would typically be at
the rear of the building have been relocated to the two sides (see Exhibit PC-3, Floor Plan, Sheet
A 1.1). This design solution has turned the two side elevations into blank walls with no
windows at the pedestrian level. Meanwhile, the amount of pedestrian level windows on the
front elevation falls short of the required 60%. Thus, the design is at odds with front and side
transparency (windows) requirements. (See findings 4 and 9.)


                                     APPROVAL CRITERIA AND ANALYSIS
The required permits include a Class II Design Review for development of the commercial site
and a Class II Variance for reduced transparency requirements (windows) on the front and side
elevations as required by CDC 55.100(B) (6) (f). The Design Review criteria are found in Chapter
55. Allowed uses and site dimensional standards are found in CDC Chapter 19, General
Commercial (GC). Class II Variance criteria are found in Chapter 75 of the CDC. Approval or
disapproval of the request by the Planning Commission will be based upon these criteria.

The site lies within the context of developed and undeveloped commercial sites to the north
and south. The main trip generating tenant to the south is a 7-11 convenience store. The
proposed development links the commercial properties together with a connecting driveway
that should allow traffic to move from one property to another without first having to access
Willamette Drive and then use another driveway with the attendant conflicts (see Finding 12).

The proposed project proVides for screening from residences to the north and noise
attenuation that meet applicable standards (see Finding 7).


-P'-_~
-..      printed on recycled paper

                                            6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                   8
The proposed use is consistent with the General Commercial zoning and the Comprehensive
Plan designation of Commercial (see findings 10 and 11).

However, there are two significant issues with this application: how far the building is set back
from the Willamette Drive right-of-way and the amount of transparency (windows) on the front
and side elevations of the building.

1. CDC Subsection 19.070A (7) requires no minimum front yard setback and a 20-foot
maximum setback. The Design Review Subsection 55.100(8) (7) (c) requires that "Commercia"
office, and multi-family projects shall be built as close to the adjacent main right-of-way as
practical to facilitate safe pedestrian and transit access".

In addition to the stated purposes of above, locating buildings close to the street can provide
amenities for pedestrian passersby in the form of awnings which provide shelter from rain and
sun, an activity area in front of the building that creates opportunities for interaction between
people, pedestrian level windows offer visual interest for passing pedestrians and motorists
and, as buildings "crowd" the street, the narrower field of vision along Willamette Drive
encourages slower vehicle speeds.

Working against compliance with Subsection 55.100(8) (7) (c) is a decades old covenant
associated with the original plat of the area that prohibits deveropment from being within 60
feet of the centerline of the Willamette Drive right-of-way. That translates into a setback from
the property line of about 20 feet instead of the desired zero setback. Although other
development on adjacent and nearby parcels have ignored the covenant and built with no front
setbacks (see Finding 6), Chase insists on deferring to the covenant. Presumably, they do not
find violation of the covenant to be practical. This is arguable. While the City is not bound by
the covenant and could condition the project to reduce the front yard setback to as little as
zero, the proposed design solution of developing the setback area as a 20-foot wide
sidewalk/plaza area with planters including a seating ledge (see Exhibit PC 3, Sheet AO.l) seems
like a reasonable compromise.

2. In order to accommodate parking behind the bank, the design places all of the typical/rear
of building" functions such as the safe, bathrooms, utility rooms, break rooms, etc to the sides
of the building which means that the amount of pedestrian level windows on the sides shrinks
to zero instead of the required 30 percent windows on each of the side elevations. The front
elevation also falls short of meeting the transparency requirement as windows comprise just 43
feet of a 102 foot long elevation. That translates into 42.1 percent ofthe elevation; not the
required 60 percent. To address these transparency shortcomings, a Class II Variance is
needed.

In researching this issue staff found an example of a very similar Chase bank in Hillsdale that
had more windows (see Finding 9). Therefore, staff recommends Condition of Approval 3 which
would require more windows.

ft
\I   printed on recycled paper

                                    6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                           9
Staff has reviewed the applicant's proposal relative to all other applicable CDC requirements
and finds that there are sufficient grounds for approval, subject to the conditions listed below.
Please see the following Supplementary Findings for details.

Public comments:

No public comments have been received to date.


                                   RECOMMENDATION
Staff recommends approval of application DR-12-08/VAR-12-01 subject to the following
conditions:

1. Approved plans. The approved site plan is the Landscape Plan, Sheet L-1, dated 4/23/2012.
   The approved elevation is Exterior Elevations Sheets A4.1 and A4.2 dated 4/11/2012 with
   window modifications per Condition of Approval 3 and no individualized awnings over
   clerestory windows.

2. Exterior building lighting. Colored illumination or colored lighting (e.g., blue) of the building
   exterior is prohibited.

3. Windows. At least nine lineal feet of additional windows shall be added at the pedestrian
   level to the front elevation. The window placement shall be consistent with, or similar to,
   the elevation below. New windows shall match proposed multi-light windows.




4. Fences. The southerly end of the four-foot high wood fence to the east of the drive through
   ATM lanes, depicted on Exhibit PC-3, Sheet L1 shall be extended 30 feet to reduce glare,
   generally as depicted below:




o   printed on recycled paper

                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            10
                                                   Extend fence 30
                                                   feet to reduce
                                                   glare and noise



     4' ""1CiI"" 501-10
     WOOD FEN~.
                                            t~"   .... J

     ~
                                    I flo   t~    I )

     c::>
                                .     ~ralи       ... )

     c>
S. Mutual Access Easement. In order to allow Chase Bank customers to use the driveway
through tax lot 700 to access Willamette Drive, the applicant shall construct a driveway to City
standards to connect with the driveway and parking lot to the north on tax lot 700 assessor's
map 21E 23AA. The applicant shall record a mutual access easement that allows traffic from
tax lot 700 to traverse that applicant's driveways and access to Willamette Drive with the
understanding that the owner of tax lot 700 will record a similar mutual access easement for
the benefit of the applicant and motorists accessing the applicant's property. The mutual
access easement(s) shall be submitted to the City Attorney for review and approval prior to
being recorded. It is recognized that this condition is contingent on the actions of a second
party over whom the applicant has no control. In the event that, after demonstration of a good
faith effort to establish mutual access easements from the owner of tax lot 700, no mutual
access easement is recorded, this condition shall be voided. Any delays in the recording of the
mutual access easement by the owner of tax lot 700 will not constitute grounds for delay of
final occupancy approval for Chase Bank.




o   printed on recycled paper

                                             6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                    11
                                          ADDENDUM
                                  SUPPLEMENTARY STAFF FINDINGS

55.100(8) (6) (a).
The predominant architecture of West Linn identified in the West Linn vision process was
contemporary vernacular residential designs emphasizing natural materials: wood with brick
and stone detail. Colors are subdued earth tones: grays, brown, offиwhites, slate, and greens.
Pitched roofs with overhanging eaves, decks, and details like generous multi-light windows with
oversized trim are common. Also in evidence are the 1890s Queen Anne style homes of the
Willamette neighborhood. Neo-traditional homes of the newer subdivisions feature large front
porches with detailed porch supports, dormers, bracketed overhanging eaves, and rear parking
for cars. Many of these design elements have already been incorporated in commercial and
office architecture.

FINDING 1:

The applicant has proposed night time illumination of the exterior of the building with blue
lighting. Blue is apparently Chase Bank's corporate color and part of their branding or identity
strategy. Staff finds that whereas the building uses earth tones per this code section for the
building, the use of blue light effectively changes the bUilding color at night time to deep blue.
For that reason, staff recommends Condition of Approval 2 which would prohibit blue or other
colored exterior lighting.


55.100(8) (6) (b).

The proposed structure(s) scale shall be compatible with the existing structure(s) on site and on
adjoining sites. Contextual design is required. Contextual design means respecting and
incorporating prominent architectural styles, building lines, roof forms, rhythm of windows,
building scale and massing, materials and colors of surrounding buildings in the proposed
structure.

FINDING 2:

The pre-application conference staff emphasized staff's desire that the extended awnings found
on the commercial properties to the north of the site be replicated, not only for the purpose of
contextual design but also because they provide the very real benefit of shade from the sun and
shelter from the rain. Staff finds that the applicant's design satisfies that requirement with 4-6
foot deep awnings running along most of the front elevation. The flat roof with parapets as
well as the brick facing on the building also reflects nearby commercial designs, material
choices and color schemes.




 ft
'.'   printed on recycled paper

                                        6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                               12
55.100(8) (6) (e)

Human scale is a term that seeks to accommodate the users of the bUilding and the notion that
buildings should be designed around the human scale (i.e., their size and the average range of
their perception). Human scale shall be accommodated in all designs by, for example, multi-light
windows that are broken up into numerous panes, intimately scaled entryways, and visual
breaks (exaggerated eaves, indentations, ledges, parapets, awnings, engaged columns, etc.) in
the facades of buildings, both vertically and horizontally. The human scale is enhanced by
bringing the building and its main entrance up to the edge of the sidewalk. It creates a more
dramatic and interesting streetscape and improves the "height and width ratio referenced in
                                                                           II


this section.

FINDING 3:

Staff finds that the awnings running across the front elevation at 9.5 feet, the use of three
different bUilding materials (cladding) and two different colors contribute to the human scale
by vertically breaking up the elevations. The building's total height is relatively low at 17 feet
(to the main parapet) meaning that human scale is respected. The front elevation's horizontal
plane is broken up by modulations (e.g. popouts, indents) and details (multi-paned windows).
Additional windows would help as recommended. Therefore, the intent of the provision above
is met.




55.100(8) (6) (f)

The main front elevation of commercial and office buildings shall provide at least 60 percent
windows or transparency at the pedestrian level to create more interesting streetscape and
window shopping opportunities. One side elevation shall provide at least 30 percent
transparency. Any additional side or rear elevation, which is visible from a collector road or
greater classification, shall also have at least 30 percent transparency. Transparency on other
elevations is optional. The transparency is measured in lineal fashion. For example, a 100-foot-
long building elevation shall have at least 60 feet (60 percent of 100 feet) in length of windows.
The window height shall be,at minimum, three feet tall. The exception to transparency would
be cases where demonstrated functional constraints or topography restrict that elevation from
being used. When this exemption is applied to the main front elevation, the square footage of
transparency that would ordinarily be required by the above formula shall be installed on the
remaining elevations at pedestrian level in addition to any transparency required by a side
elevation, and vice versa. The rear of the building is not required to include transparency. The
transparency must be flush with the building elevation.



i'_
....   printed on recycled paper

                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            13
                                                  30%




60 percent of lineal street facing or main elevation is windows. 30 percent of one side elevation
is windows. You may transfer windows from the side to front, or vice versa.




                    ~-          Yes
                                        -

                         (Windows not at eye level and/or not flush with building.)

FINDING 4:

The applicant does not meet the front transparency requirement of 60%. Only 42.1% of the
front elevation has windows at pedestrian or eye level. Four clerestory windows on the front
elevation are too high to contribute to the transparency requirement. But even if they were
included, the amount would fall short. The two side elevations are both visible from
Willamette Drive so both must meet the 30% transparency requirement. The two side
elevations have no windows at pedestrian or eye level so their 0% percent transparency is well
short of the required 30%. Consequently, the applicant has applied for a Class II Variance. See
Finding 8 below.

The applicant makes the case that by having a front entrance onto Willamette Drive and a
second at the rear to allow access from the parking lot (per 55.100(B) (7)' (a)) it is impossible to
accommodate the bank's functional requirements and specific activity/work areas (ATM money
room, vault, bathrooms etc.) along the rear of the building where they would typically go.
Consequently, these activity/work areas (which typically have limited or no windows) must go
along the sides of the structure which, per the applicant, justifies the lack of transparency on
the sides. Staff agrees with these findings.




o   printed on recycled paper

                                         6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                14
Since the clerestory windows do not factor into the transparency calculations because they are
too high for people to look in or out of the bank and because most are for secure interior
spaces the applicant has requested that they be opaque instead of clear. Staff can support the
change from clear to opaque glass on those grounds and further notes that opaque clerestory
windows will still help break up the elevations architecturally.




                                                                  11'610                            Irllfl




  l
      ~~r""""-                                      /
                                                        /
                                                            /


                                                                     ии_IlOOfCllnJBBIlCl      ---

          '~~и'(':".\~'il:': ии..: 1~'\ :>/'t.~;,               ./';i      PMUf'[I'   (JYP)


                                                                                                             Chase Bank's side
                                                                                                             elevation with two .
                                                                                                             windows 7.5 feet
                                                                                                             above grade




55.100(8) (6) (g)

g. Variations in depth and roof line are encouraged for all elevations. To vary the otherwise
blank wall of most rear elevations, continuous flat elevations of over 100 feet in length should
be avoided by indents or variations in the wall. The use of decorative brick, masonry, or stone
insets and/or designs is encouraged. Another way to vary or soften this elevation is through
terrain variations such as an undulating grass area with trees to provide vertical relief.

h. Consideration of the micro-climate (e.g., sensitivity to wind, sun angles, shade, etc.) shall be
made for building users, pedestrians, and transit users, including features like awnings.

i. The vision statement identified a strong commitment to developing safe and attractive
pedestrian environments with broad sidewalks, canopied with trees and awnings.

FINDING 5:

Staff finds that the roofline/building profile is capped in the center with a hipped roof tower
that adds interest to the building roof line. There are 1.5 to 2- foot indents to the front and side
elevations to prOVide variations on the horizontal plane of the wall. The large sidewalk/plaza
area with planters and the awnings along the building face makes for an attractive pedestrian
environment. The criteria are met.


 ft
."    printed on recycled paper

                                                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                            15
55.100(8) (7) (c):

c. Commercial, office, and multi-family projects shall be built as close to the adjacent main
right-of-way as practical to facilitate safe pedestrian and transit access. Reduced frontages by
buildings on public rights-of-way may be allowed due to extreme topographic (e.g., slope, creek,
wetlands, etc.) conditions or compelling functional limitations, not just inconveniences or design
challenges.

FINDING 6:

The applicant was advised by staff that the bank should be built on the edge of the Willamette
Drive right-of-way per this approval criterion and the following reasons:

       и      the building can offer amenities for passersby inthe form of awnings which provide
              shelter from rain and sun,
       и      a focused activity area in front of the building creates opportunities for social
              interaction between people on the sidewalk and in the businesses (through the
              pedestrian level windows),
       и      as buildings are bum closer to the street, pedestrian level windows offer visual interest
              or visual snags for passing pedestrians and motorists,
       и      as buildings "crowd" the street, the narrower field of vision along Willamette Drive
              encourages slower and safer vehicle speeds.

The applicant responded with a document ("Reservations and Restrictions in Cedaroak Park")
recorded in 1948 which establishes a setback 60 feet from the Willamette Drive centerline.
Measuring 60 feet from the centerline pushes the bank 20 feet back from the front lot line. The
document appears to apply to all of the commercial development along Willamette Drive from
Cedaroak Drive to Fairview Avenue. This raises the question: if the decades old CCR has not
been enforced against any of the other commercial and office uses that were built along
Willamette Drive with their buildings contiguous to the right-of-way, then why should this
applicant be concerned about a CCR that clearly no one is enforcing? Certainly the City of West
Linn is not obliged to enforce private CCRs. Ultimately it comes down to the comfort level of
the developer and their sensitivity to perceived risk.




A.
....       printed on recycled paper

                                           6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                  16
  Nearby commercial buildings
  with zero foot setback




Subsection 55.100(8) (7) (c) states Reduced frontages by buildings on public rights-of-way may
                                   If


be allowed due to extreme topographic (e.g., slope, creek, wetlands, etc.) conditions or
compelling functional limitations, not just inconveniences or design challenges." The
Ifcompelling limitation" could be interpreted to be the covenant. In this case, no variance is
needed and the criterion is met.

Staff notes that the applicant compensates for the increased setback by providing a larger
paved patio area in front of the bank which could have social value with its landscaped planters
and seating space. (See photo of a similar seating area below).




o   printed on recycled paper

                                        6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                               17
 55.100(C). Compatibility between adjoining uses, buffering, and screening.
      1. In addition to the compatibility requirements contained in Chapter 24 CDC, buffering
      shall be provided between different types of land uses; for example, buffering between
      single-family homes and apartment blocks. However, no buffering is required between
      single-family homes and duplexes or single-family attached units. The following factors shall
      be considered in determining the adequacy of the type and extent of the buffer:
            a. The purpose of the buffer, for example to decrease noise levels, absorb air
                pollution, filter dust, or to provide a visual barrier.
            b. The size of the buffer required to achieve the purpose in terms of width and height.
            c. The direction(s) from which buffering is needed.
            d. The required density of the buffering.
             e. Whether the viewer is stationary or mobile.
      2. On-site scre,ening from view from adjoining properties of such things as service areas,
      storage areas, and parking lots shall be provided and the following factors will be considered
      in determining the adequacy of the type and extent of the screening:
            a. What needs to be screened?
            b. The direction from which it is needed.
            c. How dense the screen needs to be.
            d. Whether the viewer is stationary or mobile.
            e. Whether the screening needs to be year-round.
      3. Rooftop air cooling and heating systems and other mechanical equipment shall be
      screened from view from adjoining properties.
 D. Privacy and noise.
      1. Structures which include residential dwelling units shall provide private outdoor areas
      for each ground floor unit which is screened from view from adjoining units.
      2. Residential dwelling units shall be placed on the site in areas having minimal noise
      exposure to the extent possible. Natural-appearing sound barriers shall be used to lessen
      noise impacts where noise levels exceed the noise standards contained in West Linn
      Municipal Code Section 5.487.
      3. Structures or on-site activity areas which generate noise, lights, or glare shall be
      buffered from adjoining residential uses in accordance with the standards in subsection C of
      this section where applicable.
      4. Businesses or activities that can reasonably be expected to generate noise in excess of
      the noise standards contained in West Linn Municipal Code Section 5.487 shall undertake
      and submit appropriate noise studies and mitigate as necessary to comply with the code.
      (See CDC 55.110(B) (11) and 55.120(M).)
 If the decision-making authority reasonably believes a proposed use may generate noise
 exceeding the standards specified in the municipal code, then the authority may require the
.applicant to supply professional noise studies from time to time during the user's first year of
 operation to monitor compliance with City standards and permit requirements.




ft
\,   printed on recycled paper

                                      6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                             18
FINDING 7:

The main concern is to protect the residents of the multi-family housing at the rear of the site
from noise and glare associated with the three 24-hour teller and transaction machines and
vehicular traffic they generate. Staff finds that the potential impacts are mitigated by the
following factors:

       и      Distance. The nearest drive through lane is 110 feet from the nearest multi-family unit
              to the east.

       и      Screening. The applicant will install a solid wood fence four feet tall along the northeast
              edge of the drive through aisles. Additionally there are a row of evergreen (red cedar)
              trees along the northeast edge of the bank property. As proposed, they should block
              most headlight glare while the fence should diminish noise from idling engines to
              acceptable levels (Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) standards) per the
              applicant's noise study. Staff is concerned that the fence does not extend far enough in
              a south-easterly direction so as to block glare from apartments behind the 7-11 store.
              Proposed Condition 4 calls for extending the fence 30 feet to address that glare issue.

       и       Choice of light fixtures and location. The applicant's lighting (photometric) study shows
               that illumination from lights will diminish to 0.0 at the northeast property line. The
               applicant has changed from metal halide light bulbs to low pressure sodium and LED
               which will reduce glare and light intensity.

       и       Noise Analysis. The noise analysis by Michael Minor and Associates, dated February 21,
               2012 identifies and discusses the noise sources listed above and finds that the bank
               operations will meet DEQ standards. Staff finds that the criterion is met.

 Staff was also concerned about the noise associated with heating ventilation and air
 conditioning (HVAC) on the roof as well as its visual impact. Similar concerns existed in regards
 to the recycling /garbage enclosure. Staff finds that the HVAC will be hidden below the
 parapet wall so there is no visual impact and the noise study determined that it will meet DEQ
 standards. Similar findings apply to the recycling/garbage enclosure.




55.100 (J).           Crime prevention and safety/defensible space.

                1. Windaws shall be located so that areas vulnerable to crime can be surveyed by the
                occupants.
                2. Interior laundry and service areas shall be located in a way that they can be
                observed by others.
                3. Mailboxes, recycling, and solid waste facilities shall be located in lighted areas
                having vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



~.]I
,.",       printed on recycled paper

                                            6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                   19
              4. The exterior lighting levels shall be selected and the angles shall be oriented
              towards areas vulnerable to crime.
              5. Light fixtures shall be provided in areas having heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic
              and in potentially dangerous areas such as parking lots, stairs, ramps, and abrupt grade
              changes.
              6. Fixtures shall be placed at a height so that light patterns overlap at a height of
              seven feet which is sufficient to illuminate a person. All commercial, industrial,
              residential, and public facility projects undergoing design review shall use low or high
              pressure sodium bulbs and be able to demonstrate effective shielding so that the light is
              directed downwards rather than omni-directional. Omni-directionallights of an
              ornamental nature may be used in general commercial districts only.
              7. Lines of sight shall be reasonably established so that the development site is visible
              to police and residents.
              8. Security fences for utilities (e.g., power transformers, pump stations, pipeline
              control equipment, etc.) or wireless communication facilities may be up to eight feet tall
              in order to protect public safety. No variances are required regardless of location.

FINDING 8:

Staff's concern is surveillance of the drive through lanes at night time. Specifically, can the
drive through lanes be readily observed from Willamette Drive or nearby activity areas? Staff
finds that with the lines of sight to the south through the 7-11 parking lot and along the entry
driveway, the answer is yes. The proposed security lighting also helps.




-1

\                                                              _. ..
                                                                  ~
                                                           I   lAY ии --
                                                        _w~'.-/' ~ии::::~.
                                                           I                   ии
                                                          ~                  t=l:"= иии
                                                        ,{=--=:                           и
                                                       un (I          View shed that           и.иии
                                                                                                 ;
                                                  и t    can observe                                   ии
                                                 ~~~'==l the drive
                                                 и
                                                 и                    through lanes
.     . . . -e.t    I
                   -t--<j;- _ _ _.             __
                                                и:                L                       -'

                   :      WTTJ.4lJ1?7"J r. lJRTVr. и




ft
\.,   printed on recycled paper

                                                       6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                              20
75.060 APPROVAL CRITERIA (VARIANCE)
    The appropriate approval authority shall approve a variance request if all the following
criteria are met and corresponding findings offact prepared. The approval authority may
impose appropriate conditions to ensure compliance with the criteria. The approval authority
shall deny the variance if any of the criteria is not met.
   A. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply
generolly to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and result from Jot size or shape,
legally existing prior to the date of this code, topography, or other circumstances over which the
applicant has no control.
   B. The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant, which
is substantially the same as a right possessed by owners of other property in the same zone or
vicinity.
    C. The authorization of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the purposes and
standards of this code, will not be inconsistent with all other regulatory requirements, and will
not conflict with the goals and policies of the West Linn Comprehensive Plan.
    D. The variance request is the minimum variance which would alleviate the exceptional and
extraordinary circumstance.
   E. The exceptional and extraordinary circumstance does not arise from the violation of this
code.
    F. The variance will not impose physical limitations on other properties or uses in the area,
and will not impose physical limitations on future use of neighboring vacant or underdeveloped
properties as authorized by the underlying zoning classification. (Ord. 1442, 1999)

FINDING 9:

As previously noted, the applicant is requesting a variance to waive the 60% transparency
requirement for the front elevation facing Willamette Drive and to waive the 30% transparency
requirement for the two side elevations. The applicant also proposes that the transparency on
the rear should be transferable to the front and side elevations. Staff finds that there is no
transparency requirement for the rear elevation since it is not visible from a collector or higher
category street. Although the code allows transfers of transparency between the sides and
front and vice versa there is no transferability of transparency allowed from the rear elevation
to the side(s) or front. (Please see criteria preceding Finding 4.)




~-
.,.,   printed on recycled paper

                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            21
Building Elevation            Transpa:rency required per     Transpa;rency required     Amount of
                              CDC 55.100(8)(6)(f) at         per CDC 55.100(B)(6)(f)    transparency proposed
                              pedestrian level expressed     at pedestrian level        by Chase Bank at
                              as percent of that elevation   expressed in Iinea1 feet   pedestrian level (lineal
                                                                                        feet and percentage)
Front                         aO%                            61.2 ft. (102 ft. X60%)    43 ft. /42.1%
Side ("east")                 30%                            12.9 ft. (43 ft. X30%)       Oft. / 0%
Side (It west")               30%                            12.9 ft. (43 ft. X 30%)      Oft. / 0%
Rear                            0%                              Oft.                    39.75 feet
                                                                                        (not visible from
                                                                                        Willamette Drive)



Staff can, however, support the variances for the side elevations based on the applicant's
argument that the entryway at the rear of the bank and associated windows means that the
activities/uses that would typically go along that rear elevation, such as the vault room,
bathrooms, etc. are pushed to the sides of the building meaning that it is not practical to
introduce windows (particularly eye level windows) on those sides.

While the argument is compelling as it relates to the side elevations, particularly for those
spaces that demand either privacy or deference to security concerns, there are portions of the
front elevation does not suffer from those constraints. Staff finds that transparency can be
added to the front elevation.

                                                                             ~i,   ,
   ,.;        C'"     .It.
         r-~--~~




Examples of transparency include the new US Bank slated for the commercial space 250 feet
north of this site. That bank has 60% transparency on the front elevation, 55% transparency on
the side facing Willamette Drive and 35% on the side facing north on Willamette Drive. Umpqua
Bank in lake Oswego, shown below, is another good example of design with transparency.




A
...      printed on recycled paper

                                                6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                       22
The most compelling evidence demonstrating that more windows could be added is that Chase
Bank's architects (Callison Architects) submitted virtually the same building and elevation
designs to the City of Portland and the Hillsdale Neighborhood Association in 2011 but with
more windows along the front elevation (see the following illustrations). According to the
applicant's calculations (page 4 of the 04/12/12 submittal) the front elevation is 102 feet long
and the proposed transparency comprises 43 fee~ 4 inches which translates to 42.4%
transparency. If the Hillsdale version can have more transparency, then West Linn's version
should be able to as well.




Contrast the proposed West Linn version (above) with the Hillsdale version (below).




o   printed on recycled paper

                                    6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                           23
Adding nine feet of windows on the front elevation, which would be similar to the Hillsdale
Chase Bank proposal, would increase transparency to 51.2%; still shy of the required 60%, but
an improvement. Staff recommends approval of the variance with the condition that the
transparency be increased as indicated in the drawings below and per proposed Condition of
Approval 3.

Staff is also mindful of the legacy of this building in that it may not always be a bank and by
limiting the transparency we are also limiting its value for non-bank purposes such as retail
which require easy, more welcoming visual access.




     Applicant's
                                                 =:!~=""~-i"lJilIB!I!J
                                                                                                        -"tlBt.1l'oot
                                                                                                      и и и~ I & C "


     design                                                                                       /
                          __________________ .s:::




-- Staff's
     recommendation                                                                               I




                                                                                                       _........




Compliance with the standards of the underlying General Commercial zone


19.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.  A use permitted outright, CDC 19.030, is a use which requires no approval under the
provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a
similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.




o     printed on recycled paper

                                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                            24
FINDING 10:

Per Section 19.030 (12) banks are permitted outright under the land use category of "Financial,
insurance and real estate services".




19.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED
UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

A.  Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are the
requirements for uses within this zone:
1. The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 35
    feet.
2. The average minimum lot width shall be 50 feet.
3. The average minimum lot depth shall not be less than 90 feet.
4. Where the use abuts a residential district, the setback distance of the residential zone shall
    apply. For example, when the rear of a residential property abuts the side of a commercial
    property, the residential 20-foot setback shall apply to the commercial property. When the
    side of a residential property abuts the rear of a commercial property, the residential five-
    to seven-and-one-halfloot setback shall apply to the commercial property. In addition, a
    buffer of up to 50 feet may be required.




                 ~J
                                                   --
                        OlJSE                      HOUSE


                 zit




     J                                              '"
                                              I      I
                  20'
                 ~
                 COMMERCIAL
                                                    ~
                                                  COMl\

     II                                  --, I
                       SETBACK OF ABUTTING HOUSE
                   DICTA.TES COMMERCIAL SETBACK

5.   The maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent.
6.   The maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories or 35 feet for any structure
     located within 50 feet of a low or medium density residential zone, and three and one-half
     stories or 45 feet for any structure located 50 feet or more from a low or medium density
     residential zone.
7.   For lot lines that abut an arterial, there shall be no minimum yard dimensions or minimum
     building setback area, and the maximum building setback shall be 20 feet. The front
     setback area between the street and the building line shall consist of landscaping or a


ft
\J   printed on recycled paper

                                       6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                              25
    combination of non-vehicular hardscape areas (covered with impervious surfaces) and
    landscaped areas, with at least 25 percent of the front setback area consisting of
    landscaped areas. If there are not street trees within the public right-of-way, the front
    setback area shall include such trees per the requirements of the City Arborist.

FINDING 11:

The application meets the minimum 35 foot frontage width with a frontage width of 150 feet.
The required lot depth of 90 feet is exceeded by an average depth of 250 feet. The 20 foot rear
setback is exceeded by a distance of 70 feet to the drive through facilities and 180 feet to the
bank itself.

The maximum lot coverage of 50% is not exceeded since the bank and drive through teller
facilities comprise only 12% of the site. The bank's height of 26.5 feet is under the allowable
height of 50 feet. The setback of 20 feet meets the allowed setback of this zone and the
combination of at grade landscaping and landscaping in planters satisfies the required 25%
landscaping for the setback area. Therefore the standards of the General Commercial zone are
met.



48.025(8) (8)

 Shared driveways. The number of driveway and private street intersections with public streets
shall be minimized by the use of shared driveways with adjoining lots where feasible. The City
shall require shared driveways as a condition of land division or site design review, as
applicable, for traffic safety and access management purposes in accordance with the following
standards:

a. Shared driveways and frontage streets may be required to consolidate access onto a
collector or arterial street. When shared driveways or frontage streets are required, they shall
be stubbed to adjacent developable parcels to indicate future extension. "Stub" means that a
driveway or street temporarily ends at the property line, but may be extended in the future as
the adjacent parcel develops. "Developable" means that a parcel is either vacant or it is likely to
receive additional development (i.e., due to infill or redevelopment potential).

b. Access easements (i.e., for the benefit of affected properties) shall be recorded for all shared
driveways, including pathways, at the time offinal plat approval or as a condition of site
development approval.

FINDING 12:

To minimize occurrences of customers leaving the bank property, driVing 200 feet along
Willamette Drive, then turning into the shopping center immediately to the north of the bank
property, the owner of that property (tax lot 700 assessor's map 21E 23AA) has built a stub out


o   printed on recycled paper

                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            26
driveway to allow easy vehicular to allow easy vehicular connection between the two parcels.
This would reduce vehicle loads on Willamette Drive and would also reduce potential turn
conflicts on that street. The applicant's plans show this driveway connection. A mutual access
easement will be needed to allow use ofthe driveways (see Condition 5).




o   printed on recycled paper

                                   6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                          27
                                  EXHIBITS PC-l AND PC-2
                   AFFIDAVIT AND NOTICE MAILING
              PACKET AND COMPLETENESS LETTER


FILE NUMBER:                              DR-12-08/VAR-12-01



REQUEST:                            Class II Design Review approval for construction of a
                                    4,335 square foot Chase Bank Branch with parking and
                                    remote three-lane drive through at the rear of the
                                    building. A Class II Variance is required to waive the
                                    transparency (window) requirements on the front and
                                    side elevations.




 ft
'"    printed on recycled paper

                                         6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                28
                                              AFFIDAVIT OF NOTICE
We, the undersigned do hereby certify that, in the interest of the party (parties) initiating a proposed land use, the
following took place on the dates indicated below:


GENERAL
FileNo. :!5R-\L-O~   APPlicant'sName-1-PMovyo                                        Cho..s.t...'6:t.nl<-
Development Name       -,-----.----;-                               _
Scheduled ~ecisionDate <." (L, l,--3\c.!:!Z-=-------------------------
NOTICE: Notices were sent at least 20 days prior to the scheduled hearing, meeting, or decision date per Section
99.080 of the Community Development Code. (check below)
TYPEA _/
       _ '
A.       The applicant (date) ----j----'-------I--'-~___:---r----                          (Signed),_ _      ~_.__"U=______.:._~____,~':!4_--+-.(.....-V'--
B.       Mfected property owners (date) ---J'--'----~L-----                                (signed),_~~~
                                                                                                       ..\S..-=-.'...::-:c.~ry-+-<..-~V
                                                                                                                                    __
C.       School District/Board (date)         ----,-_-,----_ _                             (signed),                      ---,.                            _
D.       Other affected gov't. agencies (date) ~                                           (signed),_~0~.""'~~7U;.--=--=---'Of'+-l-_=_=_v
                                                                                                                                       __
E.       Mfected neighborhood assns. (date) ~ (AU,..')                                     (signed)_-",\5~.   ~~~lVL=~";=1r_..::.(".,=.L.-V---
F.       All parties to an appeal or review (date)          c; tI Lf{l Z-                  (signed),_ _\J=-' и -"",\S.-~4=и=-d'Y~~~V      __
At least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing or meeting, notice was published/posted:

Tidings (published date)        6" l~ I Z-                                                 (signed),_ _0--,----._u:.,.,_L-/--crtt---+-_..(......_иV""
                                                                                                                                               __
City's website (posted da-te-)-'5=-~~\'Z-:========~~~~                                     (signed),_ _-..:J=-=-..\."",?""=-,,tL==-nr~...(,....--=-.:v,----

SIGN
At least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing, meeting or decision date, a sign was posted on the property per
Section 99.080 of the Community Developm~~                         r

(date)      ~\ W t ~ (Signed)---.~tF:;~~Б.~&::1..~~====--                                                                                       _

NOTICE: N ces were sent at least 14 d                   prior to the scheduled hearing,             eeting, or decision date pe                         ection
99.080 of
        Community Development C                        (check below)
TYPE
A.       The applicant (date) _-+                                     _        (si   ed)                                    --;L-           _

B.       Mfected property 0           rs (date)                           _      igned),                              -/-                 _
C.       School District/Bo d (date) - - - - - - - - - 7 '                     (signed),                           ~----

D.       Other affected     v't. agencies (date) - - - - - - - - - , , L - -   (signed),                      --/-                      _
E.       Mfected nei      borhood assns. (date)                 ----.''--_     (signed),                 -+-                            _

Notice was pos d on the City's website at least 10             ys prior to the scheduled he
Date: _ _---''-                    _                                           (signed)'~---I-                                          ---'-
STAFF REPORT mailed to applicant, City Council/Planning Commission and any other applicable parties 10 days
prior to the scheduled hearing.
(date)                            _    (signed)                                                                                                     _



FINAL DECISION notice mailed to applicant, all other parties with standing, and, if zone change, the County
surveyor's office.
(date)                        _        (signed)                                                                                                     _

p:\ devrvw\forms\ affidvt of notice-land use (9/09)

                                                    6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                           29
                                                       CITY OF WEST LINN
                                                    PLANNING COMMISSION
                                                    PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
                                                  FILE NO. DR-12-08/VAR-12-01


The West Linn Planning Commission is scheduled to hold a public hearing on Wednesday, June 6,
2012, starting at 7:30 p.m. in the Council Chambers of City Hall, 22500 Salamo Road, West linn, to
consider the request of JP Morgan Chase Bank to build a bank at 19080 Willamette Drive (Tax Lots
703 and 705 of Clackamas County Assessor's Map 2-1E-23AA). The site was formerly occupied by
Kasch's Nursery.

The required permits include a Class II Design Review and Class II Variance. Design Review criteria are
found in Chapter 55. Class II Variance criteria are found in Chapter 75 of the CDC. Approval or
disapproval of the request by the Planning Commission will be based upon these criteria and these
criteria only. At the hearing, it is important that comments relate specifically to the applicable
criteria listed.

You have been notified of this proposal because County records indicate that you own property
within 500 feet of the proposed site and/or as required by Chapter 99 of the West Linn Community
Development Code.

The complete application in the above noted file is available for inspection at no cost at City Hall or
via the web site http://westlinnoregon.gov/planning/19080-willamette-dr-c1ass-ii-design-review-
construct-new-chase-bank or copies can be obtained for a minimal charge per page. At least ten days
prior to the hearing, a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost or copies can
be obtained for a minimal charge per page. For further information, please contact Peter Spir,
Associate Planner, at City Hall, 22500 Salamo Road, West Linn, OR 97068,
pspir@westlinnoregbn.gov, or 503-723-2539.

The hearing will be conducted in accordance with the rules of Section 99.170 of the Community
Development Code, adopted December 14, 1987, Ordinance 1129. Anyone wishing to present
written testimony on this proposed action may do so in writing prior to, or at the public hearing. Oral
testimony may be presented at the public hearing. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission
will receive a staff report presentation from the City Planner, and invite both oral and written
testimony. The Planning Commission may continue the public hearing to another meeting to obtain
additional information, leave the record open for additional evidence, arguments or testimony, or
close the public hearing and take action on the application as provided by state law. Failure to raise
an issue in person or by letter at some point prior to the close of the hearing, or failure to provide
sufficient specificity to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue, precludes an
appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA) based on that issue.

                                                                   SHAUNA SHROYER
                                                                   Planning Administrative Assistant

p:\devrvw\projects folder\projects 2012\DR-12-08\notice-DR-12-08




                                                       6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                              30
          19080 Willamette Dr.- Chase Bank - 500' Buffer                                                      .и       s
                                                                                                                               '



                                                                                                                                           18649




                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                   :--- 3706
                                                                                                             ~=~
                                                                                                                                    '.,      ('I')
                                                                                                                3611                   , '-.N
                                                                                                                                             (0
                                                                                                                                             ('I')



                                                                                                                   (0
                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                   (0
                                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                                   ('I')
                                                                                                                   ('I')           (0
                                                                                                                                   ('I')               ex>
                                                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                           N                           ....
                                                                                                                                                       ('I')
                                                                                                                           ex>
                                                                                                                           .....
                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                           N

                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                                 o
                                                                                                                           20240                 ....('I')
              Legend
94                l::i    West Linn City Limits

\                 [J      Taxlot Base

    \                     Unimproved ROW
                                                                                                                           20290
              ,     /-



              \:;943
    This product is for informational purposes and may not have been prepared       NOT TO SCALE          SNAPNOTIFY,MXD / AHA APP 3-24-2011
    for~ orbe suitable for legal, en&ineering. or surveying purposes.                              ~Unn
    Users of this information should review or consult the primary data
    and information sources to ascertain the usability of the Information.

    Taxlot Base Source: Clackamas County GIS
                                                                                                   GIS                        User Name:
                                                                                                          Map Creation Date: May 09,2012




                                                                             6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                    31
ALLEN WILLIAM A & DORIS J         BELDEN WILLIAM P & KELSEY A   BENNETI DURWARD E & YVONNE
3870 RIDGEWOOD WAY                PO BOX 388                    3320 WALLING WAY
WEST LINN, OR 97068               WEST LINN, OR 97068           WEST LINN, OR 97068



BEZMERTNEY GERARDO & GAIL         BLAIR KENT E & DEBBIE A       CARLSON BRENT
19042 WALLING CIR                 19464 WILDERNESS DR           19930 OLD RIVER DR
WEST LINN, OR 97068               WEST LINN, OR 97068           WEST LINN, OR 97068



CEDAR LINN LLC                    CITY OF WEST ~N               CRAIG WILLIAM S & ROXIE ANNE
7831 SE LAKE RD STE 200           22500 SA~ RD #600             19055 WALLING CIR
MILWAUKIE, OR 97267               WEST ~,OR 97068               WEST LINN, OR 97068



EHLINGER DAVID P & KATHERINE L    ERFAN INC/ERFAN ARSANJANI     ETHINGTON FLORENCE
WARNER                            3480 RIVERKNOLL WAY           3777 UAAVE
19790 OLD RIVER DR                WEST LINN, OR 97068           EMMETI,ID 83617
WEST LINN, OR 97068


FRANKEL MARILYN                   FURUI MASANO                  GORGONE FRANK RJR
3364 WALLING WAY                  18902 WALLING CIR             19970 OLD RIVER DR
WEST LINN, OR 97068               WEST LINN, OR 97068           WEST LINN, OR 91068



HACKNEY JULIE A TRUSTEE           HAYES MICHAEL & ELIZABETH     JORDAN WAYNE T
19470 WILDERNESS DR               19775 OLD RIVER DR            20235 NE INTERLACHEN LN
WEST LINN, OR 97068               WEST LINN, OR 97068           FAIRVIEW, OR 97024



KEENEY LEROY                      KHOSRAVI FARIDOON G           KNUDSEN PAUL C & NOEL Z LEE
18950 WALLING CIR                 PO BOX 157                    19679 OLD RIVER DR
WEST LINN, OR 97068               WEST LINN, OR 97068           WEST LINN, OR 97068



LACHMAN THEODORE D                LASTER JEFFREY & TONI         MCDERMOTI MARY GRACE
16984 ALDER CIR                   19472 WILDERNESS DR           18976 WALLING CIR
LAKE OSWEGO, OR 97034             WEST LINN, OR 97068           WEST LINN, OR 97068



MERCIER ROBERT H & JEANNE SYBIL   MICETIC JOHN S                MONTPART EDWARD R & HELEN M
19717 OLD RIVER DR                20024 OLD RIVER DR            19728 OLD RIVER DR
WEST LINN, OR 97068               WEST LINN, OR 97068           WEST LINN, OR 97068



MORE WILLIAM                      MURRAY HERMENA RTRUSTEE       NEW LIFE CHURCH ROBINWOOD
222 N RAMPART ST                  19620 S KALAL CT              PO BOX 5
NEW ORLEANS, LA 70112             OREGON CITY, OR 97045         WEST LINN, OR 97068



                                        6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                               32
NEWELL DAVID B                    NUTIBROCK PATRICIA M & MICHAEL F   POND WALLACE P CO-TRUSTEE
19635 OLD RIVER DR                19468 WILDERNESS DR                18983 WALLING CIR
WEST LINN, OR 97068               WEST LINN, OR 97068                WEST LINN, OR 97068



PRESBYTERY OF PORTLAND            QUINN LAURA MATCHAK                ROWINSKI DANIEL T & NANCY
19200 WILLAMETIE DR               18993 WALLING CIR                  3424 WALLING WAY
WEST LINN, OR 97068               WEST LINN, OR 97068                WEST LINN, OR 97068



RUSSELL SUSAN                     SEELY DOUGLAS E & RUTHANN          STEPTOANN M
19023 WALLING CIR                 1780 SW ADVANCE RD                 19844 OLD RIVER DR
WEST LINN, OR 97068               WEST LINN, OR 97068                WEST LINN, OR 97068



TRIBBETI FAMILY LTD PRTNSHP       TRIBBETI&SO                        WATSON WENDY
1942 WESTLAKE LOOP                1942 W      KE LOOP                19476 WILDERNESS DR
NEWBERG, OR 97132                 NE   ERG, OR 97132                 WEST LINN, OR 97068



WEST LINN INVESTORS LLC           WEST LINN PROPERTIES               ZHAO WEN & SUI YIN TIAN
ROBERT AMES                       10250 SW NORTH DAKOTA ST           1701 ASPEN CT
1136 NW HOYT #200                 TIGARD, OR 97223                   LAKE OSWEGO, OR 97034
PORTLAND, OR 97209

JP MORGAN CHASE                   ODOT REGION 1                      HANS CHRISTIANSEN
C/O STEPHEN CARY                  MARAH DANIELSON                    CALLISON ARCHITECTS
                            ND
10011 GRAVELLY LAKE DR, SW 2 FL   123 NW FLANDERS                    1420 FIFTH AVE, STE 2400
LAKEWOOD, WA 98499                PORTLAND, OR 97209                 SEATILE, WA 98101



STEVE GARNER                      SALLY MCLARTY                      ALEX KACHIRISKY
BHT NA PRESIDENT .                BOLTON NA PRESIDENT                HIDDEN SPRINGS NA PRESIDENT
3525 RIVERKNOLL WAY               19575 RIVER RD # 64                6469 PALOMINO WAY
WEST LINN OR 97068                GLADSTONE OR 97027                 WEST LINN OR 97068



JEF TREECE                        BILL RELYEA                        ANTHONY BRACCO
MARYLHURST NA PRESIDENT           PARKER CREST NA PRESIDENT          ROBINWOOD NA PRESIDENT
1880 HILLCREST DR                 3016 SABO LN                       2716 ROBINWOOD WAY
WEST LINN OR 97068                WEST LINN OR 97068                 WEST LINN OR 97068



DEAN SUHR                         DAVE RITTENHOUSE                   KRISTIN CAMPBELL
ROSEMONT SUMMIT NA PRESIDENT      SAVANNA OAKS NA PRESIDENT          SKYLINE RIDGE NA PRESIDENT
21345 MILES DR                    2101 GREENE ST                     1391 SKYE PARKWAY
WEST LINN OR 97068                WEST LINN OR 97068                 WEST LINN OR 97068



TROY BOWERS                       BETH SMOLENS                       ALMA COSTON
SUNSET NA PRESIDENT               WILLAMETTE NA PRESIDENT            BOLTON NA DESIGNEE
2790 LANCASTER ST                 1852 4TH AVE                       PO BOX 387
WEST LINN OR 97068                WEST LINN OR 97068                 WEST LINN OR 97068


                                        6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                               33
SUSAN VAN DE WATER           KEVIN BRYCK                DOREEN VOKES
HIDDEN SPRINGS NA DESIGNEE   ROBINWOOD NA DESIGNEE      SUNSET NA SECfTREAS
6433 PALOMINO WAY            18840 NIXON AVE            4972 PROSPECT ST
WEST LINN OR 97068           WEST LINN OR 97068         WEST LINN OR 97068


WEST LINN CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE                                                DR-12-08/ VAR-12-01
1745 WILLAMETIE FALLS DR                                MAILING LABELS
WEST LINN OR 97068




                                  6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                         34
                                                   CITY OF WEST LINN
                                                PLANNING COMMISSION
                                                PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
                                              FILE NO. DR-12-08/VAR-12-01


The West Linn Planning Commission is scheduled to hold a public hearing on Wednesday, June
6, 2012, starting at 7:30 p.m. in the Council Chambers of City Hall, 22500 Salamo Road, West
Linn, to consider the request of JP Morgan Chase Bank to build a bank at 19080 Willamette
Drive (Tax Lots 703 and 705 of Clackamas County Assessor's Map 2-1E-23AA). The site was
formerly occupied by Kasch's Nursery.

The required permits include a Class II Design Review and Class II Variance. Design Review
criteria are found in Chapter 55. Class II Variance criteria are found in Chapter 75 of the CDC.
Approval or disapproval of the request by the Planning Commission will be based upon these
criteria and these criteria only. At the hearing, it is important that comments relate specifically
to the applicable criteria listed.

The complete application in the above noted file is available for inspection at no cost at City
Hall or via the web site http://westlinnoregon.gov/planning/19080-willamette-dr-c1ass-ii-
design-review-construct-new-chase-bank or copies can be obtained for a minimal charge per
page. At least ten days prior to the hearing, a copy of the staff report will be available for
inspection at no cost or copies can be obtained for a minimal charge per page. For further
information, please contact Peter Spir, Associate Planner, at City Hall, 22500 Salamo Road,
West Linn, OR 97068, pspir@westlinnoregon.gov, or 503-723-2539.

The hearing will be conducted in accordance with the rules of Section 99.170 ofthe Community
Development Code, adopted December 14, 1987, Ordinance 1129. Anyone wishing to present
written testimony on this proposed action may do so in writing prior to, or at the public
hearing. Oral testimony may be presented at the public hearing. At the public hearing, the
Planning Commission will receive a staff report presentation from the City Planner, and invite
both oral and written testimony. The Planning Commission may continue the public hearing to
another meeting to obtain additional information, leave the record open for additional
evidence, arguments or testimony, or close the public hearing and take action on the
application as provided by state law. Failure to raise an issue in person or by letter at some
point prior to the close of the hearing, or failure to provide sufficient specificity to afford the
decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue, precludes an appeal to the Land Use
Board of Appeals (LUBA) based on that issue.



                                                                           SHAUNA SHROYER
                                                                           Planning Administrative Assistant

p:\devrvw\projects folder\projects 2012\DR-12-08\notice-DR-12-08 tidings




                                                   6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                          35
        /1 CITY OF


         'West Linn
April 19, 2012

Hans Christiansen
Callison Architects
1420 Fifth Avenue, Suite 2400
Seattle, WA 98101

SUBJECT: DR-12-08 et al completeness

Dear Mr. Christiansen:

Your application, submitted on February 27, 2012 with a subsequent re-submittal on April 16,
2012 has been found to be complete as of April 19, 2012. The City now has 120 days from
today's date to exhaust all local review and potential appeals. That period will lapse on August
18,2012.

Staff expects that the application will be noticed and heard by the Planning Commission at a
public hearing on either May 23 or June 6, 2012. You can expect to receive notice of the exact
hearing date at least 20 days in advance.

This letter also waives specific submittal requirements and approval criteria as allowed by CDC
55.085(B) and as requested by the applicant. Specifically, CDC approval criteria 55.100(B) (2)
(d) requires that both for "non-residential and residential development, the layout shall achieve
at least 70 percent of maximum density for the developable net area..." The CDC uses 'dwelling
units per net acre' as its measure of density. The Planning Director finds that this standard was
written in response to Metro's 70 percent density rule for housing and that "non-residential"
development was added to the criterion in error. There are no density standards for non-
residential development. Staff went through the exercise of trying to apply the 70% rule to
non-residential development and found that the standard was unworkable, inapplicable and
serves no public purpose. The Planning Director approves the waiver request.

CDC submittal requirement of 55.110 (B) (3) calls for a slope analysis which identifies portions
of the site according to the slope ranges as follows:

          a.     Zero to 15 percent;

          b. 16 to 25 percent;

          c.     26 to 35 percent;




                                       6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                              36
           d.   36 to 50 percent;

           e.   Greater than 50 percent.

The Planning Director finds that the applicant has provided a topographic survey with one foot
contour intervals which provides all the information needed to understand the form of the site
and any grading plans that may be proposed. Planning Director also found that slope issues are
not relevant on a lot that is 95 percent flat and substantially built out. The small sloped area
will be part of an undeveloped landscaped area that will act as a buffer or transition to the
residential properties west of the site.




This letter also waives the CDC submittal requirement of 55.110 (8) (13) which require the
identification of Type I and II lands in map form and the provision of a table which identifies
square footage of Type I and II lands also as percentage of total site square footage. (Type I
lands have slopes over 35% while Type II lands have slopes 25-35%.) The Planning Director
finds that type I and II breakdowns are not relevant on a lot that is 95 percent flat and
substantially built out. The only purpose of the Type I and II breakdown is to see if a Planned
Unit Development is triggered per CDC 24.060: 1. Any development site composed of more
                                                 II




                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            37
than 2S percent of Type I or Type /I lands, as defined by CDC 24.060(C), shall be developed as a
PUD." Since these lands comprise less than five percent of the site then the Type I and II breakdown
is not germane.

 Also, for the purpose of this application, the applicant has provided a topographic survey with
one foot contour intervals which provide all the information needed to understand the form of
the site and any grading plans that may be proposed.

Please contact me at 503-723-2539 or by email at pspir@westlinnoregon.gov if you have any
questions or comments.


Sincerely,




Peter Spir
Associate Planner

p:completeness DR-12-08 chase bank-new




                                         6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                38
                                      EXHIBIT PC-3
                                 APPLICANT'S SUBMITTAL

FILE NUMBER:                            DR-12-08/VAR-12-01



REQUEST:                          Class II Design Review approval for construction of a
                                  4,335 square foot Chase Bank Branch with parking and
                                  remote three-lane drive through at the rear of the
                                  building. A Class II Variance is required to waive the
                                  transparency (window) requirements on the front and
                                  side elevations.




<)   printed on recycled paper

                                       6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                              39
                                                                                                 <I
                                                                                          CALLISON


    April 12,2012

    Mr. Peter Spir
    Associate Planner
    City of West Linn
    22500 Salamo Rd.
    West Linn, OR 97068

   Re:     Chase - Cedar Oak & Willamette, 19080 Willamette Drive, West Linn, OR
           210461.89
           Class II Design Review Application (DR-12-08 et al) - Completeness Review Response

   Dear Mr. Peter Spir:

   Unless noted please find 3 copies of the following materials attached in support of our response to your
   Completeness Review comment letter dated March 22, 2012. Plans include full size and 11" x 17".

   3-copies          Architectural Drawings (Site Plan, AO.l; Floor Plan, ALl; & Elevations, A4.1, A4.2, &
                     A4.3
   3-copies          Preliminary Development Plan (Civil, Utilities & Grading), 1 of 1
   3-copies          ALTA Survey (Existing Conditions), 1 of 1, dated 04/06/12
   3-copies          Landscape Plan (L-l) & Irrigation Plan (L-2)
   3-copies          Site Electrical Plan (Lighting), SE1.0
   3-copies          Site Photometric Plan (Lighting), SP1.0
   3-copies          Bicycle Rack Detail (8 W' xli")
   3-copies          Preliminary Drainage Analysis (updated with revised building SP)
   I-PDP             Plat Reservations & Restrictions re: 60' Building Setback from Willamette Drive.llm.lY-
                     on CD). Also submitted PDP via e-mail direct to Peter Spiro
    I-CD             PDP's of Completeness Response Documents & Drawings

   Below we will respond to your comments in the order they appear in your letter. Our responses will be
   in bold text to differentiate comments from our responses:

   55.100(A) (7) Parking. (Chapter 46) Bike parking must be show detail of racks.

   We have included 3 copies of an 8 Vi' x 11" bicycle rack detail with this response. The bicycle rack
   will be offset from the building 3' and aligned parallel with the building so that bicycles can be
   parked parallel to the building on either side of the rack. This configuration will keep bicycles
   from projecting out into the adjacent walkway and will allow bicycles to remaining protect by the
   storefront canopy. Details will be added to our construction drawings following design review
   approval.

   *CDC chapter 19.070(A) (7) requires that 25% of the area of the front setback comprise landscaping.
   The applicant has 19.5% devoted to landscaping. Exceptions as proposed by the applicant require the
   preservation of a significant natural feature. None exist at the site. The only way to seek relief is by a




-+-----1420            FIFTH AVENUE #2400   SEATTLE, WASHINGTON 98101-2343

   T 206 623 4646   F 206 623 4625   www.callison.com
                                            6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                   40
Chase - Cedar Oak & Willamette, 19080 Willamette Drive, West Linn, OR
Completeness Review Response (DR-12-08 et al)
04/12/12
Page 2



Class II variance; however, the likelihood of approvalis not high given that the solution of simply
adding more landscaping is available.

Minor adjustments have been made to the plaza area located between the public sidewalk and
building setbacldine, thus we have recalculated landscaping areas and percentages required. The
area between the back ofthe required 12' sidewalk and 20' building setback line is 1,782 SF. 25%
of this area is required to be lands~aped which equates to 445 SF. There are landscape areas
locatedиto the north and south of the proposed plaza area between the back of public sidewalk and
the building. The northerly landscape area equates to 123 SF, the southerly landscape area
equates to 172 SF. In order to meet the minimum 25% landscape percentage, 150 SF of additional
landscape area isreq~ired.

In order to meet the requirement we have added two raised planter areasto the front of the
building. The planters will be constructed of similar materials to the bank branch. They will be
20" tallи and incorporate a l' wide informal seating area around the perimeter of the planters.
Each planter area has an internal dimension of 19' x 4' equating to 76 SF Of planting area per
planter. Together the planters provide an additional 152 SF of landscaping, allowing the project to
meet the minimum front setback landscaping requirement.

55.100(B) (2) (b) requires a tree inventory andreview by City Arborist. None are provided.

Existing trees have been added to the ALTA survey drawing.

The landscape plan also includes the location of the existhlg trees, as well as a tree inventory.

55.100(B) (2) (d) requires that both for "non-residential and residential development, the layout shall
achieve qt least 70 percent ofmaximum density for the developable net area... " The CDC uses
'dwelling units per net acre'as its measure of density. Staff finds that this standard was written in
response to Metro's 70 percent density rule for housing &lld that "non-residential" development was
added to the criterion in error. There are no denSIty standards for non-residential development. Staff
went through the exercise of trying to apply the 70% rule to non-residential development and found that
the standard was unworkable, inapplicable and serves no public purpose. The. applicant should ask for a
waiver of this criterion through CDC 99.035(B) (2). Staff will support the waiver request.

As discussed above,non..residential development was added to the criteria of 55.100(B) (2) (d) in
error, and we therefore request a waiver from the criteria as allowed for by CDC 99.035(B) (2).

55.l00(B) (3) requires that the topography and natural drainage shall be preserved to the greatest degree
possible. The applicant needs to discuss the ten foot difference in grade at the rear of the site and what
kind of grading will take place in this sloped area.

This requirement appearsto have beencreated in order to]indfimpact ofdevelopment on
undeveloped lands and their drainage patters. The sitewas home to a nursery and the, majority of
this site has already been impacted by previous development. The front half of the site slopes
gently away from Qeayerton-HiIlSdale Hwyand then slopes downhillmore steeply along the north
and south sides of the existing Kasch's Nursery building. The existing building itself is stepped to




                                    6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                           41
Chase - Cedar Oak & Willamette, 19080 Willamette Drive, West Linn, OR
Completeness Review Response (DR-12-08 et al)
04/12/12
Page 3


match the slope. There is a lower flat area behind the Kasch's Nursery building that is 20'-30'
wide before sloping downhill again toward the rear property line.

Grading proposed is to the minimum extent necessary to develop the site. Proposed grading will
not alter existing drainage patterns as the site will still slope downhill and away from Beaverton-,
Hillsdale Hwy toward the rear property line. Beyond the drive-thru bypass lane the site grading
has been adjusted to provide for a relatively flat area approximately 3' wide (typically). The flat
area was created to allow for 4' tall solid wood screen fence to be located near the edge of the
drive-thru lanes for the purposes of screening the drive-thru, as requested by the City. Beyond the
fence line the site will be graded at a 3:1 slope until the grading matches the natural grade. The
3:1 slope area will have trees and shrubs planted on near the fence to provide additional vegetative
screening once landscaping matures. Beyond the fence the slope will also be landscaped with salal
which will provide slope stability and will eventually grow to blanket the slope and the remainder
of the rear of the site.

*55.100(B) (6) (f) Transparency. This section requires that 60 percent of the lineal frontage of the street
facing elevation comprise pedestrian level windows. The applicant contends that transparency is
measured in terms of square footage, and not in lineal feet. The applicable section is as follows:

           f     The main front elevation of commercial and office buildings shall provide at least 60
            percent windows or transparency at the pedestrian level to create more interesting
            streetscape and window shopping opportunities. One side elevation shall provide at least 30
            percent transparency. Any additional side or rear elevation, which is visible from a collector
            road or greater classification, shall also have at least 30 percent transparency.
            Transpa.rency on other elevations is optional. The transparency is measured in lineal
            fashion. For example, a lOO-foot-long building elevation shall have at least 60 feet (60
            percent of lOO feet) in length of windows. The window height shall be, at minimum, three feet
            tall. The exception to transparency would be cases where demonstratedfunctional
            constraints or topography restrict that elevationfrom being used. When this exemption is
            applied to the main front elevation, the square footage of transparency that would ordinarily
            be required by the above formula shall be installed on the remaining elevations at pedestrian
            level in addition to any transparency required by a side elevation, and vice versa. The rear of
            the building is not required to include transparency. The transparency must be flush with the
            building elevation.

                                              30%




60 percent of lineal street facing or main elevation is windows. 30 percent ofone side elevation is
windows. You may transfer windowsfrom the side tofront, or vice versa.




                                   6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                          42
Chase -CedarOak&Willamette, 19080Willamette Drive,West Linn, OR
COinpleteness Review Response (DR-12-0Sиetal)
04112112
Page 4




                        (Windows not ateye level (lfldlornotflushWith building.)

The City ofWestLinn has interpretedthis sectionto mean thattransparencyis measured inlineal
fashion only and ootin terms of sguare.feet. The front and rear elevations show pedestrian level
transparency amounts df41% only. That is below the requisite 60%. The two sideelevatiQns thatneed
30% transparency per code provideO% each.. Staff recognizesthefunctional requirements ofabank and
that certain areasиmust.be.secure...иEvenиif some additional windowsи were added,. the bank is so far from
the reqUired amountthat a.ClassII Variance should be applied for.

The front fac;ade isи102'longwhich would require 61 '-'1," oftransparency. Side elevationsboth are
visiblefrom the highway. The side elevations are each 43' long, which wouldrequirelZ'-l1" of
transparency perelevanon fora total of 25'-10". Overall the project is required to provide 87
Iinealfeet oftransparency.

The proposed front fac;adehasfour 6' wide.pedestrian scale windows.anda.19'-4"storefront
window/door system attheentry;providing43'.4" of transparency. The two clerestory windows
provided on each side elevation do notmeet the definition of pedestrian ~cale windows and
therefore do not count toward thetransparency requirement.

We believeи.there is a conflict in the code regarding .the transparency. requirements for rear
elevations. On one hand the code states thai the rear elevation is not required to provide
transparency. But on the other hand, if the rear elevation is visible from adjacent roadways of a
collector classification or higher (highlighteclabove), thel130 % glazing is requited to be provided
on the rear elevation. Because of this it cannot be definitively stated that thereafisexempt from
the requirement to provide transparency.

Because code doesllot fully exempt.rear elevations from therequirement to provide transparency
we believe the rear elevation should be allowed to be considered as a qualifying elevationfor the
purpose oftransparency transfer~nce in the same manner as front and side<elevations are
considered. The.rear elevation.is notvisiblefromWillametteDrive. Thefefore,lOO% of the
transparencyprovided~nthe rear ofthebank should be ttansferable for the pUrpOSe ofmeeting
the transparency requirements for the two side .elevations and.the.front elevation.и The .r~ar
elevation has four 6' .widtl pedestrian scale.windows and a.15'-9" storefrontwindow/doorsystem.at
the rear entry; providing 39'-9" oftransparency.




                                   6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                          43
Chase - Cedar Oak & Willamette, 19080 Willamette Drive, West Linn, OR
Completeness Review Response (DR-12-08 et al)
04112/12
Page 5


If considering glazing transference as allowed by code, the qualifying transparency provided at
the front and rear elevations, combined, provide 83'-1" of transparency for the project as a whole,
which is only 4'-11" (5.6%) shy of meeting the requirement of87'.

The project provides 94.4% of the required transparency. Site layout and the resultant ~uilding
design, combined with functional and security requirements of the bank precludes providing the
required amount oftransparency. In considerationof the transparency provided and the
functional and security requirements of the Bank we request a variance from the standard.
Following responses to the remainder of the staff completeness review comments, please see
Transparency Variance section for fulhesponses to the variance approval criteria of CDC section
75.060.

*55.100(B) (6) (h) discusses awnings, Although it does not spell out the dimensionrequired, staff
indicated to the applicant at the pre-app stage the importance of awnings projecting at least 4-6 feet out
from the building so as to provide realistic protection from the weather similar to awnings on the
commercial structures to the north on Willamette Drive. (Staff provided examples of awnings at nearby
buildings as examples at the pre-application conference.). The applicant proposes 3-4'4" awnings that
are 10 feet 8 inches above grade. Awnings that narrow and that high above grade do not provide any
significant or functional protection from the elements. Also, they do not meet the contextual design
requirements of (6) (b) and the human scale requirements of (6)и(e) to the extent that awnings that were
six feet wide or more.

The proposed canopy at the front entry projects 6' from the storefront window system. The two
flanking canopies located on either side ofthe entry tower element have been revised to project
from the building to align with the projection of the center.entry canopy. Canopy depth varies
along flanking canopies from 6'-3" to 4'-11".

 *55.100(B) (7) (c) requires "commercial, office, and multifamily projects shall be built as close to the
adjacent main right-of-way as practical to facilitate safe pedestrian and transit access. Reduced
frontages by buildings on public rights-of-way may be allowed due to extreme topographic (e.g., slope,
creek, wetlands, etc.) conditions or compellingft4nctionallimitations, not just inconveniences or design
challenges. " The applicant states that CCRs prohibit positioning the building closer to the ROW. The
applicant has provided no evidence of the CCR from a title company or its current applicability.

We have forwarded a copy of the language from the plat Cedar Oak Park Reservations &
Restrictions that spell out the 60' building setback measured from the centerline eCL) of the Hwy
(Willamette Drive). This language is applicable and runs with the land and has not been revoked
by any other documents. Due to the original doctmlent's poor quality we have only submitted the
document electronically in PDFfonnatи. You willfind the document on the CD of documents &
drawings submitted. Additionally we have e-mailed you a copy ofthe document for your review.

55.100(B)(7)(d) requireS that "accessways, parking lots, and internal driveways shall accommodate
pedestrian circulation and access by specia,Uy textured, colored,. or clearly defined footpaths atleast six
feet wide. Paths shall be eight feet wide when abutting parking areas or travellanes"~ The applicant
should show a pedestrian walkway from the reБ\.f parking stalls to the. reat entrance and further




                                    6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                           44
Chase - Cedar Oak & Willamette, 19080 Willamette Drive, West Linn, OR
Completeness Review Response(DR-12-08 et al)
04/12/12
Page 6


accommodate that by shifting the ADA spaces two spaces north so the ADA aisle serves double function
as a pedestrian access way.

We have added a cross-walk style striped pedestrian walkway connecting from the four compact
stalls across the. drive-aisle to theи accessible aisle between the two J\DA spaces. Please note that as
discussed we were not able to shift the ADA access stalls and aisle closer to the entry due to the
landing area required fQr the accessible ralllpserving the accessible stalls.

Staff also notes a lack of pedestrian facilities that would allow pedestrian access between the bank and
the properties to the north and south and between the rear parking area and Willamette Drive as required
per 55.l00(B)(7)(e). With the current designpedestriahs at the rear of the bank (customers, employees)
will be forced to walkin the travel lanes/driveways or across landscaping if they want to accessи
neighboring businesses or Willamette Drive.

As we have reviewed over the phone and via sketches sent via e-mail, we have revised the
walkways at the rear of the building to extend to the north property line and to the edge of the
shared access drive at theиsouth side of the site. Note that where adjacent to parking stalls the
walkway measures 8' in width in consideration of possible vehicle'overhang. Where not adjacent
to parking the walkways are 6' in width.

As discussed we have added a less formal walkway along the south edge of the building to allow
connectivity from the public sidewalk at Willamette Drive to the walkways at the rear of the site.
This walkway is 4' wide and will be constructed of compacted crushed limestone, compacted
decomposed granite, or concrete; depending on Chase's preference. Note the plan represents a
concrete walk; however, final materials will be selected when construction plans are prepared.

*55.100(C) (D) requires consideration of the glare and noise. The applicant's acoustic engineer has
already discussed noise in his report. Although the noise levels should meet DEQ standards, the noise
level is close enough to the allowable limit to consider some mitigation as the acoustic engineer
proposes.

Glare has not been discussed. Staff is concerned about glare from vehicles approaching the drive
through tellers/ATM and the impact on residences to the east. Mitigation may be required in the form of
a solid four foot high wood fence or CMU wall at the east edge of the drive through lanes to block glare
and also diminish noise levels to meet DEQ standards. Relying solely on vegetation for noise/glare
mitigation is impractical since the trees selected will take years before they provide even a modicum of
screening.

As requested the site plan has been adjusted to provide a 4' solid wood fence for screening the
drive-thru area to mitigate glare from vehicles approachingdrlve through tellers/ATM. Note: As
discussedи in the description of site grading earlier in this. response letter, grading adjacent to the
drive~thru lanes has been adjusted to provide a relatively Oat (lIlaxslope 4:1) area for the fence to
be constructed on before the slope breaks awaydownhillfrOIll the fence line.
                    i
55.100(0) Delineation of the rear ofthe site bya fence is neededto identify that area as a private space.




                                    6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                           45
Chase - Cedar Oak & Willamette, 19080 Willamette Drive, West Linn, OR
Completeness Review Response (DR-12-08 et al)
04112/12
Page 7


A chainlink fence has been called out on the site plan along .the rear property line. Final details for
fence material will be included in Final Site Development plans. Fillal fence line location will need
to be field verified due to several trees being located al()ngor on the rear property line.     .

*55.100(]) (6) The lighting plan shows metal halide fixtures. Low or high pressure sodiumfixtures are
required per the CDC. The City will consider LED lighting substitution. All fixtures must be physically
shielded especially from the housing to the east.

ParkinglightJightingpoles been updated to Low Pressure Sodium. LED lighting fixtures are
proposed for the under canopy lighting for the drive-thru canopy. Compact Fluorescent Light
(CFL) fixtures are proposed for building .mounted site lighting.

19.070(A) (7) reqUires that 25% of the area of the front setback be landscaped. The applicant provides
19.5%. The applicant requests an exception. The CDC does not offer exceptions forthis unless it is for
a shortfall of 10% and a significant natural feature (e.g. heritage tree) is saved. Those conditions do not
exist here; A Class II Variance is the only option apart from adding more landscaping.

As discussed earlier in this responseиletter. Two raised planter beds were added between to the
building plaza located between the 12' sidewalk and building setback line to meet the 25%
landscape requirements. See updated Site Plan, Development Plan and Landscape Plan

55.110 (B) (3)   A slope analysis which identifies portionsof the site according to the slope ranges as
follows:
           a.    Zero to 15 percent;
           b.    16 to 25 percent;
           c.    26 to 35 percent;
           d.    36 to 50 percent;
           e.    Greater than 50 percent.

Alternately, the applicant could ask for a waiver of this criterionthrotigh CDC 99.035(B). Staff will
support the waiver request.                                                             .

Per CDC 99.035(B) we request the requirement to provide a slope category map be waived. The
site is a pre-developed site that is proposed to be redevelopedи. Adequate information necessary for
the review of the proposed proJect has been provided in. the form of an ALTA survey showing
existing site conditions and a Preliminary Development Plan showing the proposed grading of the
site.

55.110 (B) (10) show loc~tion of trees with 6-inchcaliperat five.feet.

The ALTA survey has beenupdatedtosho",tree~asspecit1ed      above. The tandscape Plan and
Preliminary Development pJa,nhave been updated tosJ,tow the existingtree locations as well.

55.110 (B) (13) Identify Type land n lanqs in map fortII; Provideи. a t&ble which identifies square footage
ofType I and II lands also as percentage oftota!. site sqllare footage. (Type I lands have slopes over 35%
whileType II lands have slopes 25иJ5%) Ifno part of the site falls into those categories then please state




                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            46
Chase- Cedar Oak: &Willamette, 19080 Willamette Drive, West Linn, OR
Completeness Review Respon~e (DR~ 12-08 et al)
04/12/12
Page 8


as such. Alternately, the applicant could ask for a waiver of this criterion through CDC 99.035(B). Staff
will support the waiver request

Per CDC99.035(B) we request the requirement to proYide a slope category map be waived. The
site is a pre-developed site that is proposed to be redeveloped. Adequate information necessary for
the reYiew of the proposed project has been proYided in the form of an ALTA survey showing
existing site conditions and a Preliminary Development Plan showing the proposed grading of the
site.

55.130 Grading Plan. No grading plan is provided. The onlyinformation on grading is shown on the
Preliminary Development Plan. Erosion Control measures should be shown too (also required by
55.l50(B) (1).)

Grading information was provided on the Preliminary Development Plan proYided as part of the
original application. Erosion control notes were included on the original Preliminary
Development Plan.

The Preliminary Development Plan has been updated to provide more clear grading information.
Erosion control measures иhave 'also been added to the Preliminary Development Plan in response
to the comment above.

55.140 Architectural Plans. No rooftop drawings provided to show location and dimensions (height) of
HVAC. HVAC is supposed to be visually screened.

Building Sections have been provided to show location and dimensions of rooftop BVAC
equipment.

Chapter 54: Landscaping. Discuss plans to remove non~native plantlinvasives at the rear of the property
and replace with approved natives or allowed alternative material.

A note has been added to the Landscape plan regarding the non~nativeplantJinvasive
                                                                                 at the rear
of the site. The note states the following:

"Remove all invasive andnon~native plant material. Replace with Salalas shown."


Engineering Comments:

In the course of reviewing the traffic report and the storm draina.ge report a disparity in the building
square footages was noted which may have affected the calcula.tions in one or both oftltose reports.

Traffic Report
    и ExistingNurs~ryGarden Center:;: 9,400sq ft
    и Proposed Building =4,324 sq ft

Storm brainage Report




                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            47
Chase - Cedar Oak &Willamette, 19080 Willamette Drive, West Linn, OR
Completeness Review Response (DR-12-08 et al)
04/12/12
Page 9


    и   Existing. Nurseryи Garden Center = 5,630 sq ft
    и   Proposed Building =4,120 sq ft

At least one or both of these reports need to be modified. to reflect the correct building square footage.

The Storm Drainage Report has been updated to reflect a buildingfootprint area of 4,324 SF.


TRANSPARENCY VARIANCE:

On behalf of the bank we request the City of West Linn grant variance from the transparency
requirements of CDCи section 55.100(B) (6) (t) Transparency. We request the transference of
transparency allowed by the codeи be considered as part of this variance request in order to demonstrate
that the bank is requestingи theи minimum variance necessary to meet the code.

As discussed earlier in this response letter, there are transparency provisions in the code that would
require the rear elevation of a project to provide 30% transparency if, similar to side elevations, it is
visible from adjacent roads of a collector classification or higher. Furthermore, nowhere in the code
section does it state that an elevation used for transference must itself be an elevation that is required to
provide transparency.

Therefore, we request that the City allow the rear elevation to also be considered a qualifying elevation
for the purposes of applying the provision in the code section that allows for the transference of
transparency; thereby accepting transparency calculations provided earlier in this response letter.

Below we will respond to the variance approval criteria in bold text.

75.060 APPROVAL CRITERIA
The appropriate approval authority shall approve a variance request if all the following criteria are met
and corresponding findings offactprepared. The approval authority may impose appropriate.. conditions
to ensure compliance with the criteria. The approval authority shall deny the variance if any of the
criteria are not met.

A. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply generally to
otherproperties in the same zone or vicinity, and result from lot size or shape, legally existing prior to
the date ofthis code, topography, or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control.

The proposed project isa bank.и To meet code the building has been aligned with the street
frontage alongWilIamette Drive and is sited to provide as much building frontage on Willamette
Drive as feasible. Customer parking is located totherear of the building. Additionally, walkways
interior to the site provide for connections to adjacent retail development to the north and south of
the site.

Providing dual entries is important to the functiollof the site and the. bank. The dual entry
provides strong connectivity to the adjacent retain developments via vehicular and pedestrian




                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            48
Chase - Cedar Oak & Willamette, 19080 Willamette Drive, West Linn, OR
Completeness Review Response (DR-12-08 et al)
04/12/12
Page 10


connections interior to the site, as weIlQs to the public via the entry from the public sidewalk
along WiIlamette Drive.

The иsacrific~-that results from having a dual entry is there is effectively no "rear'; to the building.
and as a result no place to locate "back ofhouse" functions/uses and security sensitive uses. In this
particular instance the dualentrles are aligned on the center of the building requiring "back of
house" and security sensitive areasиto be located in the flanks of the building~ .The building has
been designed and sited to meet code requirements. We believe providing the dual entry building
provides the best building layout for this site,howeverfunctional and security requirements of the
bankprecIude the addition of more transparency to the building.

B. The .variance is necessary for the preservation ofa property right ofthe applicant, which is
substantially the same as a right possessed by owners ofother property in the same zone or vicinity.

Banks are permitted USes allowed by code. The site layout and building location proposed meet
the Community De\'elopment Code requirements for this site. Additionally, the building design
and materials are ofhigh quality and meet the design intent of the code. When considering the
transparencyreqtJirements, the impact of functional &. security requirements should be
considered as a limiting factor and not be counted as a strike against the design of the bank.

C. The authorization of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the purposes and standards
of this code, will not be inconsistent with all other regulatory requirements, and will not conflict with the
goals and policies of the West Linn Comprehensive Plan.

With the exception of meeting transparency requirements, we believe the project and building are
of a high quality design; and for all intents and pUrPoses meet the purposes and standards of the
Community Development Code. Authorization of the variance will not be detrimental to the
purposes and standards of this code, will not be inconsistent with all other regulatory
requirements, and win not conflict with the goals and policies of the West Linn Comprehensive
Plan.

D. The variance request is the minimum variance which would alleviate the exceptional and
extraordinary circumstance.

Assuming the rear elevation Can be considered for the purposes of allowing for the transference of
transparency from one facade to another; our calculations\have demonstrated the project provides
83'-1"oftrartsparency. The transparency proposed tobe provided is only 4'-11" (5.6 %) shy of
the 87'of transparency required for the project as a whole. We believe this percentage of
deficiency to be minor and isthe minimum variance required to a1leviQte the circumstances of the
bank. For a fuII discussion of transparency calculations please see pages 4 & 5 of this response
letter.

E.   The exceptional and extraordinary circumstance does not arise from the violation ofthis code.

The circumstances of the bank do not arise from the violation of this code.




                                     6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                            49
Chase - Cedar Oak & Willamette, 19080 Willamette Drive, West Linn, OR
Completeness Review Response (DR-12-08 et al)
04/12/12
Page 11


F. The variance will not impose physical limitations on other properties or uses in the area, and will
not impose physical limitations onfuture use ofneighboring vacant or underdeveloped properties as
authorized by the underlying zoning classification. (Ord. 1442, 1999)

This variance does not relate to setbacks, height, building size, or siting of the building. Therefore
the granting of this variance will not impose physical limitations on the other properties or uses in
the area, and will not impose physical limitations on future use of neighboring vacant or
underdeveloped properties.

We look forward to approval of the requested variance as well as the approval of the project. If you
require any additional information please do not hesitate to contact me.

Sincerely,



Hans Christiansen
Associate


Enclosure

c:   Callison file: 210461.89




                                   6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                          50
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 43 -- Hidden Springs Rd                                                                                                           QC JOB #: 10706612
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                          1066            689                               Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM
                             и
                            243 823
                                          и0
                                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                                                    1.2

                                                                                                                                                    и
                                                                                                                                                    0.4 1.5 0.0
                                                                                                                                                               0.7

                                                                                                                                                               и
             и
                              oJ
                                    и     '-
                                                         и                                                                                          oJ
                                                                                                                                                          и    '-
       326        151 J

                        .                      t.    0       0
                                                                                                                               0.9
                                                                                                                                     и    0.0 J

                                                                                                                                                .                   t.    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                и   0.0




                                                                        a:
                                               и
             ..                                          .
                  0                0.90              0
                                                                                                                                                          ~         и
                                                                                                                                     ..                                         .
                                                                                                                                          0.0                             0.0
       236        85    ~                      r     0       0

                              иr
                              "\
                             83 538       0
                                                                                                                               0.8        2.4 ~

                                                                                                                                                     иr
                                                                                                                                                    "\
                                                                                                                                                                    r     0.0       0.0



                             и и                                                       Quality Counts                                               2.4 0.9 0.0

                            908           621                                              -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                             co LEer 0
                                                                                                         IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                             S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                    и и
                                                                                                                                                    1.5        1.1




                  2
                        ....
                       t....
                         ~ t
                                    0




                                                     3
                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                    0     1    0


                                                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                I                        I                                0                                0


                                    1                                                                                                               0     1    0




                             и и    NA                                                                                                                    NA




                                                                                                                                                  ~~ .
                              oJ    и     '-                                                                                                        oJ    и    '-
             и J~' и                                                            I                        I
             .... Allи
                  NA

                        ~                      r
                                                    NA

                                                         .                                                                                NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                                ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                          NA


                             "\ и r                                                                                                                 "\ и r
                                    NA                                                                                                                    NA

                             и            и
 5-Min Count                          OR 43                                OR 43               Hidden Springs Rd              Hidden Springs Rd
     Period                        (Northbound)                         (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                    (Westbound)                                         Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                                            Total
                       Left         Thru Right     U             Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right            U   Left Thru Right                 U                          Totals
     4:00 PM             4           33      0     0               0      44    13     0    14      0     10          0     0      0      0               0              118
     4:05 PM             9           50      0     0               0      45    18     0    17      0      3          0     0      0      0               0              142
     4:10 PM             6           47      0     0               0      68    20     0    13      0      6          0     0      0      0               0              160
     4:15 PM             5           50      0     0               0      65    15     0    11      0      8          0     0      0      0               0              154
     4:20 PM             9           33      0     0               0      64    11     0    11      0      3          0     0      0      0               0              131
     4:25 PM             8           42      0     0               0      49     8     0    18      0      4          0     0      0      0               0              129
     4:30 PM             8           36      0     0               0      66    15     0    11      0      6          0     0      0      0               0              142
     4:35 PM             9           34      0     0               0      66    12     0    18      0      7          0     0      0      0               0              146
     4:40 PM             9           46      0     0               0      56    18     0    15      0     10          0     0      0      0               0              154
     4:45 PM             9           42      0     0               0      57    12     0    15      0      8          0     0      0      0               0              143
     4:50 PM             8           46      0     0               0      74    24     0    12      0      7          0     0      0      0               0              171
     4:55 PM             7           45      0     0               0      62    14     0    13      0      6          0     0      0      0               0              147            1737
     5:00 PM             5           38      0     0               0      54    20     0    10      0      7          0     0      0      0               0              134            1753
     5:05 PM             6           52      0     0               0      66    19     0     6      0      8          0     0      0      0               0              157            1768
     5:10 PM            11           47      0     0               0      78    21     0    11      0      4          0     0      0      0               0              172            1780
     5:15 PM             8           57      0     0               0      84    25     0    14      0      5          0     0      0      0               0              193            1819
     5:20 PM             5           52      0     0               0      72    18     0    14      0     11          0     0      0      0               0              172            1860
     5:25 PM             2           40      0     0               0      78    24     0     8      0      7          0     0      0      0               0              159            1890
     5:30 PM             5           28      0     0               0      77    28     0    15      0      2          0     0      0      0               0              155            1903
     5:35 PM             8           45      0     0               0      65    20     0    18      0     10          0     0      0      0               0              166            1923
     5:40 PM             3           39      0     0               0      56    14     0    16      0     10          0     0      0      0               0              138            1907
     5:45 PM             2           49      0     0               0      50    19     0    10      0      2          0     0      0      0               0              132            1896
     5:50 PM             8           46      0     0               0      64    28     0    19      0      2          0     0      0      0               0              167            1892
     5:55 PM             6           39      0     0               0      55    19     0     9      0      8          0     0      0      0               0              136            1881
 Peak 15-Min                            Northbound                          Southbound                Eastbound                      Westbound
                                                                                                                                                                                Total
  Flowrates            Left         Thru Right     U             Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right            U   Left Thru Right                 U
  All Vehicles          96          624      0     0               0     936   256     0   156      0     80          0     0      0      0               0                     2148
 Heavy Trucks            0            4      0                     0       4     0           0      0      8                0      0      0                                      16
  Pedestrians                         0                                    0                        0                              0                                              0
   Bicycles              0            0      0                     0       0     0           0      0      0                0      0      0                                       0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/8/2012 10:47 AM                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                              6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                     117
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 43 -- Hidden Springs Rd                                                                                                           QC JOB #: 10706611
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                            568 0.96 1047                                   Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                             и
                             92 476
                                          и
                                          0
                                                                           Peak 15-Min: 7:40 AM -- 7:55 AM
                                                                                                                                                    5.3

                                                                                                                                                    и
                                                                                                                                                    6.5 5.0 0.0
                                                                                                                                                               4.4

                                                                                                                                                               и
             и
                              oJ
                                    и     '-
                                                         и                                                                                          oJ
                                                                                                                                                          и    '-
       117        281 J

                        .                      t.    0       0
                                                                                                                               6.8
                                                                                                                                     и    2.5 J

                                                                                                                                                .                   t.    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                и   0.0




                                                                        a:
                                               и
             ..                                          .
        0.79      0                0.93              0   0.00
                                                                                                                                                          ~         и
                                                                                                                                     ..                                         .
                                                                                                                                          0.0                             0.0
       348        67    ~                      r     0       0

                              иr
                              "\
                             25 766       0
                                                                                                                               2.3        1.5 ~

                                                                                                                                                     иr
                                                                                                                                                    "\
                                                                                                                                                                    r     0.0       0.0



                             и и                                                       Quality Counts                                               8.0 5.1 0.0

                            543 0.99 791                                                   -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                             co LEer 0
                                                                                                         IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                             S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                    и и
                                                                                                                                                    4.6        5.2




                  0
                        ....
                       t....
                         ~ t
                                    0




                                                     6
                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                    0     0    0


                                                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                I                        I                                0                                0


                                    1                                                                                                               0     0    0




                             и и    NA                                                                                                                    NA




                                                                                                                                                  ~~ .
                              oJ    и     '-                                                                                                        oJ    и    '-
             и J~' и                                                            I                        I
             .... Allи
                  NA

                        ~                      r
                                                    NA

                                                         .                                                                                NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                                ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                          NA


                             "\ и r                                                                                                                 "\ и r
                                    NA                                                                                                                    NA

                             и            и
 5-Min Count                          OR 43                                OR 43               Hidden Springs Rd              Hidden Springs Rd
     Period                        (Northbound)                         (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                    (Westbound)                                         Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                                            Total
                       Left         Thru Right     U             Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right            U   Left Thru Right                 U                          Totals
     7:00 AM             0           28      0     0               0      25     6     0    19      0      3          0     0      0      0               0               81
     7:05 AM             1           56      0     0               0      26     3     0    14      0      2          0     0      0      0               0              102
     7:10 AM             1           68      0     0               0      38     2     0    21      0      1          0     0      0      0               0              131
     7:15 AM             0           54      0     0               0      26     2     0    33      0      3          0     0      0      0               0              118
     7:20 AM             2           76      0     0               0      37     2     0    16      0      5          0     0      0      0               0              138
     7:25 AM             3           65      0     0               0      32     2     0    32      0      5          0     0      0      0               0              139
     7:30 AM             1           72      0     0               0      34     2     0    28      0      7          0     0      0      0               0              144
     7:35 AM             1           65      0     0               0      30     4     0    34      0      6          0     0      0      0               0              140
     7:40 AM             2           68      0     0               0      38    12     0    29      0      3          0     0      0      0               0              152
     7:45 AM             3           65      0     0               0      33     4     0    41      0      4          0     0      0      0               0              150
     7:50 AM             3           59      0     0               0      41    20     0    25      0      8          0     0      0      0               0              156
     7:55 AM             4           53      0     0               0      38    14     0    22      0      4          0     0      0      0               0              135            1586
     8:00 AM             0           47      0     0               0      48    13     0    24      0      6          0     0      0      0               0              138            1643
     8:05 AM             3           63      0     0               0      38     4     0    13      0     12          0     0      0      0               0              133            1674
     8:10 AM             3           72      0     0               0      58     6     0    13      0      7          0     0      0      0               0              159            1702
     8:15 AM             3           57      0     0               0      41     3     0    14      0      4          0     0      0      0               0              122            1706
     8:20 AM             0           64      0     0               0      33     7     0    22      0      3          0     0      0      0               0              129            1697
     8:25 AM             2           81      0     0               0      44     3     0    16      0      3          0     0      0      0               0              149            1707
     8:30 AM             4           50      0     0               0      25     8     0    15      0      6          0     0      0      0               0              108            1671
     8:35 AM             5           54      0     0               0      25     7     0    19      0      5          0     0      0      0               0              115            1646
     8:40 AM             4           61      0     0               0      40     7     0    28      0      7          0     0      0      0               0              147            1641
     8:45 AM             3           59      0     0               0      39     8     0    14      0      8          0     0      0      0               0              131            1622
     8:50 AM             6           58      0     0               0      33     8     0    18      0      7          0     0      0      0               0              130            1596
     8:55 AM             3           44      0     0               0      37    11     0    15      0      5          0     0      0      0               0              115            1576
 Peak 15-Min                            Northbound                          Southbound                Eastbound                      Westbound
                                                                                                                                                                                Total
  Flowrates            Left         Thru Right     U             Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right            U   Left Thru Right                 U
  All Vehicles          32          768      0     0               0     448   144     0   380      0     60          0     0      0      0               0                     1832
 Heavy Trucks            4           32      0                     0      16     4           8      0      0                0      0      0                                      64
  Pedestrians                         4                                    0                        0                              0                                              4
   Bicycles              0            0      0                     0       0     0           0      0      0                0      0      0                                       0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/8/2012 6:53 AM                                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                              6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                     118
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 7 Eleven Dwy -- Cedar Oak Dr                                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10706610
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                           DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                             21           10                                   Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM
                             и
                             17     0
                                          и
                                          4
                                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                                                         0.0

                                                                                                                                                         и
                                                                                                                                                         0.0 0.0 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                    0.0

                                                                                                                                                                    и
             и
                              oJ
                                    и     '-
                                                          и                                                                                              oJ
                                                                                                                                                               и    '-
       130        5

                        .
                        J                      t.     5       118
                                                                                                                                    0.0
                                                                                                                                          и    0.0 J

                                                                                                                                                     .                   t.    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                     и   0.0




                                                                           a:
                                               и
             ..                                           .
                  89               0.97             113
                                                                                                                                                               ~         и
                                                                                                                                          ..                                         .
                                                                                                                                               0.0                             0.0
       94         0     ~                      r      0        93

                              иr
                              "\
                              0     0     0
                                                                                                                                    0.0        0.0 ~

                                                                                                                                                          иr
                                                                                                                                                         "\
                                                                                                                                                                         r     0.0       0.0



                             и и                                                          Quality Counts                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                              0           0                                                   -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                                co LEer 0
                                                                                                            IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                             S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                         и и
                                                                                                                                                         0.0        0.0




                  0
                        ....
                       t....
                         ~ t
                                    0




                                                      0
                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                         0     0    0


                                                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                                               0                                0


                                    0                                                                                                                    0     0    0




                             и и    NA                                                                                                                         NA




                                                                                                                                                       ~~ .
                              oJ    и     '-                                                                                                             oJ    и    '-
             и J~' и
             .... Allи
                  NA

                        ~                      r
                                                    NA

                                                          .                                                                                    NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                                     ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                               NA


                             "\ и r                                                                                                                      "\ и r
                                    NA                                                                                                                         NA

                             и            и
 5-Min Count                       7 Eleven Dwy                            7 Eleven Dwy              Cedar Oak Dr                   Cedar Oak Dr
     Period                        (Northbound)                            (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                    (Westbound)                                            Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                                                 Total
                       Left         Thru Right     U                Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right                U                           Totals
     4:00 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     1      6      0        0       0       7      0                0              14
     4:05 PM             0            0      0     0                  1       0      2    0     1      9      0        0       0      17      0                0              30
     4:10 PM             0            0      0     0                  1       0      3    0     4      6      0        0       0       4      0                0              18
     4:15 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      5    0     0      9      0        0       0      11      0                0              25
     4:20 PM             0            0      0     0                  1       0      2    0     2      6      0        0       0       5      0                0              16
     4:25 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     1      3      0        0       0       7      2                0              14
     4:30 PM             0            0      0     0                  1       0      3    0     2      8      0        0       0      11      0                0              25
     4:35 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      3    0     2      9      0        0       0       6      1                0              21
     4:40 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      3    0     1      9      0        0       0      10      1                0              24
     4:45 PM             0            0      0     0                  1       0      1    0     0      7      0        0       0      10      0                0              19
     4:50 PM             0            0      0     0                  1       0      2    0     1      6      0        0       0       7      0                0              17
     4:55 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      2    0     0      6      0        0       0       3      0                0              11               234
     5:00 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     0      6      0        0       0       7      0                0              14               234
     5:05 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      2    0     1      8      0        0       0      14      2                0              27               231
     5:10 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      2    0     0      8      0        0       0       9      0                0              19               232
     5:15 PM             0            0      0     0                  1       0      2    0     0      6      0        0       0      12      0                0              21               228
     5:20 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      2    0     1      6      0        0       0      11      0                0              20               232
     5:25 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     0      7      0        0       0       6      0                0              13               231
     5:30 PM             0            0      0     0                  1       0      0    0     0     10      0        0       0      16      0                0              27               233
     5:35 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     1     10      0        0       0       8      2                0              21               233
     5:40 PM             0            0      0     0                  1       0      0    0     0      7      0        0       0       9      0                0              17               226
     5:45 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      3    0     0      9      0        0       0       3      2                0              17               224
     5:50 PM             0            0      0     0                  2       0      3    0     1     14      0        0       0      10      1                0              31               238
     5:55 PM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      3    0     1      5      0        0       0       8      1                0              18               245
 Peak 15-Min                            Northbound                             Southbound                Eastbound                       Westbound
                                                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates            Left         Thru Right     U                Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right                U
  All Vehicles           0            0      0     0                  4       0     24    0     4     80      0        0       0     128      0                0                     240
 Heavy Trucks            0            0      0                        0       0      0          0      0      0                0       0      0                                       0
  Pedestrians                         0                                       0                        0                               0                                              0
   Bicycles              0            0      0                        0       0      0          0      0      0                0       0      0                                       0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/8/2012 10:47 AM                                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                                 6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                        119
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 7 Eleven Dwy -- Cedar Oak Dr                                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10706609
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                             DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                             10 1.00 12                                        Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                             и7     0
                                          и
                                          3
                                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:40 AM -- 7:55 AM
                                                                                                                                                         30.0

                                                                                                                                                           и
                                                                                                                                                         14.3 0.0 66.7
                                                                                                                                                                      8.3

                                                                                                                                                                      и
             и
                              oJ
                                    и     '-
                                                          и                                                                                                oJ
                                                                                                                                                                 и    '-
       205        3

                        .
                        J                      t.     9       207
                                                                                                                                    9.8
                                                                                                                                           и    33.3 J

                                                                                                                                                       .                   t.    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       и    9.2




                                                                           a:
                                               и
             ..                                           .
        0.64      170              0.73             198   0.81
                                                                                                                                                                 ~         и
                                                                                                                                           ..                                          .
                                                                                                                                                11.2                             9.6
       173        0     ~                      r      0       173

                              иr
                              "\
                              0     0     0
                                                                                                                                    11.6        0.0 ~

                                                                                                                                                            иr
                                                                                                                                                           "\
                                                                                                                                                                           r     0.0       12.1



                             и и                                                          Quality Counts                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0

                              0    0.00   0                                                   -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                                co LEer 0
                                                                                                            IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                             S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                           и и
                                                                                                                                                           0.0        0.0




                  0
                         ....
                        t....
                          ~ t
                                    0




                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                           0     0    0


                                                                                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                                0                                 0


                                    0                                                                                                                      0     0    0




                             и и    NA                                                                                                                           NA




                                                                                                                                                         ~~ .
                              oJ    и     '-                                                                                                               oJ    и    '-
             и J~' и
             .... Allи
                  NA

                        ~                      r
                                                    NA

                                                          .                                                                                     NA     .J~t.
                                                                                                                                                       ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                                 NA


                             "\ и r                                                                                                                        "\ и r
                                    NA                                                                                                                           NA

                             и            и
 5-Min Count                       7 Eleven Dwy                            7 Eleven Dwy              Cedar Oak Dr                   Cedar Oak Dr
     Period                        (Northbound)                            (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                    (Westbound)                                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                                                   Total
                       Left         Thru Right     U                Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right                  U                           Totals
     7:00 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     0       9      0       0       0      10      3                  0              23
     7:05 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      2    0     2       4      0       0       0       6      0                  0              14
     7:10 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      2    0     1       3      0       0       0       7      1                  0              14
     7:15 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     1       8      0       0       0       6      0                  0              16
     7:20 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     1      10      0       0       0      11      0                  0              23
     7:25 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     0       8      0       0       0       1      0                  0               9
     7:30 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     0      15      0       0       0       7      0                  0              22
     7:35 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     1      16      0       0       0      13      0                  0              30
     7:40 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     0      23      0       0       0      15      1                  0              39
     7:45 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     0      32      0       0       0      20      1                  0              54
     7:50 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     0      13      0       0       0      27      0                  0              40
     7:55 AM             0            0      0     0                  3       0      2    0     0       7      0       0       0      27      3                  0              42                326
     8:00 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     0      13      0       0       0      13      3                  0              29                332
     8:05 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     0       9      0       0       0      22      1                  0              33                351
     8:10 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     0       9      0       0       0      13      0                  0              23                360
     8:15 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     2      10      0       0       0      12      0                  0              25                369
     8:20 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     0      11      0       0       0      18      0                  0              30                376
     8:25 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     0      12      0       0       0      11      0                  0              23                390
     8:30 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     0       6      0       0       0      15      0                  0              22                390
     8:35 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      2    0     1       6      0       0       0      11      1                  0              21                381
     8:40 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      1    0     0       8      0       0       0       7      1                  0              17                359
     8:45 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     1       4      0       0       0      10      0                  0              15                320
     8:50 AM             0            0      0     0                  1       0      1    0     1       5      0       0       0       8      0                  0              16                296
     8:55 AM             0            0      0     0                  0       0      0    0     0       3      0       0       0      17      0                  0              20                274
 Peak 15-Min                            Northbound                             Southbound                 Eastbound                      Westbound
                                                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates            Left         Thru Right     U                Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right                  U
  All Vehicles           0            0      0     0                  0       0      4    0     0     272      0       0       0     248      8                  0                     532
 Heavy Trucks            0            0      0                        0       0      0          0      24      0               0      36      0                                        60
  Pedestrians                         0                                       0                         0                              0                                                0
   Bicycles              0            0      0                        0       0      0          0       0      0               0       0      0                                         0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/8/2012 6:53 AM                                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                                 6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                        120
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 43 -- Kasch's Dwy                                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10706608
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                          1007          622                              Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM
                           и0    993 14
                                        и                               Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                                                   1.7

                                                                                                                                                   и
                                                                                                                                                   0.0 1.7 0.0
                                                                                                                                                              1.0

                                                                                                                                                              и
           и
                            oJ
                                  и     '-
                                                       и                                                                                           oJ
                                                                                                                                                         и    '-
       0        0

                      .
                      J                      t.   28       36
                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                    и    0.0 J

                                                                                                                                               .                   t.    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                               и   0.0




                                                                     a:
                                             и
           ..                                          .
                0                0.93              0
                                                                                                                                                         ~         и
                                                                                                                                    ..                                         .
                                                                                                                                         0.0                             0.0
       0        0     ~                      r     8       50

                            иr
                            "\
                            0    594 36
                                                                                                                              0.0        0.0 ~

                                                                                                                                                    иr
                                                                                                                                                   "\
                                                                                                                                                                   r     0.0       0.0



                           и и                                                      Quality Counts                                                 0.0 1.0 0.0

                          1001          630                                             -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                          co LEer 0
                                                                                                      IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                       S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                   и и
                                                                                                                                                   1.7        1.0




                0
                      ....
                     t....
                       ~ t
                                  0




                                                   6
                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                   0     0    0


                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                         0                                0


                                  0                                                                                                                0     0    0




                           и и    NA                                                                                                                     NA




                                                                            и                                                                    ~~ .
                            oJ    и     '-                                                                                                         oJ    и    '-
           и J~' и
           .... Allи
                NA

                      ~                      r
                                                  NA

                                                       .                                                                                 NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                               ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                         NA


                           "\ и r                                                                                                                  "\ и r
                                  NA                                                                                                                     NA

                           и            и
 5-Min Count                        OR 43                               OR 43                  Kasch's Dwy                     Kasch's Dwy
     Period                      (Northbound)                        (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                     (Westbound)                                          Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                                           Total
                     Left         Thru Right     U              Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left     Thru Right               U                          Totals
     4:00 PM           0           42       2    0                3    56     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      4               0              107
     4:05 PM           0           46       2    0                3    56     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      4               0              112
     4:10 PM           0           54       3    0                6    78     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      3               0              144
     4:15 PM           0           57       2    0                1    68     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0              129
     4:20 PM           0           39       2    0                3    76     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      1               0              122
     4:25 PM           0           47       1    0                0    49     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      5               0              102
     4:30 PM           0           51       0    0                2    76     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0              130
     4:35 PM           0           40       1    0                1    77     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      0               0              120
     4:40 PM           0           51       4    0                1    66     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0              123
     4:45 PM           0           46       3    0                2    74     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      6               0              132
     4:50 PM           0           56       4    0                2    89     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0              152
     4:55 PM           0           56       2    0                1    77     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0              137            1510
     5:00 PM           0           42       2    0                2    72     0     0     0      0      0        0       2        0      1               0              121            1524
     5:05 PM           0           51       3    0                1    78     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      3               0              136            1548
     5:10 PM           0           47       3    0                2    87     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      3               0              143            1547
     5:15 PM           0           60       6    0                1    91     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      2               0              161            1579
     5:20 PM           0           52       0    0                1    88     0     0     0      0      0        0       2        0      4               0              147            1604
     5:25 PM           0           39       6    0                1    94     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0              141            1643
     5:30 PM           0           42       1    0                0    96     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      4               0              144            1657
     5:35 PM           0           52       2    0                0    81     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0              136            1673
     5:40 PM           0           42       1    0                1    68     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      0               0              112            1662
     5:45 PM           0           50       6    0                1    62     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      2               0              121            1651
     5:50 PM           0           60       1    0                2    86     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      1               0              151            1650
     5:55 PM           0           40       1    0                3    61     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      4               0              109            1622
 Peak 15-Min                          Northbound                         Southbound                Eastbound                        Westbound
                                                                                                                                                                               Total
  Flowrates          Left         Thru Right     U              Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left     Thru Right               U
  All Vehicles         0          636      36    0               16 1064      0     0     0      0      0        0      16        0     36               0                     1804
 Heavy Trucks          0            8       0                     0     8     0           0      0      0                0        0      0                                      16
  Pedestrians                       0                                   0                        0                               12                                             12
   Bicycles            0            0       0                     0     0     0           0      0      0                0        0      0                                       0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/8/2012 10:47 AM                                               SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                           6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                  121
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 43 -- Kasch's Dwy                                                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10706607
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                          448 1.00 931                                     Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                           и0    441
                                        и
                                        7
                                                                          Peak 15-Min: 7:40 AM -- 7:55 AM
                                                                                                                                                     4.5

                                                                                                                                                     и
                                                                                                                                                     0.0 4.5 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                4.0

                                                                                                                                                                и
           и
                            oJ
                                  и     '-
                                                       и                                                                                             oJ
                                                                                                                                                           и    '-
       0        0

                      .
                      J                      t.   15       26
                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                                                      и    0.0 J

                                                                                                                                                 .                   t.    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                 и   0.0




                                                                       a:
                                             и
           ..                                          .
        0.00    0                0.98              0   1.00
                                                                                                                                                           ~         и
                                                                                                                                      ..                                         .
                                                                                                                                           0.0                             0.0
       0        0     ~                      r    11       24

                            иr
                            "\
                            0    916 17
                                                                                                                                0.0        0.0 ~

                                                                                                                                                      иr
                                                                                                                                                     "\
                                                                                                                                                                     r     0.0       8.3



                           и и                                                        Quality Counts                                                 0.0 4.0 11.8

                          452 0.94 933                                                    -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                            co LEer 0
                                                                                                        IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                         S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                     и и
                                                                                                                                                     4.4        4.2




                0
                      ....
                     t....
                       ~ t
                                  0




                                                  10
                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                     0     0    0


                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                           0                                0


                                  0                                                                                                                  0     0    0




                           и и    NA                                                                                                                       NA




                                                                              и                                                                    ~~ .
                            oJ    и     '-                                                                                                           oJ    и    '-
           и J~' и
           .... Allи
                NA

                      ~                      r
                                                  NA

                                                       .                                                                                   NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                                 ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                           NA


                           "\ и r                                                                                                                    "\ и r
                                  NA                                                                                                                       NA

                           и            и
 5-Min Count                        OR 43                                 OR 43                  Kasch's Dwy                     Kasch's Dwy
     Period                      (Northbound)                          (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                     (Westbound)                                          Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                                             Total
                     Left         Thru Right     U              Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left     Thru Right               U                          Totals
     7:00 AM           0           46       0    0                1      24     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      1               0               73
     7:05 AM           0           58       2    0                2      25     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      3               0               90
     7:10 AM           0           84       3    0                1      32     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      2               0              122
     7:15 AM           0           74       0    0                0      26     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      3               0              104
     7:20 AM           0           91       1    0                0      33     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      2               0              127
     7:25 AM           0           86       1    0                0      34     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      3               0              124
     7:30 AM           0           84       1    0                0      31     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0              117
     7:35 AM           0           79       1    0                0      32     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      0               0              113
     7:40 AM           0           83       1    0                0      42     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0              127
     7:45 AM           0           73       3    0                0      24     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      3               0              103
     7:50 AM           0           87       1    0                3      38     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      0               0              130
     7:55 AM           0           73       1    0                0      35     0     0     0      0      0        0       2        0      0               0              111            1341
     8:00 AM           0           55       2    0                0      41     0     0     0      0      0        0       2        0      3               0              103            1371
     8:05 AM           0           75       4    0                1      32     0     0     0      0      0        0       2        0      3               0              117            1398
     8:10 AM           0           77       1    0                1      55     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      2               0              136            1412
     8:15 AM           0           66       1    0                1      37     0     0     0      0      0        0       1        0      1               0              107            1415
     8:20 AM           0           76       1    0                0      37     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      0               0              114            1402
     8:25 AM           0           88       0    0                1      37     0     0     0      0      0        0       2        0      1               0              129            1407
     8:30 AM           0           55       5    0                0      23     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0               84            1374
     8:35 AM           0           64       4    0                1      22     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      2               0               93            1354
     8:40 AM           0           80       1    0                0      43     0     0     0      0      0        0       2        0      3               0              129            1356
     8:45 AM           0           77       2    0                0      37     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      3               0              119            1372
     8:50 AM           0           73       1    0                0      37     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      1               0              112            1354
     8:55 AM           0           54       1    0                0      36     0     0     0      0      0        0       0        0      2               0               93            1336
 Peak 15-Min                          Northbound                           Southbound                Eastbound                        Westbound
                                                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates          Left         Thru Right     U              Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left     Thru Right               U
  All Vehicles         0          972      20    0               12     416     0     0     0      0      0        0       4        0     16               0                     1440
 Heavy Trucks          0           28       8                     0       4     0           0      0      0                0        0      0                                      40
  Pedestrians                       0                                     0                        0                                0                                              0
   Bicycles            0            0       0                     0       0     0           0      0      0                0        0      0                                       0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/8/2012 6:53 AM                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                             6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                    122
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 43 -- Cedar Oak Dr                                                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10706606
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                          994           630                                Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM
                           и0    965 29
                                        и                                 Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                                                     1.2

                                                                                                                                                     и
                                                                                                                                                     0.0 1.2 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                0.8

                                                                                                                                                                и
           и
                            oJ
                                  и     '-
                                                        и                                                                                            oJ
                                                                                                                                                           и    '-
       0        0

                      .
                      J                      t.    30       130
                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                                                      и    0.0 J

                                                                                                                                                 .                   t.    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                 и   0.0




                                                                       a:
                                             и
           ..                                           .
                0                0.90               0
                                                                                                                                                           ~         и
                                                                                                                                      ..                                         .
                                                                                                                                           0.0                             0.0
       0        0     ~                      r    100        94

                            иr
                            "\
                            0    600 65
                                                                                                                                0.0        0.0 ~

                                                                                                                                                      иr
                                                                                                                                                     "\
                                                                                                                                                                     r     0.0       0.0



                           и и                                                        Quality Counts                                                 0.0 0.8 0.0

                          1065          665                                               -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                            co LEer 0
                                                                                                        IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                            S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                     и и
                                                                                                                                                     1.1        0.8




                6
                      ....
                     t....
                       ~ t
                                  6




                                                    6
                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                     0     1    0


                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                               I                        I                                  0                                0


                                  11                                                                                                                 0     0    0




                           и и    NA                                                                                                                       NA




                                                                                                                                                   ~~ .
                            oJ    и     '-                                                                                                           oJ    и    '-
           и J~' и                                                             I                        I
           .... Allи
                NA

                      ~                      r
                                                  NA

                                                        .                                                                                  NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                                 ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                           NA


                           "\ и r                                                                                                                    "\ и r
                                  NA                                                                                                                       NA

                           и            и
 5-Min Count                        OR 43                                 OR 43                  Cedar Oak Dr                   Cedar Oak Dr
     Period                      (Northbound)                          (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                    (Westbound)                                           Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                                             Total
                     Left         Thru Right     U                Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right          U   Left    Thru Right                U                          Totals
     4:00 PM           0           41       6    0                  1    55     0     0     0      0      0          0     4       0      3                0              110
     4:05 PM           0           50       9    0                  1    55     0     0     0      0      0          0    19       0      0                0              134
     4:10 PM           0           53      10    0                  0    76     0     0     0      0      0          0     5       0      2                0              146
     4:15 PM           0           57       6    0                  3    69     0     0     0      0      0          0    14       0      2                0              151
     4:20 PM           0           40       5    0                  3    73     0     0     0      0      0          0     5       0      2                0              128
     4:25 PM           0           51       4    0                  0    49     0     0     0      0      0          0     8       0      0                0              112
     4:30 PM           0           44       4    0                  6    67     0     0     0      0      0          0    10       0      4                0              135
     4:35 PM           0           41       8    0                  3    78     0     0     0      0      0          0     8       0      1                0              139
     4:40 PM           0           53       8    0                  2    62     0     0     0      0      0          0    10       0      3                0              138
     4:45 PM           0           44       6    0                  1    67     0     0     0      0      0          0     8       0      3                0              129
     4:50 PM           0           60       3    0                  4    87     0     0     0      0      0          0     4       0      5                0              163
     4:55 PM           0           50       3    0                  3    76     0     0     0      0      0          0     4       0      1                0              137            1622
     5:00 PM           0           43       4    0                  2    72     0     0     0      0      0          0     6       0      2                0              129            1641
     5:05 PM           0           50       7    0                  2    68     0     0     0      0      0          0    13       0      3                0              143            1650
     5:10 PM           0           49       7    0                  1    93     0     0     0      0      0          0    10       0      1                0              161            1665
     5:15 PM           0           64       5    0                  1    91     0     0     0      0      0          0    10       0      4                0              175            1689
     5:20 PM           0           52       5    0                  2    88     0     0     0      0      0          0    12       0      1                0              160            1721
     5:25 PM           0           42       4    0                  3    87     0     0     0      0      0          0     4       0      2                0              142            1751
     5:30 PM           0           39       6    0                  4    96     0     0     0      0      0          0    12       0      4                0              161            1777
     5:35 PM           0           54       7    0                  4    78     0     0     0      0      0          0     7       0      1                0              151            1789
     5:40 PM           0           42       7    0                  0    68     0     0     0      0      0          0     7       0      2                0              126            1777
     5:45 PM           0           59       7    0                  2    62     0     0     0      0      0          0     6       0      0                0              136            1784
     5:50 PM           0           54      12    0                  3    81     0     0     0      0      0          0    11       0      2                0              163            1784
     5:55 PM           0           41       3    0                  3    59     0     0     0      0      0          0    11       0      0                0              117            1764
 Peak 15-Min                          Northbound                           Southbound                Eastbound                       Westbound
                                                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates          Left         Thru Right     U                Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right          U   Left    Thru Right                U
  All Vehicles         0          660      68    0                 16 1088      0     0     0      0      0          0   128       0     24                0                     1984
 Heavy Trucks          0            4       0                       0     8     0           0      0      0                0       0      0                                       12
  Pedestrians                       8                                     4                        0                               8                                              20
   Bicycles            0            0       0                       0     0     0           0      0      0                0       0      0                                        0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/8/2012 10:47 AM                                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                             6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                    123
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 43 -- Cedar Oak Dr                                                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10706605
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                          445 1.00 934                                       Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                           и0    420 25
                                        и                                   Peak 15-Min: 7:40 AM -- 7:55 AM
                                                                                                                                                       4.7

                                                                                                                                                       и
                                                                                                                                                       0.0 4.5 8.0
                                                                                                                                                                  4.4

                                                                                                                                                                  и
           и
                            oJ
                                  и     '-
                                                        и                                                                                              oJ
                                                                                                                                                             и    '-
       0        0

                      .
                      J                      t.    61       205
                                                                                                                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                        и    0.0 J

                                                                                                                                                   .                   t.    9.8
                                                                                                                                                                                   и    9.8




                                                                         a:
                                             и
           ..                                           .
        0.00    0                0.92               0   0.81
                                                                                                                                                             ~         и
                                                                                                                                        ..                                         .
                                                                                                                                             0.0                             0.0
       0        0     ~                      r    144       173

                            иr
                            "\
                            0    873 148
                                                                                                                                  0.0        0.0 ~

                                                                                                                                                        иr
                                                                                                                                                       "\
                                                                                                                                                                       r     9.7       11.6



                           и и                                                          Quality Counts                                                 0.0 4.0 12.2

                          564 0.90 1021                                                     -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                              co LEer 0
                                                                                                          IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                              S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                       и и
                                                                                                                                                       5.9        5.2




                3
                      ....
                     t....
                       ~ t
                                  5




                                                   17
                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                       0     0    0


                                                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                 I                        I                                  0                                0


                                  1                                                                                                                    0     0    0




                           и и    NA                                                                                                                         NA




                                                                                                                                                     ~~ .
                            oJ    и     '-                                                                                                             oJ    и    '-
           и J~' и                                                               I                        I
           .... Allи
                NA

                      ~                      r
                                                  NA

                                                        .                                                                                    NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                                   ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                             NA


                           "\ и r                                                                                                                      "\ и r
                                  NA                                                                                                                         NA

                           и            и
 5-Min Count                        OR 43                                   OR 43                  Cedar Oak Dr                   Cedar Oak Dr
     Period                      (Northbound)                            (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                    (Westbound)                                            Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                                               Total
                     Left         Thru Right     U                Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right          U   Left    Thru Right                U                           Totals
     7:00 AM           0           40       8    0                  1      23     0     0     0      0      0          0     5       0      6                0               83
     7:05 AM           0           59       5    0                  1      22     0     0     0      0      0          0     6       0      2                0               95
     7:10 AM           0           79       4    0                  0      33     0     0     0      0      0          0     6       0      3                0              125
     7:15 AM           0           74       8    0                  1      27     0     0     0      0      0          0     6       0      1                0              117
     7:20 AM           0           85       8    0                  3      28     0     0     0      0      0          0     7       0      5                0              136
     7:25 AM           0           85       7    0                  1      36     0     0     0      0      0          0     1       0      0                0              130
     7:30 AM           0           83      13    0                  2      30     0     0     0      0      0          0     4       0      3                0              135
     7:35 AM           0           77      15    0                  2      28     0     0     0      0      0          0    10       0      3                0              135
     7:40 AM           0           80      20    0                  3      39     0     0     0      0      0          0    10       0      5                0              157
     7:45 AM           0           69      28    0                  4      25     0     0     0      0      0          0    16       0      5                0              147
     7:50 AM           0           75      13    0                  0      36     0     0     0      0      0          0    16       0     11                0              151
     7:55 AM           0           66       7    0                  0      34     0     0     0      0      0          0    21       0      8                0              136            1547
     8:00 AM           0           54      12    0                  1      43     0     0     0      0      0          0    11       0      2                0              123            1587
     8:05 AM           0           74       7    0                  2      32     0     0     0      0      0          0    16       0      7                0              138            1630
     8:10 AM           0           74       7    0                  2      52     0     0     0      0      0          0    10       0      4                0              149            1654
     8:15 AM           0           63       8    0                  4      35     0     0     0      0      0          0     8       0      5                0              123            1660
     8:20 AM           0           74       7    0                  4      31     0     0     0      0      0          0    14       0      5                0              135            1659
     8:25 AM           0           84      11    0                  1      35     0     0     0      0      0          0     8       0      3                0              142            1671
     8:30 AM           0           52       6    0                  0      27     0     0     0      0      0          0     9       0      7                0              101            1637
     8:35 AM           0           62       5    0                  2      21     0     0     0      0      0          0     7       0      6                0              103            1605
     8:40 AM           0           84       4    0                  4      41     0     0     0      0      0          0     7       0      1                0              141            1589
     8:45 AM           0           75       4    0                  1      37     0     0     0      0      0          0     7       0      3                0              127            1569
     8:50 AM           0           76       4    0                  2      37     0     0     0      0      0          0     7       0      2                0              128            1546
     8:55 AM           0           52       3    0                  0      36     0     0     0      0      0          0    11       0      6                0              108            1518
 Peak 15-Min                          Northbound                             Southbound                Eastbound                       Westbound
                                                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates          Left         Thru Right     U                Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right          U   Left    Thru Right                U
  All Vehicles         0          896    244     0                 28     400     0     0     0      0      0          0   168       0     84                0                     1820
 Heavy Trucks          0           24      20                       4       4     0           0      0      0               20       0     16                                       88
  Pedestrians                       0                                       0                        4                               8                                              12
   Bicycles            0            0       0                       0       0     0           0      0      0                0       0      0                                        0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/8/2012 6:53 AM                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                               6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                      124
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 43 -- Walling Circle/Retail Center Dwy                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10706604
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                          1005          614                             Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM
                           и0 1004 1
                                        и                              Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                                                1.2

                                                                                                                                                и
                                                                                                                                                0.0 1.2 0.0
                                                                                                                                                           1.0

                                                                                                                                                           и
           и
                            oJ
                                  и     '-
                                                       и                                                                                        oJ
                                                                                                                                                      и    '-
       4        0

                      .
                      J                      t.    2       3
                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                 и    0.0 J

                                                                                                                                            .                   t.   0.0
                                                                                                                                                                           и   0.0




                                                                    a:
                                             и
           ..                                          .
                0                0.94              0
                                                                                                                                                      ~         и
                                                                                                                                 ..                                        .
                                                                                                                                      0.0                            0.0
       2        2     ~                      r     1       7

                            иr
                            "\
                            4    612    6
                                                                                                                           0.0        0.0 ~

                                                                                                                                                 иr
                                                                                                                                                "\
                                                                                                                                                                r    0.0       0.0



                           и и                                                     Quality Counts                                               0.0 1.0 0.0

                          1007          622                                            -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                         co LEer 0
                                                                                                     IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                       S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                и и
                                                                                                                                                1.2        1.0




                1
                      ....
                     t....
                       ~ t
                                  0




                                                   9
                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                0     2    0


                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                      0                               0


                                  0                                                                                                             0     0    0




                           и и    NA                                                                                                                  NA




                                                                           и                                                                  ~~ .
                            oJ    и     '-                                                                                                      oJ    и    '-
           и J~' и
           .... Allи
                NA

                      ~                      r
                                                  NA

                                                       .                                                                              NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                            ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                     NA


                           "\ и r                                                                                                               "\ и r
                                  NA                                                                                                                  NA

                           и            и
 5-Min Count                        OR 43                              OR 43
     Period                                                                            Walling Circle/Retail Center Dwy
                                                                                                                     Walling Circle/Retail Center Dwy
                                 (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                                                                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                   (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)             Total
                     Left         Thru Right     U             Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right         U     Left Thru Right        U                 Totals
     4:00 PM           0           47      0     0               0    61     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     108
     4:05 PM           1           46      0     0               0    63     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     110
     4:10 PM           1           58      0     0               0    83     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     142
     4:15 PM           2           53      0     0               0    70     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     125
     4:20 PM           0           40      0     0               0    77     0     0      0      0       1      0       0      0       0      0     118
     4:25 PM           1           53      0     0               0    48     0     0      1      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     103
     4:30 PM           0           53      0     0               0    78     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     131
     4:35 PM           0           39      0     0               0    75     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     114
     4:40 PM           0           48      1     0               1    64     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     114
     4:45 PM           0           54      0     0               0    77     0     0      0      0       2      0       0      0       1      0     134
     4:50 PM           0           68      0     0               0    83     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     151
     4:55 PM           1           47      0     0               0    85     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     133         1483
     5:00 PM           0           45      0     0               0    70     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     115         1490
     5:05 PM           1           53      1     0               0    82     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     137         1517
     5:10 PM           0           49      0     0               0    90     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       1      0     140         1515
     5:15 PM           1           58      0     0               0    91     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     150         1540
     5:20 PM           0           57      0     0               0    88     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     145         1567
     5:25 PM           1           37      3     0               0    96     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     137         1601
     5:30 PM           0           48      0     0               0    98     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     146         1616
     5:35 PM           0           48      1     0               0    80     0     0      0      0       0      0       1      0       0      0     130         1632
     5:40 PM           0           46      0     0               0    72     0     0      0      0       0      0       1      0       0      0     119         1637
     5:45 PM           0           50      0     0               0    60     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     110         1613
     5:50 PM           0           62      0     0               0    88     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     150         1612
     5:55 PM           0           43      0     0               0    64     0     0      0      0       1      0       0      0       0      0     108         1587
 Peak 15-Min                          Northbound                        Southbound                 Eastbound                     Westbound
                                                                                                                                                          Total
  Flowrates          Left         Thru Right     U             Left Thru Right     U    Left Thru Right         U     Left Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles         4          656      0     0               0 1076      0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       4      0           1740
 Heavy Trucks          0            4      0                     0     4     0            0      0       0              0      0       0                    8
  Pedestrians                       0                                  0                         0                            20                           20
   Bicycles            0            0      0                     0     0     0            0      0       0              0      0       0                    0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: South
Report generated on 2/8/2012 10:46 AM                                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                          6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                 125
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 43 -- Walling Circle/Retail Center Dwy                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10706603
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                      DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                           442 1.00 937                                    Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                            и0    441
                                         и
                                         1
                                                                          Peak 15-Min: 7:40 AM -- 7:55 AM
                                                                                                                                                    3.8

                                                                                                                                                    и
                                                                                                                                                    0.0 3.9 0.0
                                                                                                                                                               4.2

                                                                                                                                                               и
            и
                             oJ
                                   и     '-
                                                        и                                                                                           oJ
                                                                                                                                                          и    '-
       1         2

                       .
                       J                      t.    0       1
                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                     и    0.0 J

                                                                                                                                                .                   t.   0.0
                                                                                                                                                                               и
                                                                                                                                                                               100.0




                                                                       a:
                                              и
            ..                                          .
        0.42     0                0.97              0   0.00
                                                                                                                                                          ~         и
                                                                                                                                     ..                                        .
                                                                                                                                          0.0                            0.0
       10        8     ~                      r     1       1

                             иr
                             "\
                             1    935    0
                                                                                                                              10.0        12.5 ~

                                                                                                                                                     иr
                                                                                                                                                    "\
                                                                                                                                                                    r 100.0        0.0



                            и и                                                       Quality Counts                                                0.0 4.2 0.0

                           450 0.95 936                                                   -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                            co LEer 0
                                                                                                        IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                          S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                    и и
                                                                                                                                                    4.2        4.2




                 2
                       ....
                      t....
                        ~ t
                                   0




                                                   11
                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                    0     0    0


                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                          0                               0


                                   0                                                                                                                0     0    0




                            и и    NA                                                                                                                     NA




                                                                              и                                                                   ~~ .
                             oJ    и     '-                                                                                                         oJ    и    '-
            и J~' и
            .... Allи
                 NA

                       ~                      r
                                                   NA

                                                        .                                                                                 NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                                ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                         NA


                            "\ и r                                                                                                                  "\ и r
                                   NA                                                                                                                     NA

                            и            и
 5-Min Count                         OR 43                                OR 43
     Period                                                                               Walling Circle/Retail Center Dwy
                                                                                                                        Walling Circle/Retail Center Dwy
                                  (Northbound)                         (Southbound)                                                                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                      (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)             Total
                      Left         Thru Right     U             Left    Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right         U     Left Thru Right        U                 Totals
     7:00 AM            0           47      1     0               0      24     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0       72
     7:05 AM            0           61      0     0               0      30     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0       91
     7:10 AM            0           86      0     0               0      31     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     117
     7:15 AM            0           75      0     0               0      26     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     101
     7:20 AM            0           67      0     0               0      18     0     0      0      0       1      0       0      0       0      0       86
     7:25 AM            0           90      0     0               0      35     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     125
     7:30 AM            0           87      0     0               0      30     0     0      0      0       1      0       0      0       0      0     118
     7:35 AM            0           78      0     0               0      29     0     0      0      0       2      0       0      0       0      0     109
     7:40 AM            0           86      0     0               0      39     0     0      0      0       3      0       0      0       0      0     128
     7:45 AM            0           75      0     0               0      24     0     0      2      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     101
     7:50 AM            0           86      0     0               0      41     0     0      0      0       1      0       0      0       0      0     128
     7:55 AM            0           75      0     0               0      35     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     110         1286
     8:00 AM            0           57      0     0               0      42     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0       99        1313
     8:05 AM            0           78      0     0               0      34     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     112         1334
     8:10 AM            0           77      0     0               0      54     0     0      0      0       1      0       0      0       0      0     132         1349
     8:15 AM            0           68      0     0               0      38     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     106         1354
     8:20 AM            0           80      0     0               1      36     0     0      0      0       0      0       1      0       0      0     118         1386
     8:25 AM            1           88      0     0               0      39     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     128         1389
     8:30 AM            0           58      0     0               0      26     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0       84        1355
     8:35 AM            0           65      0     0               0      23     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0       88        1334
     8:40 AM            0           83      1     0               0      41     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     125         1331
     8:45 AM            0           80      0     0               0      37     0     0      0      0       0      0       0      0       0      0     117         1347
     8:50 AM            1           73      0     0               0      39     0     0      1      0       1      0       0      0       0      0     115         1334
     8:55 AM            0           59      0     0               0      34     0     0      0      0       1      0       0      0       0      0       94        1318
 Peak 15-Min                           Northbound                          Southbound                 Eastbound                     Westbound
                                                                                                                                                             Total
  Flowrates           Left         Thru Right     U             Left    Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right         U     Left Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles          0          988      0     0               0     416     0     0      8      0      16      0       0      0       0      0           1428
 Heavy Trucks           0           32      0                     0       4     0            0      0       0              0      0       0                   36
  Pedestrians                        0                                    0                         4                             0                            4
   Bicycles             0            0      0                     0       0     0            0      0       0              0      0       0                    0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: South
Report generated on 2/8/2012 6:53 AM                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                             6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                    126
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 43 -- Walling Circle                                                                                                             QC JOB #: 10706602
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                          1018          603                              Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM
                           и2    981 35
                                        и                               Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                                                   1.4

                                                                                                                                                   и
                                                                                                                                                   0.0 1.4 0.0
                                                                                                                                                              1.0

                                                                                                                                                              и
           и
                            oJ
                                  и     '-
                                                       и                                                                                           oJ
                                                                                                                                                         и    '-
       3        2

                      .
                      J                      t.   15       28
                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                    и    0.0 J

                                                                                                                                               .                   t.    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                               и   0.0




                                                                     a:
                                             и
           ..                                          .
                0                0.93              0
                                                                                                                                                         ~         и
                                                                                                                                    ..                                         .
                                                                                                                                         0.0                             0.0
       3        1     ~                      r    13       60

                            иr
                            "\
                            1    586 25
                                                                                                                              0.0        0.0 ~

                                                                                                                                                    иr
                                                                                                                                                   "\
                                                                                                                                                                   r     0.0       0.0



                           и и                                                      Quality Counts                                                 0.0 1.0 0.0

                          995           612                                             -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                          co LEer 0
                                                                                                      IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                       S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                   и и
                                                                                                                                                   1.4        1.0




                3
                      ....
                     t....
                       ~ t
                                  1




                                                   9
                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                   0     1    0


                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                         0                                0


                                  1                                                                                                                0     0    0




                           и и    NA                                                                                                                     NA




                                                                            и                                                                    ~~ .
                            oJ    и     '-                                                                                                         oJ    и    '-
           и J~' и
           .... Allи
                NA

                      ~                      r
                                                  NA

                                                       .                                                                                 NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                               ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                         NA


                           "\ и r                                                                                                                  "\ и r
                                  NA                                                                                                                     NA

                           и            и
 5-Min Count                        OR 43                               OR 43                  Walling Circle                 Walling Circle
     Period                      (Northbound)                        (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                    (Westbound)                                           Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                                           Total
                     Left         Thru Right     U              Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right                U                          Totals
     4:00 PM           0           46       1    0                4    56     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       1               0              109
     4:05 PM           0           48       0    0                2    67     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       2               0              120
     4:10 PM           0           54       5    0                6    73     1     0     0      0        0      0       3       0       3               0              145
     4:15 PM           0           51       0    0                0    67     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       1               0              120
     4:20 PM           0           37       2    0                5    72     1     0     0      0        0      0       4       0       4               0              125
     4:25 PM           0           54       1    0                2    48     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       1               0              107
     4:30 PM           0           44       5    0                2    80     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       0               0              131
     4:35 PM           0           34       6    0                3    75     0     0     0      0        0      0       4       0       3               0              125
     4:40 PM           0           46       1    0                1    69     1     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       1               0              119
     4:45 PM           0           54       1    0                1    72     0     0     0      0        0      0       2       0       0               0              130
     4:50 PM           0           65       4    0                4    82     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       2               0              157
     4:55 PM           0           40       1    0                3    83     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       3               0              130            1518
     5:00 PM           0           47       0    0                3    65     0     0     0      0        1      0       2       0       0               0              118            1527
     5:05 PM           1           47       2    0                2    83     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       2               0              138            1545
     5:10 PM           0           52       2    0                5    90     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       2               0              152            1552
     5:15 PM           0           51       3    0                2    86     0     0     1      0        0      0       2       0       0               0              145            1577
     5:20 PM           0           59       2    0                4    77     0     0     0      0        0      0       4       0       4               0              150            1602
     5:25 PM           0           35       4    0                4    98     1     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       0               0              142            1637
     5:30 PM           0           47       2    0                2   100     0     0     1      0        0      0       0       0       0               0              152            1658
     5:35 PM           0           43       3    0                4    76     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       1               0              128            1661
     5:40 PM           0           48       0    0                2    75     1     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       1               0              128            1670
     5:45 PM           0           43       2    0                1    53     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       0               0               99            1639
     5:50 PM           0           58       4    0                5    89     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       0               0              156            1638
     5:55 PM           0           44       2    0                3    60     1     0     0      0        0      0       3       0       2               0              115            1623
 Peak 15-Min                          Northbound                         Southbound                 Eastbound                      Westbound
                                                                                                                                                                               Total
  Flowrates          Left         Thru Right     U              Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right                U
  All Vehicles         0          648      28    0               44 1012      0     0     4      0        0      0      28       0     24                0                     1788
 Heavy Trucks          0            8       0                     0     8     0           0      0        0              0       0       0                                      16
  Pedestrians                       0                                   0                        0                              16                                              16
   Bicycles            0            0       0                     0     0     0           0      0        0              0       0       0                                       0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: North
Report generated on 2/8/2012 10:46 AM                                               SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                           6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                  127
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 43 -- Walling Circle                                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10706601
 CITY/STATE: West Linn, OR                                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Jan 31 2012
                          452 1.00 948                                     Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                           и5    425 22
                                        и                                 Peak 15-Min: 7:40 AM -- 7:55 AM
                                                                                                                                                      4.6

                                                                                                                                                      и
                                                                                                                                                    20.0 4.5 4.5
                                                                                                                                                                 4.2

                                                                                                                                                                 и
           и
                            oJ
                                  и     '-
                                                       и                                                                                              oJ
                                                                                                                                                            и    '-
       7        4

                      .
                      J                      t.   40       55
                                                                                                                                14.3
                                                                                                                                       и    0.0 J

                                                                                                                                                  .                   t.    5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                  и   5.5




                                                                       a:
                                             и
           ..                                          .
        0.00    0                0.94              0   0.65
                                                                                                                                                            ~         и
                                                                                                                                       ..                                         .
                                                                                                                                            0.0                             0.0
       4        0     ~                      r    15       49

                            иr
                            "\
                            2    904 27
                                                                                                                                0.0         0.0 ~

                                                                                                                                                       иr
                                                                                                                                                      "\
                                                                                                                                                                      r     6.7       6.1



                           и и                                                        Quality Counts                                                  0.0 4.2 7.4

                          440 0.93 933                                                    -RANSPOR-l\
                                                                                            co LEer 0
                                                                                                        IO~    DA t>
                                                                                                         S~R'JIC<.S
                                                                                                                                                      и и
                                                                                                                                                      4.5        4.3




                2
                      ....
                     t....
                       ~ t
                                  2




                                                  10
                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                      0     0    0


                                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                            0                                0


                                  0                                                                                                                   0     0    0




                           и и    NA                                                                                                                        NA




                                                                              и                                                                     ~~ .
                            oJ    и     '-                                                                                                            oJ    и    '-
           и J~' и
           .... Allи
                NA

                      ~                      r
                                                  NA

                                                       .                                                                                    NA    .J~t.
                                                                                                                                                  ~    r
                                                                                                                                                                            NA


                           "\ и r                                                                                                                     "\ и r
                                  NA                                                                                                                        NA

                           и            и
 5-Min Count                        OR 43                                 OR 43                  Walling Circle                 Walling Circle
     Period                      (Northbound)                          (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                    (Westbound)                                            Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                                              Total
                     Left         Thru Right     U              Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right                 U                          Totals
     7:00 AM           0           45       5    0                1      21     0     0     1      0        1      0       2       0       2                0               78
     7:05 AM           0           58       2    0                4      29     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       6                0               99
     7:10 AM           0           84       1    0                3      27     1     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       2                0              118
     7:15 AM           0           72       4    0                1      26     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       2                0              105
     7:20 AM           0           89       4    0                2      33     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       2                0              131
     7:25 AM           0           83       3    0                1      33     0     0     1      0        0      0       1       0       4                0              126
     7:30 AM           0           89       1    0                1      31     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       2                0              124
     7:35 AM           0           73       3    0                3      30     1     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       3                0              113
     7:40 AM           0           83       4    0                3      41     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       2                0              134
     7:45 AM           0           74       3    0                6      20     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       5                0              108
     7:50 AM           1           86       0    0                4      36     1     0     0      0        0      0       6       0       7                0              141
     7:55 AM           0           75       1    0                0      38     2     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       5                0              122            1399
     8:00 AM           1           50       4    0                1      40     0     0     1      0        0      0       2       0       4                0              103            1424
     8:05 AM           0           76       2    0                0      32     1     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       2                0              113            1438
     8:10 AM           0           72       2    0                2      51     0     0     1      0        0      0       2       0       3                0              133            1453
     8:15 AM           0           64       4    0                0      34     0     0     1      0        0      0       2       0       4                0              109            1457
     8:20 AM           0           79       1    0                0      36     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       0                0              117            1443
     8:25 AM           0           83       2    0                2      36     0     0     1      0        0      0       0       0       3                0              127            1444
     8:30 AM           0           59       0    0                1      27     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       2                0               89            1409
     8:35 AM           1           64       2    0                0      23     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       6                0               97            1393
     8:40 AM           0           79       1    0                0      43     0     0     0      0        0      0       0       0       5                0              128            1387
     8:45 AM           0           78       3    0                3      33     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       3                0              121            1400
     8:50 AM           0           73       0    0                0      39     0     0     0      0        0      0       2       0       1                0              115            1374
     8:55 AM           0           62       0    0                3      32     0     0     0      0        0      0       1       0       3                0              101            1353
 Peak 15-Min                          Northbound                           Southbound                 Eastbound                      Westbound
                                                                                                                                                                                  Total
  Flowrates          Left         Thru Right     U              Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right        U     Left    Thru Right                 U
  All Vehicles         4          972      28    0               52     388     4     0     0      0        0      0      28       0     56                 0                     1532
 Heavy Trucks          0           36       0                     4       4     0           0      0        0              0       0       4                                       48
  Pedestrians                       0                                     0                        4                               0                                                4
   Bicycles            0            0       0                     0       0     0           0      0        0              0       0       0                                        0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: North
Report generated on 2/8/2012 6:53 AM                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212


                                                                             6/6/2012 PC Meeting
                                                                                    128
