City of Prineville

TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
PLAN
September 2013

VOLUME 2
City of Prineville TSP                                                                     September 2013




Volume Two of the City of Prineville Transportation System Plan (TSP) provides a record of each
technical memorandum produced during the TSP development process as well as the minutes
summarizing discussion at each Technical Advisory Committee/Public Advisory Committee meeting.
These documents summarize the process of developing the final TSP and may therefore include
alternatives that were further refined or evaluated, which may not be included in the final TSP.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1                Technical Memorandum 1: Plan and Policy Review
Section 2                Technical Memorandum 2: Goals and Objectives
Section 3                Technical Memorandum 3: Existing Conditions Inventory
Section 4                Technical Memorandum 4: Existing Conditions Analysis
Section 5                Technical Memorandum 5: Future No-Build Conditions
Section 6                Technical Memorandum 6: Alternatives Analysis
Section 7                Technical Memorandum 7: Preferred Alternative
Section 8                TAC/PAC Meeting Minutes




                                                                                 Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
City of Prineville TSP                                                September 2013




                                                            Section 1
                         Technical Memorandum 1: Plan and Policy Review




                                                            Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM #1: PLANS & POLICY REVIEW
This memorandum summarizes existing plans, policies, standards, rules, regulations, and other
applicable federal, state, regional, and local documents as they pertain to development of the
City of Prineville Transportation System Plan (TSP). This summary will serve as a reference for
the project team throughout the project, and if new policies are proposed as part of the TSP they
will be reviewed for consistency with existing policies.

The documents reviewed by the project team are identified in Table 1-1 and summarized in the
following sections. Several of the key transportation issues identified through this review are
summarized below.

       The ODOT roundabout policy that influenced the OR 126 Corridor Plan has been
       amended. This amendment would allow roundabouts on the State highway system if
       proper coordination with affected stakeholders demonstrates that all users can be
       appropriately accommodated.

       The OR 126 Corridor Plan identifies options for the Tom McCall, O'Neil Highway, and
       "Y" Junction that need to be further evaluated as part of the TSP. In particular, the traffic
       growth estimates for the corridor plan were developed prior to completion of a travel
       demand model and need to be revisited to ensure the potential solutions are still
       applicable.

       Data center development near the airport has provided a new outlook on Prineville 's
       economic growth potential. Although the data centers impact the transportation system
       during construction, the long-term impacts and travel demands are low.

       State highway mobility targets and access standards have changed since the prior TSP
       was adopted; the new policies will enable more flexibility for the long-term growth of the
       city and needed transportation infrastructure.

       A number of large properties have been master planned during the past ten years. The
       growth patterns and associated infrastructure for these properties was not fully
       accounted for in the previously-adopted TSP. In particular, the Ochoco lumber site will be
       a key redevelopment site within Prineville given its size and location. The TSP process
       should account for this as a future mixed-use site.

       The completion of the 2nd Street extension has provided the City with an alternate route to
       3rd Street ­ US 26/OR 126; the benefits of this corridor and associated changes in travel
       patterns and transportation system needs will be evaluated through the TSP effort.



FILENAME: H:\PROJFILE\12221 - PRINEVILLE TSP\MEMOS\PLAN&POLICY\FINAL\12221_TM1_PLANS-
POLICY_FINAL.DOC
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                      January 20, 2013



        The existing transit infrastructure in Prineville is very limited, with Cascades East Transit
        service provided through a park-and-ride located along the Prineville "Y." On-going
        regional park-and-ride studies will need to be monitored and amended into this TSP
        effort as findings are developed.

         The City of Prineville is actively improving pedestrian facilities around schools and its
        Ochoco Creek trail system. These actions follow development of Safe Routes to Schools
        Plans. Additional connectivity needs remain both for sidewalks and trails and will be
        included in the TSP update.

        The City is also considering changes to Main Street ­ McKay between Peters Road south
        into 3rd Street. These efforts will occur in parallel with the TSP and may include an
        additional traffic signal at 9th Street, pedestrian and bicycle improvements throughout the
        entire corridor, and enhancements to the alignment of the existing traffic signal at 10 th
        Street.

                              Table 1-1     Documents and Policies Reviewed

                                                                                    Page
                                        Document/Policy                           Reference

           Statewide Planning Documents

           Statewide Planning Goals (OAR chapter 660 division 012, known as the      3
           Transportation Planning Rule or TPR)

           Transportation System Planning Guidelines                                 5

           Oregon Transportation Plan                                                5

           Oregon Highway Plan (as amended)                                          6

           Oregon Aviation Plan                                                      12

           Oregon Bicycle/Pedestrian Plan                                            12

           Oregon Freight Plan                                                       13

           Oregon Public Transportation Plan                                         13

           Oregon Rail Plan                                                          14

           Transportation Safety Action Plan                                         14

           OAR Chapter 734 Division 051                                              16

           ODOT Highway Design Manual                                                17

           Statewide Transportation Improvement Program                              18

           House Bill 3379 Administrative Rule Background                            19

           Regional Planning Documents

           Hwy 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                            19

           Cascades East Transit Regional Transportation Plan                        20

           Central Oregon Rail Plan                                                  21
                                            (Continued on next page)




Project #: 4A-11                                                                                   Page 2
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                  January 20, 2013



                                              Table 1-1 (Continued)
           County Planning Documents

           Crook County Parks and Recreation District Master Plan                22

           Crook County Comprehensive Plan                                       24

           Crook County TSP                                                      25

           City/Local Planning Documents

           City Comprehensive Plan                                               27

           City of Prineville Transportation System Plan                         36

           City of Prineville Downtown Enhancement Plan                          37

           Prineville/Crook County Airport Master Plan                           37

           City of Prineville Land Use Code (Chapter 153)                        40

           City's Standards and Specifications                                   41

           City's Buildable Lands Inventory                                      42

           City's current and past budget for transportation                     42

           City's current and historic funding and sources                       43


STATE OF OREGON/ODOT

Statewide Planning Goals

Oregon's Statewide Planning Goals first originated in 1973 to provide a coordinated vision of
state land use policies. There are nineteen planning goals within OAR 660-015. Of these, Goal 15
is only relevant to the Willamette Greenway and Goals 16 through 19 are relevant only to coastal
communities. While not all of the goals are mandatory, each has been adopted as an Oregon
Administrative Rule (OAR) to be followed by government agencies. A summary of the planning
goals is provided below.
        Citizen Involvement (Planning Goal 1) ­ To develop a citizen involvement program that
        provides the opportunity for engagement in all phases of the planning process.
        Land Use Planning (Planning Goal 2) ­ To establish land use planning process and policy
        framework as a basis for all decisions and actions related to use of land, and to assure an
        adequate factual base for such decisions and actions.
        Agricultural Lands (Planning Goal 3) ­ To preserve and maintain agricultural lands.
        Forest Lands (Planning Goal 4) - To conserve forest lands by maintaining the forest land
        base and to protect the state's forest economy by making possible economically efficient
        forest practices that assure the continuous growing and harvesting of forest tree species
        as the leading use on forest land consistent with sound management of soil, air, water,
        and fish and wildlife resources and to provide for recreational opportunities and
        agriculture.
        Natural Resources, Scenic and Historic Areas, and Open Space (Planning Goal 5) ­ To
        protect those resources that promote a healthy environment and a natural landscape that
        contributes to Oregon's livability for present and future generations.

Project #: 4A-11                                                                               Page 3
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                  January 20, 2013



        Air, Water, and Land Resources Quality (Planning Goal 6) ­ "to maintain and improve
        the quality of the air, water, and land resources of the state".
        Areas Subject to Natural Disasters and Hazards (Planning Goal 7) ­ "to protect people
        and property from natural hazards", such as floods, landslides, earthquakes, tsunamis,
        coastal erosion and wildfires.
        Recreational Needs (Planning Goal 8) ­ to satisfy citizen and visitor's recreational needs.
        Also, to provide for the siting of necessary recreation facilities (including destination
        resorts), where appropriate.
        Economy of the State (Planning Goal 9) - To provide adequate opportunities throughout
        the state for a variety of economic activities vital to the health, welfare, and prosperity of
        Oregon's citizens.
        Housing (Planning Goal 10) ­ To provide housing needs for the residents of the state.
        Public Facilities and Services (Planning Goal 11) ­ "to plan and develop a timely, orderly
        and efficient arrangement of public facilities and services to serve as a framework for
        urban and rural development".
        Transportation Planning (Planning Goal 12) ­ To develop a coordinated transportation
        system plan that is safe, convenient, and economical, minimizing reliance on any single
        travel mode.
        Energy Conservation (Planning Goal 13) ­ to manage and control lands and associated
        land uses in order to "maximize the conservation of all forms of energy, based on sound
        economic principles."
        Urbanization (Planning Goal 14) ­ To provide for an orderly and efficient transition from
        rural to urban land use, to accommodate urban population and urban employment inside
        urban growth boundaries, to ensure efficient use of land, and to provide livable
        communities.

While all of the goals will help set the necessary policy framework for the TSP processes, Goal 12
(OAR 660-015-0000 (12)) in particular provides the framework that must be followed as part of
the preparation of the updated TSP. Specifically, sections 660-012-0020 through 660-012-0045
outline the requirements and implementation guidance. For compliance with Goal 12, the TSP
must provide and encourage a safe, convenient and economic transportation system that is
coordinated with urban and rural development.

The TSP must include strategies to reduce reliance on any single travel mode (provide mode
choice), facilitate movement of goods and people, develop a system hierarchy for orderly and
efficient multimodal travel, and preserve and protect streets and highways for their intended
function. The TSP must be coordinated with and consistent with statewide, regional, and local
plans.




Project #: 4A-11                                                                               Page 4
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                January 20, 2013



Transportation System Planning Guidelines (2008)

The TSP Guidelines suggests a logical sequence of planning steps tailored to help smaller, non-
MPO jurisdictions in particular, prepare a TSP. One of the planning steps prescribes that
jurisdictions include a summary to address how the planning project complies with new
regulations, policies, and statutes that have been adopted since the TSP was last adopted, or
amended. As such, the remainder of this memorandum summarizes applicable state, regional,
and local plans, and frames how the 2005 Prineville TSP relates and complies with these.


Oregon Transportation Plan (2006)

The Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) is the state's long-range multimodal transportation plan,
providing a framework for prioritizing transportation improvements based on future revenue
conditions. The OTP is the overarching policy document among a series of plans that together
form the state's Transportation System Plan. The plan calls for a transportation system that has a
modal balance, is both efficient and accessible, provides connectivity among rural and urban
places and between modes, and is environmentally and financially stable.

The OTP outlines the following seven goals, each with associated policies, to guide local,
regional and state transportation plans.

        Goal 1 ­ Mobility and Accessibility: Provide a balanced and integrated transportation
        system that ensures interconnected access to all areas of the state, the nation and the
        world. Promote transportation choices that are reliable, accessible and cost-effective.
        Goal 2 ­ Management of the System: Improve the efficiency of the transportation system
        by optimizing operations and management. Manage transportation assets to extend their
        life and reduce maintenance costs.
        Goal 3 ­ Economic Vitality: Expand and diversify Oregon's economy by transporting
        people, goods, services and information in safe, energy-efficient and environmentally
        sound ways. Provide Oregon with a competitive advantage by promoting an integrated
        freight system.
        Goal 4 ­ Sustainability: Meet present needs without compromising the ability of future
        generations to meet their needs from the joint perspective of the environment, economy
        and communities. Encourage conservation and communities that integrate land use and
        transportation choices.
        Goal 5 ­ Safety and Security: Build, operate and maintain the transportation system so
        that it is safe and secure. Take into account the needs of all users: operators, passengers,
        pedestrians and property owners.
        Goal 6 ­ Funding the Transportation System: Create sources of revenue that will support
        a viable transportation system today and in the future. The goal recognizes that whether
        or not funds are increased, it is essential to maximize existing resources, invest
        strategically, consider return on investment and provide equity among rural and urban


Project #: 4A-11                                                                             Page 5
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                          January 20, 2013



            areas, equity among income groups and access to transportation options throughout
            Oregon.
            Goal 7 ­ Coordination, Communication and Cooperation: Foster coordination,
            communication and cooperation between transportation users and providers so various
            modes of transportation function as an integrated system. Work to help all parties align
            interests, remove barriers and offer innovative, equitable solutions.
The OTP, as the guiding document for regional and local TSPs, establishes goals, policies,
strategies and initiatives that address the core challenges and opportunities facing transportation
in Oregon. The OTP includes modal components that outline recommended standards for
various forms of transportation. Table 1-2 identifies the relevant modal elements as well as the
year of adoption by the OTC.

                                Table 1-2   OTP Modal Plan Components

  Oregon Transportation Plan Element                                  Year Adopted

                                            Originally adopted in 1999 (with subsequent amendments); Access
Highway Plan
                                            Management and Mobility Standards Amendments in 2011

                                            Originally adopted in 2000;
Aviation Plan
                                            the Oregon Aviation Plan was updated in 2007

                                            Originally adopted in 1995; Second Part of Plan updated in 2011 and
Bicycle/ Pedestrian Plan
                                            retitled the Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Design Guide

Freight Plan                                Adopted in 2011

Public Transportation Plan                  Adopted in 1997

Rail Plan                                   Adopted in 2001

                                            Originally adopted in 1995;
Transportation Safety Action Plan (TSAP)
                                            the TSAP was updated in 2004 and amended in 2006


2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the OTP

The 2005 TSP is generally consistent with the policies listed within the OTP. The 2005 TSP does
include a financial plan inclusive of near-term, mid-term, and long-term funding projections
based on various types of revenue streams. The updated TSP will need to address current
revenue projections and respond to the need for a financially constrained system.


Oregon Highway Plan (as amended)

The Oregon Highway Plan (OHP) define s policies and investment strategies for Oregon's State
highways for the next 20 years. The OHP further refines the goals and policies of the OTP, and
serves as the policy basis for implementing the Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) Division 51,
which specifically addresses access to State facilities. The OHP has three main elements:
            A Vision for the future of the State highway system that describes economic and
            demographic trends in Oregon, future transportation technologies, the policy and legal
            context of the Highway Plan, and pertinent information on the current highway system;



Project #: 4A-11                                                                                        Page 6
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                               January 20, 2013



        Goals, policies, and actions items for: system definition, system management, access
        management, travel alternatives, and environmental and scenic resources; and
        An analysis of the 20-year State highway needs, revenue forecasts, descriptions of
        investment strategies and implementation strategies, and performance measures.

The OHP provides policy and investment guidance for local corridor plans and TSPs, but it
leaves the responsibility for identifying specific projects and modal alternatives to these more
localized plans.

The OHP has been amended several times since its original adoption in 1999, the last
amendments were adopted in 2012. These amendments since 1999 have addressed the
designation of expressways, changes in mobility standards, designation of Special
Transportation Areas, and other changes affecting the classification and standards for highways
throughout the state.

Policies in the OHP pertinent to the TSP update are described below.

OHP Goal 1: System Definition

        Policy 1A, State Highway Classification System outlines functions and objectives for
        state highways to serve different types of traffic. Greater mobility is expected on
        interstate and statewide highways than on regional or district highways. Facility
        classification is used to guide planning, management and investment decisions regarding
        state highway facilities.

        Figure 1-1 illustrates the existing state highway classifications. OR 126 to the west of
        Prineville and US 26 through and east of Prineville are Statewide Highways. OR 126 west of
        the O'Neil Highway also includes an Expressway designation, increasing its role in
        intercity high-mobility travel. Within City limits, US 26 is designated as a Special
        Transportation Area (STA) from milepost 18.24 (Locust Avenue) to 19.38 (Spruce Lane),
        identifying the increased access role the highway plays in downtown Prineville.

        US 26 (Madras-Prineville Highway) is classified as a Regional Highway. OR 27 (Crooked
        River Highway) south of City limits, OR 370 (O'Neil Highway), and OR 380 (Paulina
        Highway) are classified as District Highways.

        Policy 1B, Land Use and Transportation addresses the relationship between the highway
        and development patterns on and off the highway. It emphasizes development patterns
        that maintain state highways for regional and intercity mobility, and supports compact
        development patterns that are less dependent on state highways than linear development
        for access and local circulation. This policy is designed to clarify how ODOT will
        coordinate with local governments and others to link land use and transportation in
        transportation plans, facility and corridor plans, plan amendments, access permitting and
        project development.



Project #: 4A-11                                                                            Page 7
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                           January 20, 2013



          Policy 1C, State Highway Freight System identifies the need to balance the movement of
          goods and services with other uses and the importance of maintaining efficient through
          movement on major freight routes.

          Throughout its length OR 126 is a designated freight route, and US 26 is a designated
          freight route from its junction with OR 126 at the Prineville "Y" east of the City.

          Policy 1F, Highway Mobility Targets1 establishes acceptable levels of mobility for the
          various levels of state highway facilities, and the condition of the transportation system.
          With respect to transportation system planning, the highway mobility targets are used to
          "identify state highway mobility performance expectations and provide a measure by
          which the existing and future performance of the highway system can be evaluated." As
          such, the targets may be used to identify system mobility deficiencies over a planning
          horizon of at least 20 years.

          The OHP's mobility targets use volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratios as the primary metric.
          However, where it can be shown that it is infeasible or impractical to meet the targets,
          local jurisdictions may develop alternative targets in coordination with ODOT and other
          relevant stakeholders. The OHP states that "providing for better multimodal operatio ns is
          a legitimate justification for developing alternatives to established OHP mobility
          targets."2

          Table 1-5 summarizes the mobility standards that are applicable to the City of Prineville
          UGB.




1
    The Oregon Transportation Commission reviewed and adopted changes to Policy 1F in December 2011.
2
    Any OHP Amendments are contingent on Oregon Transportation Commission (OTC) approval.
Project #: 4A-11                                                                                        Page 8
                                                                                                                             Prineville TSP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             December 2012




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LN
                                                                                                                                                                                         NW ELLIOTT RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IEL D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NW BR OOKF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NW PEPPERMINT LN                                                                                                                                      NE BARNES BUTTE RD                                                                                                           NE W ITT ME R RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NE Y E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NW GUM P E RT R D                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NE OWENS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NW WE ST HIL LS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                         NW
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CE N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LLOW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                T UR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N E SUGA R PIN E R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Y DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NE RA WHIDE LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NW MCDONALD RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    INE R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NW L ON S M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NW APOLLO RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             370                                                                                                                                                                                      M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ON




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NE BARNES RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NE SU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ITH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NE PETERS RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NE WAINWRIGHT RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N ER R D
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NW                                                      IL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EC                                                        HW
                                                                                                                                                   26                                                                                                                             Y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RE
                                                                                                                                     26                                                                                                                                                       N W RIMROCK                                                                                                                    26




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                 CROOK COUNTY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LO O P
                                                                                                                                   126                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NE SUNRIS E S T

                                                                                                                                                       380                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NE LOPER AVE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NE ELM ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NE OCHOCO AVE                                                  H
                                                                                                                                            27                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NW DEER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NW 9T H S T                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         U   DS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NE 7TH ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NE 6TH ST                                                                                                                                                                    D ER D R
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NW ROSE W OOD DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NE JUNIPER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NW 6TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NE LAUG HLIN RD                                                                                                                    NE OCHOCO HWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              26
                                                                                                                                                                                     SW WESTWOOD DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SW LAN DFILL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NW 4 T H ST                                      NE 4TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NW 3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 26                                                                                                                                                                                NE 3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NW 2ND ST                                           NE 2ND ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E 1ST ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SE ELM ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SE 2ND ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SE HOLLY ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SE 3RD ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SW HOUSTON LAKE RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SE DUNHAM ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S W R IMR O C K R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SE 5TH ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AY
                                                                                                                               Highway Classifications                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SW PA RK DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C O N NE C T W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S E 7 TH S T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SE MELROSE DR
                                                                                                                                           DISTRICT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SE LYNN BLVD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MCCALL RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SW CRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S W EMP IRE                                                                                                                                                                      T VIE                                                                                                                                                                                                   SE LINCOLN RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SW
                                                                                                                                           REGIONAL                                                                                                                                                                     DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FO                     S TE R R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A RE Y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SE C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                           STATEWIDE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SW TOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RT
                                                                                                                                           City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             J


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H
H:\projfile\12221 - Prineville TSP\gis\Memo 3\3-5 Existing Highway Classification.mxd - jsommerville - 11:52 AM 12/30/2012




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SW BALDWIN RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UN
                                                                                                                                           UGB




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IPE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               380




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RD        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RT        SW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R   PO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U   LI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     126




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SW HUNTER RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SW GEORGE MILLICAN RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SE KENNEDY WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          27




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VIEW RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IS L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S E J ER RY D
                                                                                                                                                                       SW WILEY RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DAV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DAV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ID WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sources: USGS, ESRI, TANA, AND



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Existing Highway Classification                                                                                                             Figure
                                                                                                                               0         0.25    0.5         1 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of Prineville, Oregon                                                                                                           1-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Coordinate System: NAD 1983 HARN StatePlane Oregon South FIPS 3602 Feet Intl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Data Source: Oregon Department of Transportation
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                              January 20, 2013



       Table 1-3         Volume to Capacity Ratio Targets for Peak Hour Operating Conditions
                                                                     Non-STAs        Non-STAs
                                                                      where           where         Where
                                                                      posted        speed > 35    speed limit
                                                                      speed         mph but <45     >= 45
       Facility Designation       Facility Extents         STA      <= 35 mph          mph           mph
                               OR 126 from Milepost
       Statewide
                              1.37 (Veteran's Way) to      N/A          0.80              0.80       0.80
       Expressways
                              17.92 (O'Neil Highway)
       Freight Route on a
                                    All of OR 126          0.90         0.85              0.80       0.80
       Statewide Highway
       Statewide (not a        US 26 east of Prineville
                                                           0.95         0.90              0.85       0.80
       Freight Route)                   "Y"
       Freight Route on a
                               US 26 west of Prineville
       Regional or District                                0.95         0.90              0.85       0.85
                                        "Y"
       Highway
       Regional Highways                None                1.0         0.90              0.85       0.85
                                OR 27 south of City
       District/ Local
                                      limits,               1.0         0.95              0.90       0.90
       Interest Roads
                                OR 370, and OR 380
Source: OHP, Table 6, modified for relevance to Prineville facilities and designations.


         Policy 1G, Major Improvements requires maintaining performance and improving safety
         by improving efficiency and management before adding capacity. ODOT coordinates
         with regional and local governments to address highway performance and safety.

OHP Goal 2: System Management

         Policy 2A, Partnerships establishes the need for cooperative partnerships between ODOT
         and state and federal agencies, regional governments, cities, counties, tribal governments,
         and the private sector.

         Policy 2B, Off-System Improvements helps local jurisdictions adopt land use and access
         management policies.

         Policy 2E, Intelligent Transportation Systems puts emphasis on considering a broad
         range of Intelligent Transportation Systems services to improve system efficiency and
         safety in a cost-effective manner.

         Policy 2F, Traffic Safety establishes the need to continually improve safety for all
         highway system users with solutions involving engineering, education, enforcement and
         emergency medical services.




Project #: 4A-11                                                                                            Page 10
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                                            January 20, 2013



OHP Goal 3: Access Management

           Policy 3A, Classification and Spacing Standards defines access spacing standards for the
           location, spacing and type of road and street intersections and approach roads on state
           highways. The adopted spacing standards consider highway classification, posted speed,
           safety, and operational needs. Revisions to the OHP were adopted by the Oregon
           Transportation Commission (OTC) on March 21, 2012 to address Senate Bill 264 (2011).
           The revisions included reductions in spacing standards outside of interchange areas and
           established unique standards based on highway volume.

           Access management spacing standards for highway segments with AADT of 5,000
           vehicles or less are shown in Error! Reference source not found..

                Table 1-4         Access Management Spacing Standards for Highway Segments

                                                                       Functional        2012      Posted      Access Spacing
               Route Name                   Description
                                                                      Classification     AADT    Speed (mph)     Standard

       US 26
               Ochoco Hwy              East of Prineville "Y"       Statewide Highway1   >5000       30             500
               Madras Hwy           City Limits to Prineville "Y"    Regional Highway    >5000    55/40/30     1,320/800/500
       OR 27, Crooked River Hwy         Outside City Limits          District Highway    <5000       45             360
       OR 126, Ochoco Hwy                 Entire Segment            Statewide Highway2   >5000    55/45/30     2,640/2,640/500
       OR 370, O'Neil Hwy                 Entire Segment             District Highway    <5000       55             650
       OR 380, Paulina Hwy                Entire Segment             District Highway    <5000      35/45         250/360
   1   Special Transportation Area from Milepost 18.24 to 19.38
   2   Expressway from Milepost 1.37 (Veteran's Way) to 17.92 (O'Neil Highway)


           Policy 3D, Deviations establishes general policies and procedures for deviations from
           adopted access management standards and policies.

OHP Goal 4: Travel Alternatives

           Policy 4A, Efficiency of Freight Movement establishes the need to maintain and improve
           the efficiency of freight movement on the state highway system and access to intermodal
           connections. The State seeks to balance the needs of long distance and through freight
           movements with local transportation needs on highway facilities in both urban areas and
           rural communities.

           Policy 4B, Alternative Passenger Modes establishes the need to advance and support
           alternative passenger transportation systems where travel demand, land use and other
           factors indicate the potential for successful and effective development of alternative
           passenger modes.

2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the OHP

The Oregon Highway Plan was and will continue to be relevant in the assessment of ODOT
facilities in the current and updated TSPs. The 2005 TSP includes a Streets and Highways
Element that defines the street functional classification, and specifies classifications within the
Project #: 4A-11                                                                                                            Page 11
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                January 20, 2013



City of Prineville roadway network. State mobility targets for the existing and no-build
conditions will be developed based on the facility designations and the adopted mobility targets
contained within the OHP.


Oregon Aviation Plan

The Oregon Aviation Plan (OAP) is a comprehensive evaluation of Oregon's aviation system,
thus providing a systematic approach to meeting improvements and development strategies
recommended within the Plan. The plan looks beyond the traditional state aviation system
planning elements by assessing the following three areas:
        Existing aviation infrastructure;
        The economic benefit of the aviation industry;
        National importance and state significance of each airport.

The Prineville Airport is classified as a local general aviation airport within the OAP which
means that it primarily supports local air transportation needs and special use aviation activities.
The OAP suggests that the Prineville Airport install low intensity taxiway lighting, rehabilitate
runway pavement, rehabilitate terminal building, construct hangars, and install automated
weather reporting equipment.

2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the OAP

The 2005 TSP includes an Air Service Element, which recognizes that the Prineville Airport is a
part of the OAP. In addition, the Prineville Airport has a Master Plan which considers and
addresses OAP recommendations.


Oregon Bicycle/Pedestrian Plan

The Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan is divided into two parts, the Policy and Action Plan
and the Bicycle and Pedestrian Design Guide. The first part was adopted in 1995, while the
second part was updated in 2011. The Plan outlines key characteristics that should be considered
related to accommodating bicycles and pedestrians when planning and designing state facilities.
The Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan does not require specific standards for non-ODOT
facilities. However, the plan recommends that land use patterns, transportation system layout,
public transportation system design, and other planning related issues consider the impact to
bicycle and pedestrian users and to the bicycle and pedestrian system as a whole. To this end, the
plan provides specific design recommendations to support bicycle and pedestrian travel.

The Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan recognizes the role that safe, attractive, convenient, and easy to
use bicycle and pedestrian facilities play in the provision of the state and local transportation
systems. The plan includes seven chapters that guide the planning and design of on-road
bikeways, restriping, bicycle parking, walkways, street crossings, intersections, and shared use
paths.


Project #: 4A-11                                                                            Page 12
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                January 20, 2013



2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan

The existing TSP contains a Bikeway Plan element and a Pedestrian System element that address
bicycle and pedestrian system needs, goals and policies, respectively. The TSP update will
include revised inventory information, incorporate Safe Routes to School program
recommendations, seek to better connect pedestrian attractions such as parks and trails with
Prineville residents, and include specific technical analyses relative to the bicycle and pedestrian
plan recognizing the important role that these modes play in the provision of a sustainable, safe,
and efficient transportation system.


Oregon Freight Plan

The Oregon Freight Plan was adopted in June 2011 and provides a 25-year planning vision. The
purpose of the Oregon Freight Plan (OFP) is to "improve freight connections to local, state,
regional, national and global markets in order to increase trade-related jobs and income for
Oregon workers and businesses." The OFP addresses challenges facing the freight system,
including system operation and development, safety, communications, environmental
considerations and funding.

While the freight plan serves as a modal element of the Oregon Transportation Plan, the OFP
includes elements of several modes including marine, aviation, rail, pipeline, and truck
transport. Key routes and transfer sites are presented and summarized within the plan.

Strategic freight corridors identified by the Central Oregon Area Commission on Transportation
(ACT) include: US 97, US 26, US 20, US 197, BNSF/UP rail corridor, the City of Prineville Railway
shortline, and the Redmond and Bend airports.

2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the OFP

The 2005 TSP includes a Freight Mobility Element which identifies improvements to the local
street network to increase the efficient movement of freight and to decrease traffic impacts to
local streets. The TSP Update will also identify improvements to the street network in order to
improve freight mobility.


Oregon Public Transportation Plan

As a modal element of the OTP, the Oregon Public Transportation Plan provides a long range
vision for the public transportation system in Oregon. This system incorporates public and
private transportation providers and is comprised of ridesharing and volunteer programs, taxi
and minibus service, and intercity and intracity bus and passenger rail services. The Public
Transportation Plan outlines three primary goals and associated policies and strategies that
guide public transportation through the year 2015. In recognition of limited resources, the Plan
prioritizes elements that deliver service to "those Oregonians most dependent on the public
transportation system (seniors, disabled, low-income, and youth)."


Project #: 4A-11                                                                            Page 13
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                      January 20, 2013



2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the Public Transportation Plan

The City of Prineville falls within the jurisdictional category of cities with a population between
2,500 and 25,000 and is, therefore, not required to include a public transportation plan in their
local transportation system plans (TSPs). The 2005 TSP does include an inventory of public
transportation facilities in the city.

The TSP update will not include a Public Transportation Plan, but will update the inventory of
public transportation facilities specifically related to regional transit services being provided
through Cascades East Transit and the siting of park-and-ride facilities. These facilities and
services were not present when the 2005 TSP was prepared, and support regional trip making to
the larger urban areas within Central Oregon.


Oregon Rail Plan

The Oregon Rail Plan was adopted as the railway modal element plan into the Oregon
Transportation Plan in 2001. The document is divided into three separate parts:
        Part 1: Describes the rail policies and planning process
        Part 2: Describes the freight element
        Part 3: Describes the passenger element

Within Part 1, the Oregon Rail Plan meets mandatory federal and state planning requirements
related to the management and maintenance of the railway system. This section also provides the
general management goals for State rail facilities.

Part 2 is particularly relevant to Prineville given the existing rail infrastructure. The Oregon Rail
Plan provides the following benefits associated with railways serving industrial lands.

    Because of the continuing dependence of many producers upon rail services, communities in their land
    use planning should attempt to ensure that a sufficient quantity of land with convenient access to rail
    service is planned and zoned for industrial development. There are several reasons why industrial
    parks and other industrially zoned property should have rail access:
        1. Railroads tend to be more energy efficient than trucks and, therefore, can make better use of
           available energy resources.
        2. Some commodities and products, especially those that are large, bulky, low valued, oversized,
           or not transportable over highways can be transported only by, or most efficiently by, railroad.
        3. Access to rail service enable shippers to have a wider choice of transportation options, thus
           having a better bargaining position when negotiating rates with rail and truck carriers. While
           the initial occupant or occupants of a particular site or industrial park may not require rail
           service, subsequent occupants may.
        4. Rail service enables delivery of goods in periods of emergency, strike or inclement weather
           when trucks cannot operate.


Project #: 4A-11                                                                                   Page 14
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                   January 20, 2013



        5. A railroad right-of-way may take less space than roads, and a railroad spur track may handle
           more volume in less space than could be done with trucks.

The Oregon Rail Plan further describes the implications of rail service with respect to zoning,
noting that industrial lands served by rail are more valuable than those without; whereas
residential lands near railways are less valuable. Prineville was noted in the plan as an especially
competitive given its location by more than a single major railroad. The plan also notes that
communities with access to short lines have an advantage in attracting business that need
frequent switching or rail car movements.




Exhibit 1-2. State of Oregon Railroads.

Limited information related to the City of Prineville (COP) Railway is also summarized in the
plan; it was noted that COP manages 18.35 miles of railway that connects to the Burlington
Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) mainline, as shown in Exhibit 1-2. The plan also notes that the railway
is maintained at Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) Class 2 (25 mph maximum speeds) with
no weight or dimensional restrictions.

Passenger service along the COP has been discontinued since 2001 so the Passenger rail section
of the Oregon Rail Plan no longer applies to Prineville.

Project #: 4A-11                                                                               Page 15
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                January 20, 2013



2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the Oregon Rail Plan

The interaction and more recent investment in City infrastructure (and at the Prineville Junction
north of Redmond) have improved the City of Prineville Railway. Consideration of the
interaction and safety at rail crossings, access to loading areas for trucks, and land use
compatibility are all components that will need to be addressed within the Prineville TSP to
preserve the leverage the rail infrastructure and attract industry.


Transportation Safety Action Plan

The Transportation Safety Action Plan (TSAP) serves as the state of Oregon's Strategic Highway
Safety Plan (SHSP), as required by federal law. The TSAP lays out a set of actions to provide a
safer travel environment. The set of actions are prioritized based on those factors that contribute
to the greatest number of transportation-related deaths and injuries. The TSAP identifies
impaired driving, not using safety constraints, speed, and inexperience as Emphasis Area
Actions that should be implemented by the year 2020. Beyond identifying actions to decrease the
overall number of fatalities and injuries related to transportation, the TSAP also serves as a guide
to prioritize investments.

2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the TSAP

Improvement to safety was a noted criterion when identifying new improvement projects in the
2005 TSP. The 2005 TSP identifies 18 street improvements to address specific capacity
deficiencies and safety needs. The street improvements are categorized based on priority level.
The TSP Update will provide a more in-depth assessment of safety needs within the Prineville
UGB to address changes in crash patterns and develop a revised set of mitigating projects and
strategies.


OAR Chapter 734-051 (Division 51)

Commonly referred to as Division 51, ODOT has adopted OAR 734-051 to establish procedures
and criteria to govern highway approaches, access control, spacing standards, medians and
restriction of turning movements in compliance with statewide planning goals, in a manner
compatible with acknowledged comprehensive plans and consistent with state law and the OTP.
Any new street or driveway connections, as well as any changes to existing street or driveway
connections, to state roads within the TSP study boundary must be in compliance with these
rules.

OAR 734-051 policies address the following:
        How to bring existing and future approaches into compliance with access spacing
        standards, and ensure the safe and efficient operation of the highway;
        The purpose and components of an access management plan; and;
        Requirements regarding mitigation, modification and closure of existing approaches as
        part of project development.

Project #: 4A-11                                                                            Page 16
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                               January 20, 2013



Access management standards adopted by ODOT and applicable to Prineville's TSP are
summarized in Table 1-4. OHP Policies 3A and 3C establish access management objectives for
state highways and interchange areas based on facility type and set standards for spacing of
approaches. These standards have also been adopted as part of OAR 734-051, which provides the
regulatory basis for implementation.

Senate Bill 264 was passed in June 2011, and amended temporary rules that took effect in May
2012. The bill directs ODOT to develop proposed legislation to "codify, clarify and bring
consistency to issuance of access based on objective standards for highway segments where the
annual amount of daily traffic is 5,000 vehicles or fewer." The temporary rules are reflected in
the OHP amendment to the 2011 Access Management Standards.

2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the OAR 734-051

The 2005 TSP outlines the guiding principles used in the adoption of new access management
standards consistent with OAR 734-051 and the 1999 OHP. Table 7-2 in the 2005 TSP summarizes
the street design guidelines and includes access management standards based on the guiding
principles. The TSP Update shall incorporate the amendments to OAR 734-051 through the
adoption of Senate Bill 264 when establishing revised street design guidelines.


ODOT Highway Design Manual

An update to the Highway Design Manual (HDM) was released in 2012, and includes ODOT
standards and procedures for the location and design of new construction, major reconstruction,
and resurfacing, restoration or rehabilitation (3R) projects. The HDM is used for all projects that
are located on state highways. The following matrix in Table 1-5 shows which design standards
are applicable for certain projects based on project type, and whether the project pertains to a
state route.




Project #: 4A-11                                                                           Page 17
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                    January 20, 2013



                           Table 1-5    Design Standards Selection Matrix

                                                           Roadway Jurisdiction
              Project Type                      State Highways            Local Agency Roads
           Modernization/ Bridge
                                            ODOT 4R/ New Urban                 AASHTO
            New/Replacement
            Preservation/ Bridge               ODOT 3R Urban                   AASHTO
               Rehabilitation
         Preventive Maintenance                        1R                        N/A
           Safety- Operations-
          Miscellaneous/ Special                 ODOT Urban                    AASHTO
                Programs
     Source: 2012 HDM, Table 1-1

In addition, the HDM identifies more stringent capacity standards than those within the Oregon
Highway Plan when developing new highway facilities, to further leverage the investment in
infrastructure.

2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the Highway Design Manual

The design standards in the HDM will be integrated into the detailed design and engineering
that will occur for projects once they are incorporated into the TSP Update and are programmed
as part of the City's Capital Improvement Program (CIP) for transportation.


Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (2012-2015)

The Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) is Oregon's four -year transportation
capital improvement program that identifies the funding for, and scheduling of, transportation
projects and programs. It includes projects on the federal, state, county and city transportation
systems, multimodal projects (highway, passenger rail, freight, public transit, bicycle and
pedestrian) and projects in the National Parks, National Forests and Indian tribal lands. Oregon's
STIP covers a four-year construction period, but is updated every two years in accordance with
federal requirements. The currently approved program is the 2012-2015 STIP. The Draft 2015-
2018 STIP is currently under development, including potential improvements at the Tom McCall
intersection with OR 126.

The 2012-2015 STIP should be reviewed for projects to consider during the development of
Prineville's TSP Update for complementary or conflicting traffic impacts . The Approved 2012-
2015 STIP identifies one project within the City of Prineville, as summarized in Table 1-6.




Project #: 4A-11                                                                                Page 18
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                        January 20, 2013



          Table 1-6     2012-2015 Approved STIP Projects within the City of Prineville



                                                                                                   Year
             Section               Total Cost             Description              Status         (FFY)

                                                   Pavement preservation with
  OR126 @ Prineville Grade        $2,000,000        center line rumblestrips &   Construction      2014
                                                         durable striping


House Bill 3379 Administrative Rule

House Bill (HB) 3379, which passed during the 2009 legislative session, directed the Oregon
Transportation Commission (OTC) to adopt an administrative rule to establish an application
process that local governments can use for economic development projects if they are not able to
meet the funding or timing requirements of the Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) related to
state highways. The administrative rule describes how a local jurisdiction may work with the
OTC and ODOT to do one of the following:
        Apply for a time extension to meet TPR requirements;
        Submit a plan proposing alternative methods of funding that will meet the standards
        adopted by the OTC;
        Apply to adjust traffic performance measures during an interim period prior to
        completion of construction of the proposed development; or,
        Apply to allow various types of traffic performance measures other than volume to
        capacity ratios (v/c).

The OTC adopted the Administrative Rule in December 2010 and provisions pertaining to the
above can be found in OAR 731-017-005 through -0055.


REGIONAL PLANS


OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan

The OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan assesses the highway segment between the western
Crook County boundary and the Prineville "Y" junction with US 26. The Plan establishes a long-
term vision for OR Highway 126 and provides a series of strategies aimed at addressing corridor
congestion, improving safety, supporting economic development and expected population
growth in Crook County and Prineville, and serving statewide mobility needs.

2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan

The 2005 TSP was adopted before the OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan was developed
and adopted. The TSP Update will incorporate the recommendations and improvements within
the City of Prineville UGB and determine their applicability on a system-wide level. The corridor
plan did not make specific recommendations within the Prineville city limits between the O'Neil

Project #: 4A-11                                                                                    Page 19
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                               January 20, 2013



Highway and the City core, as the implications of these on 3rd Street (OR 126/US 26) had a
considerable impact on the downtown that was determined to be better addressed as part of City
(rather than regional) plans. Accordingly, specific items to be addressed within the TSP include:
        Adoption of a plan for Tom McCall and Millican Road;
        Realignment options for the O'Neil Highway, or interim treatments; and
        Review of options at the Prineville "Y" and how these options would integrate with 3 rd
        Street.


Cascades East Transit Regional Transportation Plan

                                                       Central     Oregon       Intergovernmental
                                                       Council (COIC) is facilitating the
                                                       development of regional transit plans that
                                                       will encompass service throughout
                                                       Deschutes and Jefferson Counties within
                                                       Central Oregon. Cascades East Transit
                                                       (CET), which provides regional services to
                                                       cities shown in Exhibit 1-3, will operate
                                                       the service. The dispersed services that
                                                       had been provided prior to 2008 were
                                                       inefficient to transfer between services
                                                       with separate fare structures.

                                                       Key elements of the ongoing CET regional
                                                       transportation plan include the following:

                                                              Development of fixed route transit
                                                              service in Redmond

                                                              Integration   with     tourist/event
                                                              services

                                                              Establishment of regional park and
                                                              ride facilities

                                                              Partnerships with schools, health
                                                              care, and Confederated Tribes of
                                                              Warm Springs
Exhibit 1-3. Regional CET service boundaries.




Project #: 4A-11                                                                           Page 20
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                January 20, 2013



2005 TSP Assessment Relative to CET Regional Transportation Plan

Fixed route transit service was not established within Central Oregon when the 2005 TSP efforts
were completed. The provision of regional transit and routes to connect pedestrians, bicyclists,
and motorists with these services will help to relieve the congested OR 126 corridor and provide
modal options. The CET Regional Transportation Plan is currently in progress so the COIC
project manager will serve as a technical advisory committee member to ensure coordination
between efforts.


Central Oregon Rail Plan

The Central Oregon Rail Plan was developed "between 2007 to 2009 to address various rail
related safety, congestion, freight mobility, and economic development issues for Central
Oregon." One of the primary concerns identified in the plan is the need "to make strategic
investments to avoid eventual loss of rail service by Class 1 haulers, and the significant economic
and livability impacts this would have on all of the communities" in Central Oregon. Two of the
three solutions listed to address this issue directly involve the City of Prineville Railroad (COPR)
and intermodal transfer facilities:
        Take advantage of and maximize opportunities with the area's shortline railroad, COPR,
        including industrial sites along the line, and freight terminal options such as the
        Prineville Freight Depot and at the COPR interchange with BNSF at Prineville Junction.
        Seek agreement by shippers in Central Oregon to use a single designated intermodal
        complex.

The Central Oregon Rail Plan seeks to address two general issues: rail crossings and freight
mobility. Per the plan, at-grade crossings in Central Oregon cities can contribute to safety and
congestion issues. Freight mobility, on the other hand, "is about economics, preserving and
enhancing rail freight mobility."

The plan indicates that the long term (50-70 year) vision is "to eliminate the at-grade crossings,
either by bridge crossings or by closures." However, the high cost of the needed infrastructure
makes this challenging to implement in the short term (20 years). The stated goal is to gradually
phase out at-grade crossings over the planning period, beginning with those deemed to be of
greatest significance on a regional level. The plan specifically identifies seven "high priority"
crossing locations to eliminate, none of which are in Crook County.

The plan states the "ideal vision for Central Oregon" in regard to freight mobility "is to improve,
enhance, and sustain freight mobility by use of rail services." Stating the primary challenge as
the infeasibility of "individual shippers (with individual commodities) located on the mainline,
the plan states the following twofold goal:
        Maximize the existing rail network.
        Develop large land parcels for rail-served industries.



Project #: 4A-11                                                                            Page 21
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                 January 20, 2013



The plan specifically identifies maximizing use of the City of Prineville Railroad and intermodal
transfer facilities as "an opportunity to improve freight mobility." Finally, the plan highlights the
City of Prineville Railroad in several of the implementation statements, including the following:
        "Take advantage of and maximize opportunities with the area's shortline railroad, COPR.
        Secure long-term efficient and competitive rail service by siting non-unit train, rail-served
        industries along the COPR. Sites served by a shortline railroad with access to both the
        BNSF and UP are exceedingly rare and desirable from a competitive standpoint. The
        highest ranked sites . . . include land at: Prineville Junction (Deschutes County), Crook
        County Heavy Industrial Zone, [and] Northwest Industrial Park (Prineville)."
        "Prioritize and encourage support of trucking freight to COPR Freight Depot for transfer
        to rail mode, for the shippers of less than one unit train volumes currently located on the
        mainline or new shippers locating in the vicinity of the mainline."
        "Having one pick-up and drop-off location in Central Oregon [for the BNSF line], rather
        than several, will ensure that the mainline velocity and capacity are not compromised
        over the long term."
        "Regardless of which recommended strategies COACT is able to or decides to implement,
        the COPR is Central Oregon's best hope for assuring we maintain access to the national
        rail network."


COUNTY PLANS AND POLICIES


Crook County Parks and Recreation District Master Plan (2007)

The Crook County Parks and Recreation District (CCPRD) Master Plan was created to "guide the
acquisition and development of recreation programs, parks, facilities, and trails to accommodate
the needs and desires of the total community." Key findings of this plan include:
        Small, neighborhood parks, within walking distance of residents, are needed in new and
        existing neighborhoods.
        The development of an interconnected trail system is a high priority for the community.
        Parks, open spaces, trails, and greenways are an important part of the character of
        Prineville. The park, open space, trails, and greenway system should be maintained and
        expanded.

Within the plan there is limited discussion of trails as a transportation need, rather the plan
highlights the recreational benefits. One relevant project for the TSP update is the Ochoco Creek
Bike Path, which is described as a 2.4 mile "paved surface separated from vehicles for pedestrian
and bicycle use" and indicates that the "path needs resurfacing & repair."

The CCPRD Master plan includes the following 20-year recommendations relevant to
transportation:
        Plan for an additional 7 miles of pathways and 7 miles of trails.
Project #: 4A-11                                                                             Page 22
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                               January 20, 2013



        Work with developers to assure that park lands and trail connections are developed with
        new development.
        Continuously look for opportunities for land dedication, purchase and/or establishment
        of easements for greenway parks and trails in areas of existing and new development.

The plan also includes several recommendations related to specific properties on which there
may be opportunities to expand or provide connections to the trail system:
        Land located on either side of NW Lon Smith Road is an area identified in the City's
        comprehensive plan to be rezoned from industrial to residential. The District should
        work with the City and future developer(s) to create community and neighborhood parks
        and trails in this area.
        Lands south of Barnes Butte are proposed with approximately 2,500 residential lots. The
        District is currently working with the developer for potential parks and trails.
        Colson and Colson are proposing a development of approximately 1,000 residential lots
        along the Crooked River, south of the City. The District should review development
        applications for neighborhood parks, trails, and trail connections.
        Kennedy Development is proposing a residential development west of Juniper Canyon
        Road, north of Highland Acres. This development will require neighborhood parks and
        trails.
        The Melrose area in the southeast portion of the City has potential for redevelopment
        with a neighborhood park. The District should review the area for park development and
        trail opportunities.
        Crystal Springs is a proposed development with 200 to 300 residential lots northeast of
        the Melrose area. The District should also evaluate this area for park development and
        trail opportunities.

The strongest single statement in the plan related to the development of the trails is the
following:

"The District should strive to create a continuous trail and open space greenway system adjacent to
Ochoco Creek, McKay Creek, and the Crooked River. These greenways should be developed with a system
of trails and parks that connect to other trails, parks, and neighborhoods in the District."

The Plan includes a Trail Vision Map which depicts existing and future trails along each of the
water courses listed above as well as up into the rimrock both to the east and west of the city.


Crook County Comprehensive Plan (Last Amended 2002)

The Comprehensive Plan is a statement of public policy for the guidance of growth,
development, and conservation of resources within the County. There is little background
information in the Comprehensive Plan related to the transportation system within the Prineville
UGB and there are no policies that directly relate to the function or design of streets within

Project #: 4A-11                                                                           Page 23
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                        January 20, 2013



Prineville's transportation system. However, policies related to growth and transportation
planning are relevant to future planning for the UGB.

The Comprehensive Plan describes the dynamic tension between rural and urban land uses and
the County's role in providing a planning framework that both preserves agricultural land and
provides for the smooth transition of rural to urban use. The policy framework set out in Chapter
I is related to the urban growth boundary (UGB) and urbanization. These policies relate to the
timing, location, and funding of public facilities. Pertinent to the TSP Update process,
particularly within the areas of the UGB outside of city limits, policies specifically address the
role of transportation facilities in supporting or restricting growth. Chapter I includes the
following implementation guidelines:
        1. "The type, location and phasing of public facilities and services are factors which
           should be utilized to direct urban expansion.
        2. The type, design, phasing and location of major public transportation facilities (i.e. all
           modes: air, rail, mass transit, highways, bicycle and pedestrian) and improvements
           thereto are factors which should be utilized to support urban expansion into
           urbanizable areas and restrict it from rural areas.
        3. Financial incentives should be provided to assist in maintaining the use and character
           of lands adjacent to urbanizable areas.
        4. Local land use controls and ordinances should be mutually supporting, adopted and
           enforced to integrate the type, timing and location of public facilities and services in a
           manner to accommodate increased public demands as urbanizable lands become more
           urbanized."

The Plan highlights "urban development priority factors" that relate to the costs of providing
transportation, provide for the efficient extension of the system, and providing access to an
existing improved arterial or collector.

Other policies related to future growth and impacts to the transportation system include those
addressing employment land. The first policy under the Industry Chapter is to "protect existing
industrial development and establish the Airport and Railroad Industrial Sites as a high priority
for industrial expansion." The second policy is to direct growth to the "airport vicini ty between
Houston Lake Road and the Redmond Highway."

The following Air, Water and Land Resource policy also relates to the transportation system:
        "6. Provide for bicycling and walking as viable transportation alternatives and provide
            facilities for such (Transportation Element, Chapter IV )."

The Recreation chapter supports this policy with a statement that there is a need in the greater
Prineville area for bicycle paths; the Transportation chapter includes several policies relating to
the City of Prineville's objective to encourage pedestrian and bicycle movement as a safe, feasible
alternative to the automobile for the metro area.


Project #: 4A-11                                                                                        Page 24
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                               January 20, 2013



Crook County TSP

The 2005 Crook County Transportation System Plan (County TSP) addresses the County's
anticipated transportation needs through the year 2025. The long-range plan is intended to serve
as a guide for managing existing County transportation facilities and developing transportation
facilities to meet existing and future needs.

Transportation Goals and Policies are found in Section 2.0. Under Goal 1, Mobility, County
policies and describe four phases of transportation improvements along OR 126, address
Prineville Airport access onto OR 126, and reference the County's intergovernmental agreement
(IGA) with ODOT regarding the Powell Butte Highway jurisdictional transfer and associated
improvements along OR 126. These are summarized below.
        Policy 1.11: "Future transportation improvements along OR 126 shall occur by a four
        phase process. These phases are: 1) passing lanes every 3-5 miles; 2) continuous four lane
        section; 3) grade separate the higher volume road intersections with interchanges and/or
        overpasses; 4) full access control with median barriers, frontage roads. Depending on the
        intersection, some elements of Phase 3 and Phase 4 can be intermixed. The goal of this
        four-phase approach is to incrementally improve an existing two lane rural highway,
        culminating in a four-lane facility with grade-separated interchanges and frontage roads.
        The timing of improvements may be tied to volume-capacity (v/c) ratios, levels of service,
        crash rates per million vehicle miles, reducing types of crashes, or other performance
        standards."
        Policy 1.12: "Any transportation changes near the Prineville Airport must consider the
        current Prineville Airport Layout Plan. Crook County does not necessarily support the
        conclusions of the 1998 City of Prineville Transportation System Plan in regard to their
        preferred option to improve the airport industrial area access to OR 126. The City of
        Prineville is in the process of updating their transportation system plan and should
        closely coordinate the airport industrial area access issues to OR 126 with Crook County
        since part of the affected facility and traffic is on county roads. The ultimate solution
        should adequately connect Tom McCall Road and Millican Road together in an efficient
        manner with one interchange connection to OR 126."
        Policy 1.13: "Crook County recognizes that the agreements with ODOT in regard to the
        Powell Butte jurisdictional transfer and the improvements along OR 126 provide the
        framework to implement the transportation improvements along those corridors.
        Specifically, the agreement addresses the planning and funding of the Powell Butte
        Highway interchange with OR 126 and the eventual four-lane widening of OR 126 from
        Redmond to Prineville. In addition, the IGA addresses the process to develop the Tom
        McCall Road/Millican Road interchange with OR 126."

Goal 7 outlines policies to encourage and maintain multi-jurisdictional coordination amongst
agencies and organizations with Crook County, including the City of Prineville and ODOT.
        Policy 7.3: "Work with ODOT and the City of Prineville in establishing cooperative
        transportation improvement programs and schedules."

Project #: 4A-11                                                                           Page 25
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                January 20, 2013



        Policy 7.6: "Crook County shall maintain an urban growth boundary (UGB) management
        agreement with the City of Prineville. This agreement shall be the basis to manage
        facilities outside the Prineville city limits but within the UGB as well as to eventually
        transfer facilities from Crook County to the City of Prineville when annexations occur."
        Policy 7.8: "Crook County shall coordinate with the City of Prineville in the development
        and update of its transportation system plan (TSP). Crook County shall also coordinate
        with the City of Prineville in the development of the city's TSP. Consistency between
        Crook County's and City of Prineville's TSPs shall be sought."

The Existing Conditions section of the TSP lists OR 126 and US 26 as two of the five state
highways that form the "backbone of Crook County's street system (p. 3-6)." The TSP describes
the facilities, and includes their functional classifications and general roadway geometries. Table
3-1 in the Crook County TSP provides the posted speeds and roadway design for six specific
segments of OR 126 and four specific segments of US 26, from Prineville to the County line.

Several Prineville area projects are identified in the County TSP and are listed below:
        US 26/Harwood signal (completed)
        Crooked River Bridge (completed)
        Millican Road Interchange with OR 126
        Crestview Road Extension across Crooked River to OR 27
        Roundabout at Knowledge/high school entrance
        Add bike lanes and sidewalks to Lynn Boulevard
        New Millican Road, alternative truck route, from OR 126 to US 20
        New Davis Road connection between Juniper Canyon and OR 27, south of Prineville

2005 TSP Assessment Relative to the Crook County TSP

The 2005 Crook County TSP does not reflect amendments the City has made to their current
transportation system plan, nor does it include an account of the recent OR 126 corridor study.
As the plan was prepared when economic projections were strong, the recommendations reflect
conditions that have subsequently become more constrained.

Goals, priorities, and the interaction within boundary areas between County and City facilities
will be key components of the plan that will need to be carried into the Prineville TSP update.
The update process should also include a specific account of Juniper Canyon and its emergency
access needs (alternatives to OR 126).




Project #: 4A-11                                                                            Page 26
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                January 20, 2013



CITY PLANS AND POLICIES


City of Prineville Urban Area Comprehensive Plan (2007)

The Prineville Urban Area Comprehensive Plan (Plan) "is a dynamic and inspirational guide for
directing and managing growth in the community." It is a "value driven" plan through which
community goals become the foundation for decision-making on a variety of levels within the
local government." The following highlights chapters from the Comprehensive Plan that contain
information, goals or policies relevant to transportation planning in the UGB.


Chapter 1, Community Characteristics

This chapter highlights the history of Prineville as well as current characteristics of the
community. It includes a history of the Prineville Railroad, the last civically owned railroad in
the country. The railroad was constructed in 1916 with a bond voted on by the citizens after the
major railroads had decided to bypass Prineville. The railroad has been a key part of the
community's history, culture and economy over the past century, specifically in its relation to the
lumber mill industry. Decline in that industry has threatened the operation of the Prineville
Railroad over the past couple decades; however, renewed efforts by the City have protected this
resource as a viable freight option for local businesses. The Prineville Railroad, and associated
freight depot, are seen by the community not only as a historical treasure but also as a major
component of the current and future economy, community identity, and freight transportation
system.

Chapter 1 also indicates that the city "has a high concentration of trucking/ground transportation
companies" and points out that the wide streets "testify to a value of open spaces and easy
vehicular and large transport access." Ensuring a strong trucking industry complements the
city's efforts to promote rail freight by offering local businesses more freight options. Protecting
the viability of the trucking industry will be a key consideration in the TSP update.

The following policy excerpts in Chapter 1 are relevant to the TSP update.
        Neighborhoods shall contain employment/shopping/service opportunities located in
        areas that can be served by transit and easily accessed by residents in the neighborhood.
        A downtown revitalization program shall be researched and developed to include
        incentives and other features desired by the community. These may include: delivery
        systems that do not negatively affect pedestrians, shoppers, and traffic flows; pedestrian
        amenities and improved crossing corridors; and reserved on street parking spaces for
        disabled, public transportation, maintenance and emergency services.




Project #: 4A-11                                                                            Page 27
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                  January 20, 2013



Chapter 2, Urban Land Use and Zoning Designations

This chapter discusses residential, commercial and industrial zone values and policies as well as
multimodal transportation, sustainability and growth management. The following policy
excerpts in Chapter 2 are relevant to the TSP update:
        Residential zones shall promote walk-ability and connectivity to adjacent neighborhoods,
        open spaces, parks and commercial nodes.
        Commercial zones should provide adequate opportunities to locate and operate
        businesses so Prineville can be as self-sufficient as possible without requiring citizens to
        make excessive vehicle trips to other communities.
        The downtown business commercial core area is a key feature of Prineville and should be
        enhanced to provide a draw for all citizens and visitors alike. Convenient and plentiful
        transportation and parking opportunities are necessary for the success of the downtown
        area.
        Industrial areas that are served by adequate community transportation, convenient
        connections to highway access, workforce housing, water, and sewer, communication,
        power, and gas systems will have a competitive advantage in the Central Oregon region.
        Industrial areas that provide mixed-use opportunities and service uses for employees can
        reduce excess vehicle trips and community subsidy.
        Larger width streets are appropriate in industrial areas.
        Industrial areas near local airports can enhance commerce and attract compatible aviation
        activities and industries.
        Industrial areas near city railroad facilities can enhance commerce and attract supportive
        activities and industries. Industrial uses should be encouraged to use railroad facilities for
        transportation of heavy freight, thus reducing vehicular traffic on roadways.
        Alternate mode transportation opportunities should be expanded as part of new
        development and redevelopment proposals.
        The topography of the Prineville community is mixed. The outlying areas contain various
        landforms that necessitate the creation of separate residential areas in-between the
        rimrock/plateau features. These areas will need to be developed as "complete
        neighborhoods" to provide proper service levels, infrastructure systems, reduced vehi cle
        miles traveled, and other designs/devices that support alternative mode use.
        The Prineville community desires to move towards creating land use patterns that
        support a multi-modal transportation system. This technique will seed to connect all
        areas of the community resulting in greater sustainability of all resources in spite of the
        challenges created by the varied topography.
        Higher density residential areas that are within walking distance of shopping, jobs, open
        space, recreation, and transit services will use land efficiently without sacrificing the
        existing low density residential character.


Project #: 4A-11                                                                              Page 28
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                               January 20, 2013



        The existing street grid system, with modifications to enhance views and respond to
        natural topography, is a good way to provide connectivity between all uses and
        encourage multimodal transportation.
        New developments and redevelopment projects that place housing within walking
        distance of shopping, services, employment, parks, recreation, and schools will be the
        easiest to serve with transit and other alternatives modes of travel.


Chapter 5, Economy

Chapter 5 is the City's economic opportunities analysis. It contains demographic and
background information related to employment that will have an impact on the transportation
system.

Chapter 5 includes the "recent development" of the Millican Highway connection from Highway
20 (Burns) to OR 126 at the industrial park in the City's locational advantages. It states that the
addition of truck stop services near the intersection of the Millican Highway and OR 126 will
help to serve the industry while reducing the negative impact of the truck traffic upon the rest of
the community at the city center. The Les Schwab distribution plant is also located off of
Millican.

Although written prior to any hint that data centers could eventually locate in Prineville,
Chapter 5 includes a paragraph highlighting companies "that rely upon the development of
technology and the transfer of knowledge products" as businesses that could be targeted by the
community which do not rely on proximity to major transportation routes. This paragraph
recommends "linking economic development strategies to a technology based economy" as a
method to adjust to Prineville's transportation limitations.

Chapter 5 also identifies the "strip" configuration of some of Prineville's commercial corridors as
a disadvantage due to poor access control, conflicts with ODOT, undesirable access for
commercial developments, and longer vehicle trips to reach needed shopping services. It states
that "strip commercial areas on the edges of the community force shoppers to travel by cars
along the primary access ways." It identifies mixed use zoning and commercial centers as a
means of providing "a better balance of commercial development and reduce unnecessary
vehicle trips."

Existing conditions information includes the statement that car commuting in Crook County is
higher than other places in Central Oregon due to the rural setting and distances from
employment and shopping opportunities in Bend and Redmond. The Plan clearly states a desire
to provide jobs in the community and reduce daily commuting to other cities. The section
indicates that increased jobs will result in increased population which will, in turn, lead to more
local shopping options. In addition, the lack of "desirable" industrial land in Bend and Redmond
and the City of Prineville's 2004 UGB expansion, which added over 540 acres of industrial land,
may influence commuting patterns and reduce traffic on US 26 and OR 126.



Project #: 4A-11                                                                           Page 29
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                 January 20, 2013



Chapter 5 identifies remanufactured wood, secondary wood products, the Les Schwab
distribution plant and ground transportation companies as the primary reasons for the fact that
"Prineville has the highest per capita of manufacturing jobs in the state." Each of these
businesses/industries relies on a safe and efficient transportation system to succeed. Therefore,
freight movement must be a primary component of the TSP update.

This chapter also highlights the Ochoco Lumber Mill Property. This 75-acre former industrial site
is identified in the Comprehensive Plan as a future mixed-use redevelopment site which will
likely include "commercial, industrial, open space and housing activities." This is a key site for
the City as it is the only large property in the UGB with potential for large scale commercial
and/or mixed-use development. It is important that the TSP take this into account so the
community can properly plan for the type of traffic patterns associated with a mixed use project.

Chapter 5 identifies the Prineville Airport as a major industrial area and a top local priority for
infrastructure planning and economic expansion incentives. This area includes the Tom McCall
Industrial Park, over 100 acres owned by the County and private developers, the Prineville
Industrial Park (Tom McCall Expansion), 118 acres of privately owned land, and the Prineville
Airport Business/Industrial Park, which has sites available for industrial and commercial
development (lease only). The economic analysis concludes that there is a need for additional
industrial lands that are situated near the airport, which will require a future UGB expansion.
The Plan includes the policy that "adequate public facilities must be planned, funded, and
installed to serve industrial sites and commercial areas."

The following policy excerpts in Chapter 5 are relevant to the TSP update:
        Adequate public facilities must be planned, funded, and installed to serve industrial sites
        and new manufacturing businesses.
        SDC charges must be carefully monitored and evaluated to ensure that development pays
        its own way while not creating obstacles to desired development.
        The State of Oregon transportation system (ODOT) has a significant effect upon the local
        community. Local groups and the City decision makers will need to establish good
        working relationships with ODOT to ensure coordination and quality development.


Chapter 6, Transportation & Circulation

Chapter 6 identifies the primary east-west and north-south grid streets (arterials and collectors)
and discusses transportation choices, railroad issues, transit facilities, bicycle and pedestrian,
street capacity and transportation funding. It refers to the City's TSP as "the long-term master
plan addressing transportation needs throughout the community" and "a guide for helping the
City make rational choices about the locations and type of needed transportation facilities."

Chapter 6 briefly identifies the benefits of the Prineville Railroad and lists potential and existing
problems related to safety, performance and/or capacity. It identifies the value of the railroad to
the Prineville Community as a competitive shipping option for local industry "to almost
anywhere in the United States."
Project #: 4A-11                                                                             Page 30
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                 January 20, 2013



Chapter 6 also describes operations and planned improvements at the Prineville Airport. Per this
chapter, there are approximately 500 take-offs and landings per month with over 20,000 people
per year using the airport. There are two runways and an improved taxiway, which is sufficient
to handle corporate jets and general use aviation aircraft. Most of Crook County's large business,
commercial and heavy industrial firms use the airport. The Plan states that airport development
and expansion is important for Crook County's overall economic growth and that the airport is
in the process of expanding, consistent with the adopted Airport Expansion Plan.

The transit section of Chapter 6 was adopted prior to Cascades East Transit commencing
operations in Crook County and only refers to shuttle services offered by private businesses or
community-based organizations.

In regard to bicycle and pedestrian facilities, Chapter 6 identifies "the lack of developed marked
routes and continuous grid pattern" as an obstacle to "full utilization of safe and efficient bicycle
and pedestrian routes." It identifies the Ochoco Creek Bike Path system as an amenity serving
"several activity centers, among which are the public parks, schools and central Prineville,"
however, it also notes that there are many areas of town not served by the trail or any complete
sidewalk network, including the fairgrounds, high school and several commercial and industrial
areas.

Chapter 6 contains the following goals, all of which are relevant to the TSP update:
        Goal #1: Create a functional transportation system to maximize and extend the life of
        transportation facilities and improve livability throughout the Prineville Community.
        Goal #2: Create a supportable method for determining and monitoring street capacity and
        service levels needed for a safe and efficient transportation system.
        Goal #3: Create a supportable method for determining adequate and consistent
        transportation impact analyses, mitigation procedures, and transportation improvement
        options.
        Goal #4: Develop a supportable and sustainable financing method for funding necessary
        transportation system master plan improvements over the life of the Plan.


Chapter 7, Housing

This chapter discusses the importance of providing sufficient land within the urban growth
boundary to support a range of housing types for all socioeconomic levels of citizens. It discusses
the "unprecedented residential development" that occurred in the early to mid-2000s and states
that this growth has "put a strain on public services." The following policy excerpts in Chapter 7
are relevant to the TSP update.
        The community should maintain the feel of a small community through careful design of
        new and redeveloping residential areas.




Project #: 4A-11                                                                             Page 31
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                 January 20, 2013



        The Prineville community desires to preserve, protect, and strengthen the vitality and
        stability of existing neighborhoods while permitting uses that make neighborhoods more
        "complete" and reduce vehicle miles traveled.
        Multi-modal access should be provided internally and to adjacent new and existing
        neighborhood developments.
        Higher density developments should be in close proximity to schools, services, parks,
        shopping, employment centers, and public transit.
        The location of most multi-family housing will be best suited near the City core, major
        transportation corridors, schools, services, parks, shopping, employment centers, and
        transit corridors.
        A lack of particular housing choices create traffic congestion as people commute from one
        community to another, increase costs for businesses related to employee travel time,
        employee absences, unnecessary street expansions and parking demand, reduced
        mobility for certain disadvantaged groups, and unnecessary community subsidy to
        remedy these and other impacts.


Chapter 8, Public Services and Facilities

This chapter identifies and describes current public facilities and services provided to residents
of Prineville, whether by the City, County or utility company. The following policy excerpts in
Chapter 8 are relevant to the TSP update:
        Local plans for providing urban levels of services to all land with the UGB must be
        comprehensive.
        Providing needed services in an economic and effective manner is good business and a
        good growth management tool.
        Plans providing for public facilities and services should be coordinated with plans for
        designation of urban boundaries, zoning, urbanizable land, rural uses and for the
        transition of rural land to urban uses.
        Public facilities and services in urban areas should be provided at levels necessary and
        suitable for urban uses without reducing service levels of existing residents.
        Public facilities and services in urbanizable areas should be provided at levels necessary
        and suitable for existing uses. The provision for future public facilities and services in
        these areas should be based upon: (1) the time required to provide the service; (2)
        reliability of service; (3) financial cost; (4) levels of service needed and desired; and (5)
        economic benefit to the community.
        A public facility or service should not be provided to outlying urbanizable areas unless
        there is provision for the coordinated development of all the other urban facilities and
        services appropriate to that area.




Project #: 4A-11                                                                             Page 32
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                     January 20, 2013



        The Prineville community understands that making growth pay its own way is one of the
        many techniques that can sustain limited resources without resulting in unnecessary
        subsidy.
        The Prineville community expects the local school district and City Planning officials will
        coordinate the location of new school site and implement strategies for multiple use
        spaces. The opportunity for reduced vehicle usage at school campuses should be
        evaluated and implemented.


Staff Updates to 2005 TSP (not formally adopted)

In 2009, City staff began preliminary work on an update of the TSP. There were several reasons
for this in spite of the fact that the TSP had been updated just four years earlier, including:
        Many of the projects identified in the 2005 TSP have been completed.
        Other projects have either been altered or eliminated as priorities.
        Since 2005 significant growth occurred that highlighted deficiencies in the transportation
        system and it became obvious that there are many critical projects not identified in the
        2005 TSP.
        Cost estimates for projects in the 2005 TSP were not updated from the original 1998 TSP.

The work of staff was summarized in the following four technical memorandums, as described
below.

Technical Memorandum #1: Development of Project Priority Matrix

This memo describes the method used by staff to identify and prioritize projects. Per this memo,
the projects in the 2005 TSP were evaluated to determine if they should continue to be
considered as priorities. All collector and arterial streets within the Prineville UGB were
evaluated to determine improvements needed to ensure city standards and projected capacity
needs could be met through the buildout of the city's UGB. Finally, projects were ranked
utilizing a project priority matrix. There are two documents that are exhibits to Technical
Memorandum #1: a matrix weighting worksheet, used by staff to assign scores to projects based
on weighted categories, and the Key for the Project Priority Matrix, which describes in detail
each of the scoring categories.

Technical Memorandum #2: Project Cost Estimates

This memo describes the method and assumptions used to develop the Project Cost Summary. It
includes a table of unit costs (i.e. cost of sidewalk per square foot, cost of curb per linear foot, cost
of right-of-way by zone, engineering as a percent of overall project cost, etc.). It also includes a
detailed description of each of the cost categories and a detailed description of how each of the
unit cost estimates were derived.



Project #: 4A-11                                                                                 Page 33
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                 January 20, 2013



Technical Memorandum #3: Traffic SDC

This memo summarizes the methodology used to calculate the City's current transportation
system development charge (SDC). Project cost estimates for all priority projects were included
in the SDC calculations and highlighted in the memo. The calculation included consideration of
estimated project costs, the Working Project Cost Allocation table, a breakdown of estimated
benefit of each project to existing vs. future transportation system users, and the estimated
number of p.m. peak hour trips that would be generated by future system users.

Technical Memorandum #4: Tom McCall Intersection Impact Fee

The 2005 TSP included cost estimates for a grade separated interchange at the intersection of OR
126 and Tom McCall Road or Millican Road, as well as a percentage breakdown of project costs
to be paid for by State, County, City and private sources. However, it did not include any
mechanism to collect these funds from private sources. This left potential developers in a
position where they would either generate too few trips to trigger any improvements to the
intersection and not have to contribute at all to a future improvements or they would generate a
large enough number of trips for ODOT to require the construction of the grade-separated
interchange.

In order to address this issue and ensure that all developments pay their share, and no single
development has to complete a major improvement, Technical Memorandum #4 was generated
to establish an impact fee to be assessed to any development that accesses OR 126 via the Tom
McCall or Millican Road intersections. This memo summarizes the methodology, which includes
an estimated project cost for a multi-lane roundabout (identified in a report by Group MacKenzie
as an alternative to the grade separated interchange), an anticipated breakdown of project
responsibility among ODOT, Crook County, the City and private development, and an estimate
of the additional trips that could be accommodated by the roundabout. The result was an impact
fee of $1,452 per p.m. peak hour trip.


Other Key City Staff Work

In addition to these technical memorandums, City staff developed numerous spreadsheets to
summarize critical information. The most significant of these are the Project Priority Matrix,
Project Cost Summary and Working Project Cost Allocation. These tables are summarized below.


Project Priority Matrix

This matrix lists the 24 projects identified by staff as priorities and details the weighted rankings
the projects received based on the scoring criteria described in the matrix key. The categories and
sub-categories considered include the following:

        Safety
            o      Pedestrian & Bike

Project #: 4A-11                                                                             Page 34
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                              January 20, 2013



            o      Vehicular
        Level of Service
            o      Circulation
            o      Intersections
        Economic Development
            o      Downtown
            o      Commercial/Industrial Areas
        Community Development
            o      Appearance
            o      Accessibility
        Feasibility
            o      Financial
            o      Political
Each of the categories and sub-categories had a weighted score determined by averaging staff
scores on each criterion. The result was a prioritized list which identified seven high priority
projects (score of 150+ out of a possible 300), nine medium priority projects (score between 100
and 149.9), and eight low priority projects (score under 100).

Project Cost Summary

This spreadsheet describes the cost of each project based on the following breakdown, which
was determined through the process described in Technical Memorandum #2. Cost centers
include the following:
        Full street improvements
        Partial street improvements
        Traffic signals and structures
        Professional services
        Mobilization and temporary traffic control
        Project management
        Right-of-way acquisition
        Contingency

The total estimated cost for all 24 projects was $99.4 million.

Table 1-7 summarizes the priority rankings and cost estimates complete by staff. It is important
to note that this in no way reflects any adopted plan or the will of the community. It was merely
an activity completed by staff in preparation for the upcoming TSP update process.
Project #: 4A-11                                                                          Page 35
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                 January 20, 2013



                   Table 1-7   City of Prineville Transportation Priority Rankings

  Project Title                                            Staff Score        Staff Cost Estimate
  9th St. N ­ Main St. to 7th St. E                           204.3               $7,429,351
  West "Y" Roundabout                                         187.0               $3,364,900
  Laughlin Rd ­ 7th St/Juniper to 3rd St NW                   177.4               $7,177,993
   nd                                        rd
  2 St. N ­ Dead End West to Knowledge/3 St                   174.2               $5,489,905
  Tom McCall/Millican Intersection                            157.8              $18,820,120
  Lynn Blvd ­ Main St. to Combs Flat                          156.5               $3,747,552
  Main St. ­ Lamonta to N. City Limits                        150.2               $3,855,871
  Lamonta ­ Gardner to Main                                   147.4               $5,264,147
                                              rd
  Peters Ext. to Combs Flat / Combs Flat to 3                 141.2               $5,345,340
  Peters Rd. Extension ­ Main to Lamonta                      132.0               $3,163,930
  Main St. ­ Lynn Blvd to Lamonta                             131.5               $4,513,094
  Brummer Rd. ­ Main St. to George Millican                   127.9               $8,398,632
  Gardner Rd. ­ Madras Hwy to Lamonta                         123.0               $1,780,336
  Brummer Rd. ­ Davis Loop to Main St.                        119.6               $5,291,088
  Peters Rd. ­ Main St. to Yellowpine                         101.4                $664,046
  Combs Flat Rd. ­ 3rd St. to Laughlin                        100.1                $558,850
  Harwood St. ­ 3rd St. NW to Lamonta                         98.9                 $687,736
  Elm St. / Fairview St. ­ Lynn to 10th St.                   97.3                 $723,668
  Combs Flat Ext. from Peters to Barnes Butte                 93.5                $3,625,930
  4th St. N ­ Harwood to Elm                                  88.1                $2,120,782
  Main St. ­ S. City Limits to Lynn Blvd.                     87.8                 $386,331
  Deer St. ­ 5th Pl. to Lamonta                               82.1                 $644,360
  9th St. N ­ Madras Hwy to Main St.                          80.3                $4,252,796
  Yellowpine Rd. ­ Peters to City Limits                      78.5                $2,103,897


Working Project Cost Allocation

This table assigns a percentage of the cost of each project to each of the potential funding
partners ­ ODOT, Crook County, the City and private development. Based on this analysis,
approximately $34 million is the responsibility of the state, $14.7 million as the responsibility of
the county, $38.4 million the responsibility of the City, and $12.3 million the responsibility of
private development. The table then further breaks down the City's portion of each project into a
percentage of benefit to existing vs. future transportation users. Based on this analysis, $9.5
million of the project costs benefit existing users and $28.9 million of the project costs benefit
future users. The latter number is the one used in Technical Memorandum #3 to estimate the
transportation SDC if all 24 projects were to be funded.


City of Prineville 2005 Transportation System Plan

The City of Prineville adopted its Transportation System Plan in 2005 in compliance with the
requirements of the Transportation Planning Rule. The plan was developed to address several
key issues within the City related to its vision and accommodating planned growth:


Project #: 4A-11                                                                             Page 36
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                               January 20, 2013



        Improvement options for the Prineville "Y"
        Review of whether 3rd Street ­ US 26 should be improved to a higher-capacity form
        (couplet, five-lane cross-section, or left as-is)
        Realignment considerations for the O'Neil Highway
        Tom McCall/Millican Road intersection with OR 126 improvements
        9th Street Truck Route and Extension
Generally, the City's Transportation System Plan identified that major improvements would be
needed to improve conditions along 3rd Street. While the plan did not identify the need for cross-
section changes through the downtown core, it was reliant on parallel routes (such as 9th Street)
off-loading 3rd Street demands. While the 9th Street extension has not been completed, recent
efforts by the City to provide parallel capacity on 2nd Street have been completed.

There have also been significant land use changes since the TSP was prepared. Land use
assumptions within the adopted plan did not specifically account for Iron Horse, Anglers
Canyon, Rivergate, or River Steppes developments that are expected to concentrate growth
within specific areas of the City. External growth in areas such as Juniper Canyon and
destination resorts may also influence the levels and patterns of growth. Current data center
development within the City's Tom McCall business park also provides a change to the intensity
of expected growth from what was envisioned within the prior plans.

Each of the key issues (outlined above) related to the City's vision and planned growth, is
separately addressed within the TSP at the conceptual level. While many of these improvements
were identified as necessary within the planning horizon, the financial changes that occurred
with the recession reduced funding and forced the City to scale back and phase in
improvements. Other elements, such as the Prineville "Y" and access surrounding the airport
industrial lands were more recently addressed as part of the OR 126 Corridor Plan.

Additional changes have recently occurred with the adoption of revised mobility targets for State
facilities. While these may not change the system needs, they may influence the size and scale of
improvement options that are required.

Due to the changes to the transportation system, revised growth projections, changing revenue,
and a desire to review mixed use zoning provisions, the TSP update will need to review key
issues from this prior plan and determine if modifications will be required. Review of the prior
input, concerns, and discussions will be used to help inform the solution options considered
within the City's TSP update.


City of Prineville Downtown Enhancement Plan

The Downtown Enhancement Plan was adopted in June 1997 and has been inconsistently
implemented since that time. The plan includes a summary of existing plans affecting the
downtown core, a summary of land uses in the study area and an inventory of sidewalks,


Project #: 4A-11                                                                           Page 37
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                         January 20, 2013



bikeways, parking, utilities, building architecture, signage and parks and open space. The
recommendations are the most significant part of the plan and include the following:

        Basic design guidelines related to building mass, materials and scale;
        Sidewalk width of 10-12 feet;
        Installation of concrete bulb-outs to reduce pedestrian crossing distances at intersections;
        Limitations on vehicular access and encouraging utilization of alleys;
        Provision of on-street parking as well as restrictions on city-owned, off-street parking
        areas;
        Guidelines for landscaping and street tree selection;
        Guidelines for street furniture, bicycle parking and lighting; and,
        Regulations for sidewalk construction in the downtown core (cobblestone or imprinting).

Prineville/Crook County Airport Master Plan

The Airport Layout Plan Report (Report) was developed jointly by the City of Prineville and
Crook County, with the support of the Oregon Department of Aviation (ODA), so that the
Prineville Airport could continue to qualify for federal Airport Improvement Program (AIP)
grants for eligible facility improvement projects. The Report recognizes the role that this general
aviation airport in providing access to the statewide transportation system, as well as both direct
(i.e., employment) and indirect economic activity within the local community and region. The
Report also points to the airport's role in the joint effort by the City and County to attract new,
large employers to the area, noting that the County owns most of the available undeveloped
industrial land adjacent to the airport and that expanding a diversified industrial base within the
county is a primary component of the region's economic development strategy. Key report
conclusions related to land use and traffic in the vicinity of the airport include:

        11. The existing zoning associated with Prineville Airport does not fully comply with ORS
        Ch. 836.600 et. Seq.

        12. The east side of the airport currently accommodates all landside facilities. It is
        anticipated that this area will not have sufficient landside capacity to accommodate
        projected facility demands without redevelopment and/or reconfiguration of existing
        facilities. If existing facility configurations are maintained, expansion to the north side of
        Runway 10/28 will be required during the current planning period.

        13. The planned expansion of landside facilities into undeveloped areas of the airport will
        require the extension of utility service (water, electrical, telephone, sanitary sewer, etc.)
        and airport access roads. Utility improvements are not eligible for FAA funding, therefore
        will require local funding. Access roads that serve aviation developments are generally
        eligible for FAA funding.


Project #: 4A-11                                                                                         Page 38
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                      January 20, 2013



The Report's recommendations include upgrading and widening runways, adding taxiways,
adding floodlighting to the existing terminal area and other existing landside areas (hangars,
aircraft parking, etc.), and fencing along the airport's boundary. Transportation
recommendations relevant to OR 126 facility planning include:

        7. Any future improvements to Highway 126 in the vicinity of the airport should be designed to
        avoid creating obstructions to the approach surfaces of Runway 28 and 33, as depicted on the
        updated airspace drawings contained in this report.

        20. Any planned improvements to Highway 126 in the vicinity of the airport should be designed to
        avoid any obstruction to the Prineville Airport's FAR Part 77 imaginary surfaces. In addition, any
        lighting associated with the highway in the vicinity of the airport should be designed to avoid
        producing excessive upward light emissions that could create a hazard for aircraft operating at the
        airport.

Chapter 2 notes that all landside developments (hangars, aircraft parking, services, etc.) are
located at the east end of the airport and are served by an access road that connects to OR 126.
Citing information provided by the local chamber of commerce, Chapter 2 reports that the
airport has three industrial parks nearby with more than 100 acres of land zoned for heavy
industry. The background information on the airport lists the patrons as a "variety of general
aviation users, including business, commercial, and government aviation," as well as the United
States Forest Service (USFS) and the Bureau of Land Management (BLM).

Under "Land Use Planning and Zoning," the Report states that the airport is located entirely
within the City's UGB and city limits. Land is zoned Airport Operations (A-O); Airport
Development (A-D); Airport Business ­ Industrial (A-M); and Airport Commercial (A-C). City
and/or County industrial zoning is located to the southeast, east, and north of the site, with the
remaining areas in Crook County Exclusive Farm Use (EFU3) Zoning.

The remainder of Chapter 2 deals with the methodology of updating the forecasts of aviation
activity and translating future activity into gross facility needs for the 20-year planning period.
Air traffic at the airport is predominately general aviation with a small amount of government
activity, where business jet activity currently accounts for more than 12% of annual operations
and is expected to increase in the future. More than 430 aircraft are located within Prineville's
airport service area; Prineville currently accounts for about 17 percent of the area's aircraft, with
Bend and Redmond accounting for more than 60 percent. The Report concludes that competition
among airports (services and facilities) will continue being a primary factor affecting aviation
activity at all airports within the local service area. The Report looked at national general
aviation trends, as well as local population to predict future airport usage, and concludes that
aviation activity at the airport has generally outpaced population growth in recent years. Long-
term forecasts of Crook County population reflect a moderate increase (1.6 percent annual
average growth) over the next twenty to forty years and airport activity is expected to increase at
a slightly higher rate than County population. An annual average growth rate of 3.1 percent was
used to project area-based aircraft through the twenty-year planning period to provide a more
aggressive projection. Aircraft operations are projected to increase at an average annual rate of

Project #: 4A-11                                                                                   Page 39
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                        January 20, 2013



4.5 percent. The higher rate of growth in operations is based on the assumption that the average
aircraft utilization at the airport will gradually increase from its current 120 operations per based
aircraft to 160, which is equal to the airport's long-term historic average.

Chapter 4 describes a preferred alternative for the airport layout, a refinement of an earlier
concept ("Concept A") that involves the redevelopment of the existing east -side facilities located
between the ends of Runways 28 and 33, OR 126 and the main access taxiway. The aim of
Concept A was to eliminate the "patchwork pattern of development" by maximizing the
efficiency of existing developed areas (east landside area) to address facility needs before
proceeding with the development of other parts of the airport. The preferred alternative
supports redevelopment of east side facilities where feasible and designates large development
areas and development reserves on the north side of Runway 10/28 for general aviation,
agricultural, military and government aviation use. A previously-planned realignment of the
main airport access road allows for the development of aviation-related facilities east of the
existing access road, which currently cannot be accessed by aircraft without taxiing across the
roadway. This new north airport access road would extend from an existing service point on OR
126 and is described in the Airport Layout Plan as follows:

        The existing airport access road will be realigned to accommodate a combination of aviation and
        aviation-related developments between OR 126 and existing east landside development. The
        existing access road will be gated at the north and south ends of the development area to provided
        limited vehicle access. The area will be developed to accommodate aircraft hangars on both sides of
        the existing access road and hangar taxilanes will be extended to serve hangars located on the east
        side of the existing road.

In addition, the Airport Layout Plan calls for the following:

        A location for an emergency services building is identified near the southeast corner of the airport.
        This facility is envisioned to provide emergency response services on the airport and to adjacent
        areas through direct access to OR 126.


City of Prineville Land Use Code (Chapter 153)

The City of Prineville's Land Use Code implements the goals, policies, and objectives expressed
in the City's Comprehensive Plan. Sections 153.045 through 153.064 (Use Zones) specify the
allowed uses and associated regulations for each zoning district in the City. There are 15 zoning
districts currently represented in the city, including three residential zones, four commercial
zones, three industrial zones, four airport zones and a park reserve. In addition, there are three
zones that are available within the code but have not yet been applied to any specific properties;
these are the high density residential zone, low density residential zone and neighborhood
commercial zone. Future application of these zones could have a significant impact on the
transportation system.

Transportation facilities are identified specifically in each zone as permitted and/or conditional
uses and bike paths and walking trails are permitted outright in all zones. All the City zoning

Project #: 4A-11                                                                                     Page 40
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                               January 20, 2013



districts allow maintenance and repair of existing roadways, as well as the construction of new
facilities, if identified in an adopted transportation plan. In addition, a wide range of highway
improvement activities are permitted outright in all zones and are exempt from local permit
requirements, including the installation of additional lanes and pedestrian and/or bikeways
within a highway right-of-way.

Section 153.195 provides guidelines for access management. The standards are presented as
"guidelines" that the reviewing authority "shall consider" in the review and approval of new
development. Major arterials require 500 feet between driveways and/or streets and ¼ mile
between intersections while minor arterials require 300 feet between driveways and/or streets
and 600 feet between intersections. Collectors require 50 feet between driveways and/or streets
and 300 feet between intersections. This section also identifies other techniques and
considerations for restricting access to arterials and collectors, but does not include any
requirements for their use. These standards will be evaluated during the TSP update.

Additional requirements for access management are provided in some of the zones. The airport
zones, commercial zones and industrial zones include a requirement that new development be
designed so that traffic does not onto a public street right-of-way while entering or exiting a
particular development. In the Park Reserve zone, there is a general requirement that access
points from public streets must be located to "minimize traffic congestion, noise and dust
pollution and to protect scenic views and vistas." In the industrial zones, there is a similar
standard for access to "minimize traffic congestion, noise and dust pollution," and "...avoid
directing traffic onto residential streets or onto streets passing directly through residential,
school, hospital or other noise sensitive use areas and safety zones." The zoning ordinance gives
the city the ability to require access to lower order streets (when there are multiple options for
access) for any residential, commercial or industrial development in any zone.

Notably absent from the Land Use Code are development requirements related to traffic impact
analysis (TIA); TIA requirements are found in Appendix A to the 2005 TSP. These were
subsequently amended by the City.


City of Prineville Standards and Specifications

The City of Prineville adopted its first Standards and Specifications in 2007 and they are
reviewed and updated annually with the most recent update in 2011. Chapter 6 covers "Streets
and Related Work." This chapter includes guidelines and regulations for all work that is
completed within the public right-of-way or easements utilized by the city for public access. It
includes tables and text specifying minimum standards for construction of any public road as
well as procedures that must be followed in relation to all aspects of road construction, such as
temporary traffic control, inspection, sampling and testing, base preparation, etc.

One of the most significant aspects of the Standards and Specifications to transportation
planning are the typical street cross sections provided within this chapter. These cross sections,
along with the associated tables, lay out dimensional standards for each street type, including
right-of-way, pavement, vehicle travel lanes, bicycle lanes, sidewalk, and curbs. The cross

Project #: 4A-11                                                                           Page 41
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                               January 20, 2013



sections and tables also include standards for asphalt and concrete depth, aggregate base depth,
curb return radius, design speed and maximum grade. Arterial streets require 100 feet of right-
of-way while collectors require 80 feet and local streets require 60 feet. Paved width (curb to
curb) depends on both the type of street and surrounding uses. Arterials require a minimum of
50 feet paved width while the width of pavement on collectors ranges from 36 feet to 44 feet
depending on whether there is on-street parking and whether it is used primarily by industrial
traffic or residential/commercial traffic. Local streets require 35 feet of paved width. The cross
section tables also include basic standards for all weather service roads, all weather utility
accesses and alleys. Modifications to the cross-section requirements will be addressed as part of
the TSP update.


City of Prineville Buildable Lands Inventory (2004)

The Buildable Lands Inventory was developed to support Prineville's 2004 urban growth
boundary (UGB) expansion. The Buildable Lands Inventory accounted for vacant, buildable, and
redevelopable parcels by zoning district to determine a net amount of available land within the
existing UGB at the time. It evaluated the mix of housing and residential densities within the
UGB as well as employment forecasts and employee/acre ratios in commercial and industrial
lands. Ultimately, the Buildable Lands Inventory resulted in a projection of residential,
commercial and industrial land needed between 2004 and 2024.

The Buildable Lands Inventory recommended the addition of 1,429 total acres to the UGB
including 870 acres of residential land, 40 acres of commercial land, 371 acres of industrial land
and 148 acres of open space/park reserve land. The employee/acre ratios utilized to arrive at this
recommendation were 10.1 employees/acre for industrial development, 46.6 employees/acre for
office development and 21.5 employees/acre for retail development. The average residential
density, based on four different scenarios of potential growth patterns, ranged from 6.5 to 7.4
units/acre.


City of Prineville Current and Past Transportation Budget

There are two primary funds within the adopted 2012-2013 City of Prineville Budget. These are
the Transportation SDC Fund and the Transportation Fund. The Transportation SDC Fund
accounts for the receipt and expenditures of Transportation System Development Charges (SDC)
improvement fees. The Transportation Fund provides the accounting of the City's street, bike
lane, right-of-way and storm water maintenance.

The Table 1-8 summarizes resources and expenditures for the past three fiscal years as well as
projections for the current year.




Project #: 4A-11                                                                           Page 42
Draft Technical Memorandum #1: Plans & Policy Review                                  January 20, 2013



                                 Table 1-8      Transportation Revenue

                                     FY 09-10           FY 10-11          FY 11-12       FY 12-13
Transportation SDC Fund
                                      $67,621           $199,206          $90,400        $150,800
Resources
Transportation SDC Fund
                                     $167,256           $532,302         $114,200        $167,500
Expenditures
Transportation Fund
                                     $888,715           $922,794         $903,661        $939,000
Resources
Transportation Fund
                                     $972,131           $888,917         $1,155,300     $1,161,900
Expenditures

City of Prineville Current and Historic Funding Sources

New street improvements, related to the capacity improvements for new development, has been
funded primarily by system development charges. The previous table shows the actual and
estimated revenue in the Transportation SDC Fund. The Transportation Operations Fund has a
wider variety of funding sources. In recent history, the primary sources of revenue for this fund
has been the State of Oregon gas tax and, to a lesser extent, state revenue sharing and the STP
fund exchange program. Recognizing the impact that the installation of public utilities have on
the need for street repairs, the City of Prineville recently established two new revenue sources
for the transportation fund ­ the City's water and wastewater funds now pay franchise fees to
the transportation fund. The following table shows the funding sources for the Transportation
Fund over the past three fiscal years as well as projections for the current year:

                        Table 1-9   Transportation Fund Revenues by Source

                                     FY 09-10           FY 10-11          FY 11-12       FY 12-13
Water Franchise Fee                     $0                 $0               $0           $80,300
Wastewater Franchise Fee                $0                 $0               $0           $142,000
Licenses & Permits                    $15,723                                             $6,000
Charges for Services                    $0              $20,006             $0
Taxes including:
STP Fund Exchange Prog
                                     $868,255           $893,856         $876,803        $704,700
State Revenue Sharing
Oregon Gas Tax
Miscellaneous Income                  $4,737             $8,892           $26,858         $6,000




Project #: 4A-11                                                                              Page 43
City of Prineville TSP                                              September 2013




                                                          Section 2
                         Technical Memorandum 2: Goals and Objectives




                                                          Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
 MEMORANDUM

Date:          June 12, 2012                                                    Project #: 12221.0
To:            Scott Edelman, City of Prineville
               Devin Hearing, ODOT
               Project Advisory Committee
Project:       City of Prineville Transportation System Plan
Subject:       Draft Technical Memorandum #2: Goals, Objectives and Evaluation Criteria


This memorandum presents goals, objectives and a draft set of evaluation criteria for the City of
Prineville Transportation System Plan (TSP) update. The goals and objectives will help guide the
TSP update process to ensure key issues are addressed within this process. The evaluation
criteria will be used to set policies and identify "preferred alternatives", which will comprise the
list of recommended projects and associated policy, code amendments, and funding actions in
the TSP.

This document is organized as follows:

      ·   Background: This section describes the changes in Prineville following adoption of the
          2005 TSP.

      ·   Goals: The goals are the desired project outcomes and needs that support the land use
          and growth vision for Prineville. The project goals were developed based on guidance
          from agency staff, review of the prior TSP, findings of the OR 126 Corridor Plan, the
          Transportation Growth Management (TGM) grant application submitted by the City of
          Prineville, and on conversations with City, County, and ODOT staff.

             o   Objectives: The objectives expand on the project goals and outline the discrete
                 elements that, taken as a whole, summarize the goal.

             o   Evaluation Criteria: The evaluation criteria were developed to measure and
                 respond to the objectives and ultimately to the project goals.

      ·   Action Items: Specific items to be addressed within the TSP.

The purpose of this draft document is to outline the consultant understanding of these elements.
This will be further discussed at the June 13, 2012 meeting, with meeting comments and
subsequent comments received incorporated into a final draft that will be resent to the Project
Advisory Committee and approved as part of our July meeting.



FILENAME: H:\PROJFILE\12221 - PRINEVILLE TSP\MEMOS\TM2_GOALSOBJECTIVES\12221_TECHMEMO_FINAL.DOC
City of Prineville Transportation System Plan                                          June 12, 2012




Background
The existing City of Prineville Transportation System Plan was adopted in 2005. Since that time,
there have been significant changes in Prineville, as outlined below.

    ·   The City of Prineville has approved several significant developments that have the
        potential to shape growth and transportation system needs in Prineville over the next 20
        years. These planned developments are to be located in the southwest and northeast
        areas and were not contemplated as part of the growth assumptions in the prior TSP.

    ·   The recently completed OR 126 Corridor Plan identifies system needs where OR 126
        transitions down the grade and into downtown Prineville. This transition includes a
        change in State and City priorities for access and mobility and will have implications in
        the downtown area.

    ·   Recent investments in the City's rail infrastructure have created new opportunities within
        the City for attracting specialized industries that rely on rail service. Within the TSP the
        City should consider how to leverage these prior investments and preserve, extend, and
        enhance its rail network and interactions with its streets.

    ·   The City has seen a large interest in locating additional data centers in the Tom McCall
        area. Formalization of a transportation plan in that area will help foster and support this
        investment.

    ·   The City wants to consider measures, such as development of mixed-use zoning, that will
        encourage travel modes other than single-occupant vehicle trips.

    ·   The City of Prineville implemented a transportation system development charge (SDC),
        though no similar fee is required in Crook County.

Several general goals were established by the consultant team to help guide the development of
the City of Prineville TSP update. These general goals are:

    1. Ensure a safe and efficient transportation system for all users.

    2. Improve access to the transportation system for all users, including low income and
       minority populations.

    3. Integrate a multi-modal system including bicycle and pedestrian pathways, sidewalks,
       and bicycle lanes throughout the community, particularly to connect residential areas
       with schools, parks, and activity centers.

    4. Improve the local circulation system to reduce the community's reliance on State
       Highways to travel to local destinations.

    5. Build and maintain the transportation system to facilitate economic development in the
       region.
Project #: 4A-11                                                                             Page 2
City of Prineville Transportation System Plan                                      June 12, 2012



    6. Improve system performance by balancing mobility, access, community growth, and
       Prineville's identity, particularly along main travel routes.

    7. Minimize the impacts of transportation system development on the natural and built
       environment.

To more specifically address the changes and needs that have occurred or been identified since
the 2005 plan, five specific action items are suggested.

    1. Incorporate specific land use plans and zoning within Prineville to more accurately
       project and plan for long-term transportation system needs.

    2. Review and revise or incorporate findings of the OR 126 Corridor Plan within City limits
       (Tom McCall to the "Y", and into downtown).

    3. Integrate mixed-use zoning into the City's transportation plans.

    4. Integrate the City's roadway and rail transportation planning.

    5.     Update the City's Transportation System Development Charge (SDC) based on the
          revised needs.

An underlying objective of the TSP update process is to satisfy the requirements of the
Transportation Planning Rule (TPR, Oregon Administrative Rule 660-012) for a TSP update. This
includes compliance with Title VI (civil rights) requirements and collaborating with plan area
residents and transportation users through the City and County Planning Commissions, City
Council, County Court, public open houses, key participant workshops, and the public website.
It also includes ensuring compliance with the TSP content requirements of the TPR and
consistency with the Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP), Oregon Highway Plan (OHP), adopted
local, regional and state plans, and ODOT's TSP guidelines.


Goals and Objectives
Based on the goals for the TSP update, we developed draft objectives and evaluation criteria to
assess the progress towards each goal. The goals and the corresponding objectives and
evaluation criteria are below.


Goal #1: Ensure a safe and efficient transportation system for all users


Objectives

    1A.    Coordinate with existing safe routes to school (SRTS) plans and identify potential
           engineering components for future SRTS plans for local schools.



Project #: 4A-11                                                                         Page 3
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Lamonta Rd -- Harwood St                                                                                          QC JOB #: 10736501
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                         0          0                           Peak-Hour: 4:00 PM -- 5:00 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                         0    0     0
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 4:00 PM -- 4:15 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

       176   0                             0   163
                                                                                                                 7.4   0.0                       0.0      8.0
             209             0.75        150
                                                                                                                       1.9                       8.7
       243   34                           13   222
                                                                                                                 1.6   0.0                       0.0      1.8

                        26    0     13
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

                        47          39
                                                                                                                              0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                       0                          0

             0                             0                                                                           0                          1

                                                                                                                       0                          0


                              0                                                                                                0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                          NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count                  Lamonta Rd                     Lamonta Rd               Harwood St                   Harwood St
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        4           0       0    0         0       0     0     0     0     30      7      0     3       10      0       0           54
     4:05 PM        0           0       4    0         0       0     0     0     0     26      7      0     1       15      0       0           53
     4:10 PM        3           0       1    0         0       0     0     0     0     12      5      0     1       19      0       0           41
     4:15 PM        2           0       2    0         0       0     0     0     0     16      1      0     0       19      0       0           40
     4:20 PM        1           0       0    0         0       0     0     0     0     16      3      0     2       13      0       0           35
     4:25 PM        3           0       0    0         0       0     0     0     0     20      2      0     1       12      0       0           38
     4:30 PM        3           0       1    0         0       0     0     0     0     20      1      0     0       15      0       0           40
     4:35 PM        4           0       1    0         0       0     0     0     0     15      1      0     1       16      0       0           38
     4:40 PM        4           0       1    0         0       0     0     0     0     14      3      0     0       12      0       0           34
     4:45 PM        2           0       0    0         0       0     0     0     0     12      1      0     2        4      0       0           21
     4:50 PM        0           0       3    0         0       0     0     0     0     19      0      0     1        9      0       0           32
     4:55 PM        0           0       0    0         0       0     0     0     0      9      3      0     1        6      0       0           19              445
     5:00 PM        2           0       0    0         0       0     0     0     0     17      1      0     3        9      0       0           32              423
     5:05 PM        0           0       0    0         0       0     0     0     0     22      4      0     3        6      0       0           35              405
     5:10 PM        3           0       0    0         0       0     0     0     0     10      0      0     3        9      0       0           25              389
     5:15 PM        5           0       3    0         0       0     0     0     0      8      3      0     1        6      0       0           26              375
     5:20 PM        2           0       1    0         0       0     0     0     0      9      2      0     1       17      0       0           32              372
     5:25 PM        1           0       4    0         0       0     0     0     0      3      1      0     4       13      0       0           26              360
     5:30 PM        2           0       4    0         0       0     0     0     0      9      0      0     1       10      0       0           26              346
     5:35 PM        2           0       1    0         0       0     0     0     0      9      1      0     0        7      0       0           20              328
     5:40 PM        5           0       0    0         0       0     0     0     0     12      0      0     0        7      0       0           24              318
     5:45 PM        1           0       0    0         0       0     0     0     0     13      0      0     0        7      0       0           21              318
     5:50 PM        1           0       1    0         0       0     0     0     0     15      2      0     0        7      0       0           26              312
     5:55 PM        0           0       3    0         0       0     0     0     0      7      1      0     0        9      0       0           20              313
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     28           0      20    0         0       0     0     0     0    272     76      0    20      176      0       0                  592
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0              0       0     0           0      0      0            0       16      0                          16
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                        0                            0                                  0
   Bicycles         0           0       0              0       0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Main St -- 7th St                                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10736502
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                     501            569                          Peak-Hour: 4:20 PM -- 5:20 PM                                 1.6        3.5

                         0   322 179
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 4:55 PM -- 5:10 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.6 3.4

       13    4                            178   200
                                                                                                                  7.7   0.0                       5.6      5.0
             4               0.94           1
                                                                                                                        0.0                       0.0
       20    12                            21   229
                                                                                                                  0.0   0.0                       0.0      3.9

                        12 387 46
                                                                                                                               8.3 2.6 6.5

                     355            445
                                                                                                                               0.6        3.1



                              1                                                                                                 1    0    0


                                                                                                                        0                          0

             4                              9                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          0


                              1                                                                                                 0    0    1




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                           NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                    Main St                         Main St                   7th St                       7th St
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        0          33       3    0         12      34       0   0     0      0       0     0     5        1      14      0          102
     4:05 PM        2          24       5    0         19      32       0   0     0      0       0     0     3        0      14      0           99
     4:10 PM        1          34       6    0         12      28       0   0     0      0       1     0     2        0      14      0           98
     4:15 PM        0          26       3    0         14      24       0   0     0      0       1     0     3        0      12      0           83
     4:20 PM        1          35       3    0         12      26       0   0     0      0       1     0     0        0      13      0           91
     4:25 PM        1          31       4    0         17      25       0   0     1      0       0     0     4        0      21      0          104
     4:30 PM        2          28       5    0         16      25       0   0     0      0       1     0     1        1      12      0           91
     4:35 PM        0          35       2    0         19      29       0   0     0      0       1     0     2        0      18      0          106
     4:40 PM        0          37       3    0         16      28       0   0     0      1       2     0     1        0      15      0          103
     4:45 PM        1          29       2    0         15      30       0   0     0      0       1     0     4        0       9      0           91
     4:50 PM        0          27       1    0         18      28       0   0     1      1       0     0     2        0       9      0           87
     4:55 PM        0          30       6    0         10      31       0   0     1      2       0     0     2        0      10      0           92             1147
     5:00 PM        0          31       5    0         13      32       0   0     0      0       2     0     4        0      16      0          103             1148
     5:05 PM        4          45       7    0         16      26       0   0     1      0       1     0     0        0      14      0          114             1163
     5:10 PM        0          28       6    0         15      23       0   0     0      0       3     0     1        0      16      0           92             1157
     5:15 PM        3          31       2    0         12      19       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0      25      0           92             1166
     5:20 PM        1          37       1    0          7      19       0   0     0      1       1     0     2        0      15      0           84             1159
     5:25 PM        0          26       2    0         13      14       0   0     0      1       0     0     3        1      11      0           71             1126
     5:30 PM        1          27       3    0          7      22       0   0     0      0       1     0     2        2      14      0           79             1114
     5:35 PM        1          35       4    0         13      30       0   0     1      2       0     0     0        0      15      0          101             1109
     5:40 PM        1          43       5    0         10      30       0   0     0      0       1     0     4        0      12      0          106             1112
     5:45 PM        1          33       3    0          9      16       1   0     0      0       1     0     2        0      10      0           76             1097
     5:50 PM        1          42       3    0         11      28       0   0     0      0       0     0     1        0      17      0          103             1113
     5:55 PM        1          28       1    0          8      23       0   0     0      1       0     0     1        0      10      0           73             1094
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     16         424      72    0        156     356       0   0     8      8      12     0    24        0    160       0                  1236
 Heavy Trucks       4           8      12               4       0       0         0      0       0           0        0       8                          36
  Pedestrians                   4                               0                        0                            0                                   4
   Bicycles         0           0       0               0       0       0         0      0       0           0        0       0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Deer St -- US 26                                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10736503
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                        87          98                           Peak-Hour: 4:15 PM -- 5:15 PM                                 2.3        4.1

                        37    30    20
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                               2.7 3.3 0.0

       500   23                            33   445
                                                                                                                  2.8   4.3                       0.0      2.9
             551             0.89         398
                                                                                                                        2.9                       3.3
       603   29                            14   612
                                                                                                                  3.0   3.4                       0.0      2.9

                        65    42    41
                                                                                                                               0.0 7.1 4.9

                        73          148
                                                                                                                               2.7        3.4



                              7                                                                                                 0    0    0


                                                                                                                        0                          0

             4                              7                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          0


                              14                                                                                                0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                           NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                    Deer St                         Deer St                   US 26                        US 26
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        4           5       3    0          2       2       5   0     0     47      4      0     0       43      1       0          116
     4:05 PM        6           5       6    0          5       5       8   0     4     36      5      0     1       44      2       0          127
     4:10 PM       12           3       2    0          0       6       3   0     2     32      4      0     1       24      1       0           90
     4:15 PM        6           3       7    0          2       1       2   0     3     42      3      0     0       37      3       0          109
     4:20 PM        6           4       2    0          1       3       5   0     3     32      1      0     1       35      2       0           95
     4:25 PM        7           0       1    0          3       1       4   0     4     39      0      0     1       41      3       0          104
     4:30 PM        4           1       3    0          2       4       4   0     2     59      8      0     0       26      3       0          116
     4:35 PM        5           4       1    0          3       4       4   0     1     47      2      0     2       31      3       0          107
     4:40 PM        2           7       3    0          2       1       1   0     2     48      3      0     1       30      5       0          105
     4:45 PM        3           3       6    0          0       1       2   0     3     49      1      0     2       18      2       0           90
     4:50 PM        5           0       6    0          0       3       2   0     2     41      1      0     1       47      1       0          109
     4:55 PM        6           6       2    0          2       4       3   0     0     42      0      0     0       19      2       0           86             1254
     5:00 PM        3           5       7    0          1       4       4   0     0     43      5      0     2       39      2       0          115             1253
     5:05 PM        5           6       0    0          2       4       4   0     2     53      1      0     2       30      4       0          113             1239
     5:10 PM       13           3       3    0          2       0       2   0     1     56      4      0     2       45      3       0          134             1283
     5:15 PM        5           5       3    0          2       2       5   0     2     37      3      0     0       32      1       0           97             1271
     5:20 PM        9           3       5    0          0       3       4   0     3     45      1      0     1       29      1       0          104             1280
     5:25 PM        2           4       3    0          2       1       4   0     2     52      0      0     0       23      1       0           94             1270
     5:30 PM        7           2       3    0          1       2       2   0     1     48      3      0     3       35      0       0          107             1261
     5:35 PM        8           4       2    0          4       2       2   0     3     48      8      0     0       36      1       0          118             1272
     5:40 PM        2           1       2    0          4       5       1   0     3     52      2      0     1       31      3       0          107             1274
     5:45 PM        2           1       3    0          1       2       3   0     2     44      5      0     0       22      1       0           86             1270
     5:50 PM        2           1       2    0          1       2       9   0     1     48      1      0     1       37      1       0          106             1267
     5:55 PM        6           3       4    0          2       1       2   0     1     39      1      0     0       24      2       0           85             1266
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     84          56      40    0         20      32     40    0    12    608     40      0    24      456     36       0                  1448
 Heavy Trucks       0           4       0               0       0       0         0     12      4            0        8      0                           28
  Pedestrians                   8                               4                        0                            4                                  16
   Bicycles         0           0       0               0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Main St -- US 26                                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10736504
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                     322          387                          Peak-Hour: 4:00 PM -- 5:00 PM                                 3.1        3.9

                        70 179 73
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                             5.7 2.2 2.7

       479   160                         62   443
                                                                                                                4.0   3.8                       3.2      3.6
             378           0.94         331
                                                                                                                      4.5                       4.2
       616   78                          50   486
                                                                                                                3.7   0.0                       0.0      4.1

                        78 165 35
                                                                                                                             1.3 4.2 2.9

                     307          278
                                                                                                                             1.3        3.2



                            11                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                            9                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                            4                                                                                                 0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                         NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                  Main St                         Main St                   US 26                        US 26
     Period                (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                  Left      Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        9        13       2    0          3      22       6   0    16     25      8      0     2       29      4       0          139
     4:05 PM        8        11       2    0          5      21       5   0    16     31      7      0     4       32      5       0          147
     4:10 PM        7        19       5    0          3      17       6   0    11     29      9      0     3       27      6       0          142
     4:15 PM        9        16       1    0          8      17       5   0     6     34      4      0     4       32      4       0          140
     4:20 PM        4        12       4    0         12       9       7   0    15     25      7      0     7       36      1       0          139
     4:25 PM        7        13       4    0          9      14       5   0     9     24      6      0     3       34      7       0          135
     4:30 PM        7        14       2    0          6      14       5   0    16     40      4      0     5       18      9       0          140
     4:35 PM        5         7       4    0          5      13       9   0    11     37      5      0     6       28      6       0          136
     4:40 PM        5        20       3    0          3      18       8   0    11     49     10      0     2       31      4       0          164
     4:45 PM        2        17       2    0          6      10       5   0    16     27      6      0     5       15      3       0          114
     4:50 PM       11        11       3    0          7      14       5   0    12     25      8      0     6       27      7       0          136
     4:55 PM        4        12       3    0          6      10       4   0    21     32      4      0     3       22      6       0          127             1659
     5:00 PM        4        11       1    0          9      17       6   0     9     28      7      0     4       31      7       0          134             1654
     5:05 PM        9        19       3    0          7      20       5   0     8     23      9      0     6       27      8       0          144             1651
     5:10 PM        8         9       2    0         10      14       4   0    12     43      2      0     7       28      5       0          144             1653
     5:15 PM        6        17       1    0          4      15       6   0     7     35      3      0     5       24      7       0          130             1643
     5:20 PM        7        19       5    0         11      11       4   0    11     32      4      0     6       19      8       0          137             1641
     5:25 PM        3         8       3    0          2      10       2   0    10     44      4      0     2       14      5       0          107             1613
     5:30 PM        6        10       2    0          3       9       3   0     8     34      3      0     6       23      4       0          111             1584
     5:35 PM        9        15       3    0          7      13       5   0    14     27     10      0     4       26      2       0          135             1583
     5:40 PM        3        15       1    0          9      15     10    0    26     33     10      0     5       24      4       0          155             1574
     5:45 PM        4         8       4    0          5      12       2   0    18     25      7      0     4       31      7       0          127             1587
     5:50 PM        3        15       2    0          7      14       4   0    18     24      6      0     3       23      5       0          124             1575
     5:55 PM        3        18       1    0          0      17       3   0     8     26     10      0     3       22      5       0          116             1564
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates       Left      Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     68       164      36    0         56     180     88    0   152    504     76      0    52      308     76       0                  1760
 Heavy Trucks       0         0       0               0       0       0         8     16      0            0        8      4                           36
  Pedestrians                 0                              12                        0                            4                                  16
   Bicycles         0         0       0               0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Laughlin Rd -- US 26                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10736505
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Wed, Apr 11 2012
                        45          41                          Peak-Hour: 4:00 PM -- 5:00 PM                                 11.1        9.8

                         6    3     36
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 4:40 PM -- 4:55 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 13.9

       179   5                            26   180
                                                                                                                 5.6   0.0                       15.4      7.8
             159             0.89        153
                                                                                                                       4.4                        6.5
       182   18                            1   198
                                                                                                                 4.4   5.6                        0.0      6.1

                        20    10    3
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

                        22          33
                                                                                                                              4.5         0.0



                              1                                                                                                0     0    0


                                                                                                                       0                           0

             0                             0                                                                           0                           0

                                                                                                                       0                           0


                              0                                                                                                1     0    0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                          NA                                                                            NA                         NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                  Laughlin Rd                    Laughlin Rd                 US 26                        US 26
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        3           0      1     0         2       0      0    0     2     17      1      0     0       15      1        0           42
     4:05 PM        1           2      1     0         5       0      2    0     0      7      2      0     0       13      2        0           35
     4:10 PM        2           0      0     0         3       0      0    0     0     13      3      0     0       13      2        0           36
     4:15 PM        0           1      0     0         4       0      0    0     0     14      0      0     0       11      4        0           34
     4:20 PM        0           1      0     0         2       0      2    0     1     13      0      0     0       17      2        0           38
     4:25 PM        1           0      0     0         0       1      0    0     0     14      4      0     1       18      4        0           43
     4:30 PM        4           2      1     0         3       0      0    0     1     15      1      0     0        7      2        0           36
     4:35 PM        3           3      0     0         2       0      0    0     1      6      0      0     0        9      0        0           24
     4:40 PM        0           0      0     0         5       0      1    0     0     16      0      0     0       10      6        0           38
     4:45 PM        3           0      0     0         4       1      0    0     0     12      4      0     0       18      0        0           42
     4:50 PM        1           1      0     0         4       0      0    0     0     16      2      0     0       18      1        0           43
     4:55 PM        2           0      0     0         2       1      1    0     0     16      1      0     0        4      2        0           29              440
     5:00 PM        3           2      0     0         1       1      0    0     0     11      4      0     0       10      2        0           34              432
     5:05 PM        2           1      0     0         3       0      2    0     0     13      0      0     0        9      1        0           31              428
     5:10 PM        1           0      0     0         3       0      1    0     0     16      0      0     0        2      0        0           23              415
     5:15 PM        3           1      0     0         1       0      0    0     0     18      1      0     1       13      2        0           40              421
     5:20 PM        2           0      0     0         4       0      0    0     0     21      1      0     0       11      1        0           40              423
     5:25 PM        1           1      0     0         4       0      1    0     0     16      0      0     0       18      0        0           41              421
     5:30 PM        1           0      1     0         5       0      1    0     0     11      0      0     0       16      2        0           37              422
     5:35 PM        6           1      0     0         4       1      2    0     0     14      1      0     1        6      1        0           37              435
     5:40 PM        2           0      0     0         3       0      0    0     0     14      1      0     0       14      2        0           36              433
     5:45 PM        1           1      0     0         5       0      0    0     0     15      1      0     0       10      2        0           35              426
     5:50 PM        2           0      0     0         3       0      0    0     0     20      0      0     0        4      3        0           32              415
     5:55 PM        0           0      0     0         6       0      0    0     0     10      1      0     0        5      2        0           24              410
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles     16           4      0     0        52       4      4    0     0    176     24      0     0      184     28        0                  492
 Heavy Trucks       0           0      0               8       0      0          0      8      4            0       20      0                           40
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles         0           0      0               0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Main St -- 9th St                                                                                             QC JOB #: 10736506
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                              DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                   467          439                         Peak-Hour: 4:25 PM -- 5:25 PM                                 0.4        3.2

                   36 415 16
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 0.5 0.0

       148   21                        4     7
                                                                                                             2.0   4.8                       0.0      0.0
             5           0.95          2
                                                                                                                   0.0                       0.0
       132   106                       1   59
                                                                                                             0.8   0.0                       0.0      1.7

                   110 414 38
                                                                                                                          2.7 3.1 2.6

                   522          562
                                                                                                                          0.4        3.0



                          0                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                   0                          0

             0                         0                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                   0                          0


                          2                                                                                                0    3    0




                          NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                       NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count                Main St                        Main St                   9th St                       9th St
     Period              (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At Left                                                                                                                          Total
                          Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM    10         26       0    0         2      41       3   0     2      1       7     0     0        0       1      0           93
     4:05 PM     4         32       5    0         1      43       1   0     0      2       9     0     0        0       1      0           98
     4:10 PM     9         34       2    0         3      41       1   0     0      0       8     0     0        0       0      0           98
     4:15 PM     8         28       3    0         2      30       8   0     1      1       6     0     0        0       0      0           87
     4:20 PM     9         33       2    0         1      34       0   0     1      0       9     0     0        0       0      0           89
     4:25 PM    12         37       1    0         1      33       1   0     0      1      12     0     0        0       0      0           98
     4:30 PM     8         32       4    0         0      36       4   0     4      2       9     0     0        0       0      0           99
     4:35 PM    11         36       5    0         1      35       4   0     0      0       9     0     0        0       0      0          101
     4:40 PM     9         39       3    0         1      42       1   0     2      0      10     0     1        0       0      0          108
     4:45 PM     6         30       2    0         0      41       3   0     1      0      11     0     0        0       1      0           95
     4:50 PM     5         28       3    0         2      43       3   0     3      0       6     0     0        0       1      0           94
     4:55 PM     4         31       4    0         4      34       6   0     0      0       6     0     0        1       0      0           90             1150
     5:00 PM     8         33       5    0         3      37       2   0     1      0      10     0     0        0       0      0           99             1156
     5:05 PM    12         38       4    0         0      35       2   0     5      0      12     0     0        0       0      0          108             1166
     5:10 PM    15         29       3    0         1      29       2   0     2      2       9     0     0        0       0      0           92             1160
     5:15 PM    11         37       4    0         1      24       4   0     1      0       8     0     0        0       0      0           90             1163
     5:20 PM     9         44       0    0         2      26       4   0     2      0       4     0     0        1       2      0           94             1168
     5:25 PM     9         25       4    0         1      18       2   0     3      3       5     0     0        0       0      0           70             1140
     5:30 PM     5         26       8    0         3      23       4   0     2      0       9     0     0        0       0      0           80             1121
     5:35 PM     5         41       2    0         1      31       2   0     3      0       7     0     0        0       2      0           94             1114
     5:40 PM     9         43       5    0         3      27       4   0     3      2      10     0     0        0       0      0          106             1112
     5:45 PM     7         28       4    0         1      20       3   0     2      0       3     0     0        0       0      0           68             1085
     5:50 PM    15         45       0    0         1      28       3   0     7      0       9     0     0        0       0      0          108             1099
     5:55 PM     3         29       1    0         1      26       1   0     4      1       6     0     2        1       0      0           75             1084
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates    Left       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles 112        428      48    0         8     452     36    0    24      8    112      0     4        0       0      0                  1232
 Heavy Trucks    0         16       0              0       4       0         0      0       0           0        0       0                          20
  Pedestrians               4                              0                        0                            0                                   4
   Bicycles      0          3       0              0       0       0         0      0       0           0        0       0                           3
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Elm St -- US 26                                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10736507
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                     131            46                          Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                  0.8        6.5

                        14    28    89
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 1.1

       435   12                           14   419
                                                                                                                 2.8   16.7                       0.0      2.4
             501             0.89        399
                                                                                                                       1.6                        2.5
       524   11                            6   629
                                                                                                                 2.1   9.1                        0.0      1.4

                        22    20    39
                                                                                                                               9.1 5.0 0.0

                        45          81
                                                                                                                               2.2        3.7



                              10                                                                                                0    1    0


                                                                                                                       0                           0

             12                            8                                                                           0                           0

                                                                                                                       0                           0


                              5                                                                                                 0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                          NA                                                                            NA                         NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                    Elm St                         Elm St                    US 26                        US 26
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        0           5       2    0         4       3      3    0     1     30      1      0     0       41      0        0           90
     4:05 PM        1           2       3    0         4       3      2    0     5     34      0      0     0       42      5        0          101
     4:10 PM        1           1       3    0         7       3      2    0     3     32      1      0     0       38      2        0           93
     4:15 PM        0           3       2    0         9       1      1    0     2     34      2      0     2       45      3        0          104
     4:20 PM        3           0       2    0         6       2      2    0     0     33      4      0     0       45      1        0           98
     4:25 PM        2           2       3    0         5       3      0    0     3     28      1      0     2       35      2        0           86
     4:30 PM        2           2       4    0         2       0      0    0     0     45      3      0     0       32      1        0           91
     4:35 PM        1           2       4    0         7       2      1    0     0     39      0      0     3       38      0        0           97
     4:40 PM        0           1       2    0         2       1      2    0     2     47      1      0     0       30      3        0           91
     4:45 PM        1           2       5    0        10       3      1    0     0     37      1      0     2       26      2        0           90
     4:50 PM        2           0       1    0        10       2      0    0     1     43      0      0     1       34      1        0           95
     4:55 PM        3           0       1    0         8       2      1    0     2     29      1      0     0       29      2        0           78             1114
     5:00 PM        2           2       3    0         7       2      1    0     4     38      1      0     0       41      1        0          102             1126
     5:05 PM        4           2       4    0        10       6      3    0     2     38      1      0     0       37      0        0          107             1132
     5:10 PM        3           3       5    0        10       0      1    0     0     53      1      0     0       36      1        0          113             1152
     5:15 PM        2           0       7    0         5       4      2    0     0     47      1      0     0       36      1        0          105             1153
     5:20 PM        2           3       2    0        10       3      0    0     0     39      1      0     0       30      1        0           91             1146
     5:25 PM        0           3       1    0         8       3      2    0     1     46      0      0     0       30      1        0           95             1155
     5:30 PM        1           1       2    0         2       0      1    0     2     42      1      0     1       35      3        0           91             1155
     5:35 PM        0           2       1    0         2       0      4    0     1     42      0      0     1       37      2        0           92             1150
     5:40 PM        0           5       1    0         4       2      1    0     1     38      0      0     2       34      0        0           88             1147
     5:45 PM        1           1       0    0         5       4      0    0     0     29      0      0     0       41      2        0           83             1140
     5:50 PM        0           1       0    0         3       2      2    0     1     40      0      0     1       28      0        0           78             1123
     5:55 PM        2           3       1    0         4       3      0    0     1     26      1      0     1       26      4        0           72             1117
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles     36          20      64    0       100      40    24     0     8    552     12      0     0      436      8        0                  1300
 Heavy Trucks       4           0       0              4       0      0          0      8      0            0        0      0                            16
  Pedestrians                   0                             12                       20                           12                                   44
   Bicycles         0           0       0              0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Main St -- 4th St N                                                                                             QC JOB #: 10736508
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                     376          392                         Peak-Hour: 4:10 PM -- 5:10 PM                                 1.9        3.6

                        25 273 78
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 4:55 PM -- 5:10 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 1.8 2.6

       52    18                         57    75
                                                                                                               1.9   0.0                       0.0      1.3
             22            0.92          9
                                                                                                                     9.1                       0.0
       99    59                          9   138
                                                                                                               3.0   1.7                      11.1      3.6

                        18 317 38
                                                                                                                            5.6 4.4 2.6

                     341          373
                                                                                                                            2.1        4.3



                            11                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                     0                          0

             4                          10                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                     0                          0


                            9                                                                                                0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                         NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count                  Main St                        Main St                  4th St N                     4th St N
     Period                (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                  Left      Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        3        27       2    0         7      28       5   0     0      0       5     0     0        0       2      0           79
     4:05 PM        2        27       2    0        13      20       2   0     0      3       7     0     0        2       5      0           83
     4:10 PM        2        24       6    0         6      21       1   0     1      4       5     0     1        3       7      0           81
     4:15 PM        2        22       6    0         9      20       0   0     1      1       7     0     1        1       5      0           75
     4:20 PM        3        20       0    0         4      25       2   0     3      2       7     0     0        0       8      0           74
     4:25 PM        0        28       2    0         8      19       1   0     0      0       5     0     0        0       5      0           68
     4:30 PM        3        32       2    0         1      21       2   0     0      1       4     0     1        1       2      0           70
     4:35 PM        0        23       1    0         2      27       1   0     3      3       4     0     1        0       3      0           68
     4:40 PM        2        30       1    0         8      22       3   0     3      5       2     0     0        0       4      0           80
     4:45 PM        2        31       3    0        10      24       2   0     1      1       1     0     1        0       3      0           79
     4:50 PM        2        23       8    0        11      21       1   0     1      1       5     0     1        1       2      0           77
     4:55 PM        1        28       5    0         6      24       5   0     0      3       1     0     1        2       4      0           80              914
     5:00 PM        0        25       3    0        10      27       4   0     1      1       6     0     1        0       7      0           85              920
     5:05 PM        1        31       1    0         3      22       3   0     4      0      12     0     1        1       7      0           86              923
     5:10 PM        1        25       2    0         3      21       1   0     1      3       5     0     0        0       4      0           66              908
     5:15 PM        2        22       2    0         4      17       1   0     3      0       6     0     0        1       5      0           63              896
     5:20 PM        2        32       4    0         4      16       2   0     1      1       4     0     0        0       2      0           68              890
     5:25 PM        1        18       3    0         3      13       2   0     1      0       3     0     0        0       2      0           46              868
     5:30 PM        1        23       1    0         3      18       2   0     2      0       0     0     0        1       4      0           55              853
     5:35 PM        1        29       5    0         7      23       0   0     2      1       5     0     1        1       6      0           81              866
     5:40 PM        2        39       3    0         8      27       1   0     1      0       6     0     0        1       5      0           93              879
     5:45 PM        1        29       4    0         4      13       1   0     0      0       3     0     1        0       5      0           61              861
     5:50 PM        1        35       1    0         4      22       1   0     2      1       3     0     0        1       5      0           76              860
     5:55 PM        1        27       3    0         3      20       1   0     0      1       1     0     1        0       2      0           60              840
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates       Left      Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      8       336      36    0        76     292     48    0    20     16      76     0    12       12      72      0                  1004
 Heavy Trucks       4        20       0              0       4       0         0      4       4           0        0       0                          36
  Pedestrians                 4                              4                        8                            0                                  16
   Bicycles         0         0       0              0       0       0         0      0       0           0        0       0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Main St -- 2nd St N                                                                                             QC JOB #: 10736509
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                     302          257                        Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  1.3        2.7

                        33 252 17
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 1.6 0.0

       121   9                          40   65
                                                                                                               0.8   0.0                       0.0      1.5
             22            0.90         22
                                                                                                                     0.0                       4.5
       114   83                          3   46
                                                                                                               0.9   1.2                       0.0      0.0

                        66 208    7
                                                                                                                            0.0 3.4 0.0

                     338          281
                                                                                                                            1.5        2.5



                            11                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                     0                          0

             11                          5                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                     0                          0


                            2                                                                                                0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                         NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                            NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count                  Main St                       Main St                  2nd St N                     2nd St N
     Period                (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                  Left      Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right       U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        9        18       2    0        5      19       8   0     1       2      5      0     1        3      4       0           77
     4:05 PM        3        21       1    0        2      22       8   0     0       1      9      0     0        2      4       0           73
     4:10 PM        5        24       1    0        6      17       6   0     0       3      9      0     0        0      3       0           74
     4:15 PM        4        19       2    0        2      19       4   0     2       5      5      0     0        2      4       0           68
     4:20 PM        4        20       0    0        3      19       2   0     1       3      3      0     2        0      3       0           60
     4:25 PM        2        15       2    0        1      16       5   0     0       3      7      0     0        1      5       0           57
     4:30 PM        5        19       0    0        2      14       5   0     0       3      6      0     0        0      3       0           57
     4:35 PM        5        15       1    0        3      20       3   0     2       1      7      0     1        4      1       0           63
     4:40 PM        2        20       0    0        6      18       5   0     0       4      1      0     1        0      3       0           60
     4:45 PM        8        14       2    0        1      16       4   0     1       4      9      0     0        0      6       0           65
     4:50 PM        1        17       0    0        2      20       4   0     2       1      6      0     0        1      4       0           58
     4:55 PM        3        16       0    0        3      11       5   0     1       1      2      0     0        1      1       0           44              756
     5:00 PM        3        19       0    0        1      26       2   0     2       1     10      0     1        1      7       0           73              752
     5:05 PM        8        17       2    0        1      28       4   0     1       0      2      0     0        4      4       0           71              750
     5:10 PM        6        13       1    0        1      21       6   0     1       3      8      0     0        3      4       0           67              743
     5:15 PM        6        24       0    0        1      19       1   0     1       3      9      0     1        3      3       0           71              746
     5:20 PM        5        24       1    0        1      15       4   0     0       2      8      0     0        1      2       0           63              749
     5:25 PM        6        12       0    0        1      17       0   0     1       2     10      0     0        0      2       0           51              743
     5:30 PM        6        16       2    0        3      16       4   0     0       2      4      0     0        2      3       0           58              744
     5:35 PM        6        21       1    0        0      20       4   0     0       3      4      0     0        4      5       0           68              749
     5:40 PM        4        14       0    0        3      26       2   0     1       2      8      0     0        1      5       0           66              755
     5:45 PM        6        14       0    0        1      18       2   0     2       2      8      0     1        1      1       0           56              746
     5:50 PM        8        15       0    0        2      22       0   0     0       0      6      0     0        2      4       0           59              747
     5:55 PM        2        19       0    0        2      24       4   0     0       2      6      0     0        0      0       0           59              762
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                   Southbound                 Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates       Left      Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right       U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     68       196      12    0       12     300     48    0    16     16      80      0     4       32     60       0                  844
 Heavy Trucks       0         8       0             0       4       0         0       0      4            0        0      0                          16
  Pedestrians                 0                             4                         0                            0                                  4
   Bicycles         0         0       0             0       0       0         0       0      0            0        0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Main St -- 5th St                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10736510
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Wed, Apr 11 2012
                     312            187                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                 1.3        1.6

                         0   269 43
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 4:45 PM -- 5:00 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.7 4.7

       0     0                            37   45
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                       2.7      2.2
             0               0.92          0
                                                                                                                      0.0                       0.0
       0     0                             8   49
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                       0.0      4.1

                         0   150    6
                                                                                                                             0.0 1.3 0.0

                     277            156
                                                                                                                             0.7        1.3



                              0                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                      0                          1

             2                             3                                                                          0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                              0                                                                                               0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                           NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count                    Main St                       Main St                   5th St                       5th St
     Period                  (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        0          13       0    0        4      22       0   0     0      0       0     0     1        0       3      0           43
     4:05 PM        0          18       1    0        5      21       0   0     0      0       0     0     2        0       2      0           49
     4:10 PM        0          15       0    0        7      17       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       3      0           42
     4:15 PM        0          13       0    0        1      20       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       2      0           36
     4:20 PM        0          10       0    0        1       7       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       5      0           23
     4:25 PM        0          13       1    0        0      19       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       8      0           41
     4:30 PM        0           9       0    0        3      17       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       2      0           31
     4:35 PM        0           8       0    0        7      24       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       3      0           42
     4:40 PM        0           9       0    0        4      17       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       0      0           30
     4:45 PM        0          16       1    0        4      26       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       3      0           50
     4:50 PM        0          18       0    0        1      20       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       3      0           42
     4:55 PM        0          12       1    0        6      23       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       5      0           47              476
     5:00 PM        0          12       0    0        1      21       0   0     0      0       0     0     1        0       3      0           38              471
     5:05 PM        0          10       0    0        7      27       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       2      0           46              468
     5:10 PM        0           9       1    0        7      27       0   0     0      0       0     0     3        0       4      0           51              477
     5:15 PM        0          14       0    0        4      18       0   0     0      0       0     0     1        0       3      0           40              481
     5:20 PM        0          13       2    0        1      19       0   0     0      0       0     0     1        0       2      0           38              496
     5:25 PM        0           5       0    0        4      17       0   0     0      0       0     0     1        0       2      0           29              484
     5:30 PM        0          11       0    0        2      26       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       5      0           44              497
     5:35 PM        0          21       0    0        2      14       0   0     0      0       0     0     1        0       4      0           42              497
     5:40 PM        0           9       1    0        4      31       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       1      0           46              513
     5:45 PM        0          13       0    0        6      17       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       7      0           43              506
     5:50 PM        0          23       0    0        6      10       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0       5      0           44              508
     5:55 PM        0          13       1    0        8      15       0   0     0      0       0     0     1        0       2      0           40              501
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                   Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      0         184       8    0       44     276       0   0     0      0       0     0     0        0      44      0                  556
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0             4       0       0         0      0       0           0        0       0                          4
  Pedestrians                   0                             0                        0                            4                                  4
   Bicycles         0           0       0             0       0       0         0      0       0           0        0       0                          0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Meadow Lakes Dr -- 2nd St                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10736511
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                            DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                     36          30                       Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                                 5.6        0.0

                     7     16    13
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                        14.3 0.0 7.7

       27    5                         7    59
                                                                                                           3.7   0.0                       0.0      1.7
             107          0.83        19
                                                                                                                 4.7                       0.0
       123   11                       33   156
                                                                                                           4.1   0.0                       3.0      4.5

                     1     18    36
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 2.8

                     60          55
                                                                                                                        1.7        1.8



                           6                                                                                             0    2    1


                                                                                                                 0                          1

             10                        0                                                                         1                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          1


                           1                                                                                             0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                  NA




             NA                       NA                                                                         NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count          Meadow Lakes Dr                Meadow Lakes Dr               2nd St                      2nd St
     Period            (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                             Total
                  Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        1     2       4    0           2     1     0     0     0      8       1     0     0        0      0       0           19
     4:05 PM        1     2       1    0           3     2     1     0     0      9       1     0     7        2      0       0           29
     4:10 PM        0     4       2    0           1     1     0     0     1      7       1     0     3        2      0       0           22
     4:15 PM        0     3       3    0           1     1     0     0     0      3       0     0     3        4      1       0           19
     4:20 PM        1     1       0    0           0     2     0     0     0      8       0     0     2        2      0       0           16
     4:25 PM        0     2       2    0           0     0     0     0     0     14       1     0     0        2      0       0           21
     4:30 PM        0     2       2    0           1     0     1     0     0      5       0     0     1        0      1       0           13
     4:35 PM        0     1       1    0           1     0     0     0     0     10       2     0     3        0      2       0           20
     4:40 PM        0     0       4    0           1     1     1     0     1      4       3     0     3        1      1       0           20
     4:45 PM        0     3       1    0           1     3     2     0     1      6       0     0     2        2      0       0           21
     4:50 PM        1     3       2    0           3     1     0     0     0      4       0     0     3        1      0       0           18
     4:55 PM        0     0       4    0           0     0     1     0     1      5       2     0     3        2      0       0           18              236
     5:00 PM        0     3       6    0           2     0     0     0     0      9       1     0     3        1      1       0           26              243
     5:05 PM        0     0       7    0           1     3     0     0     0     12       2     0     5        3      1       0           34              248
     5:10 PM        0     1       4    0           1     2     2     0     1      8       1     0     1        0      1       0           22              248
     5:15 PM        0     1       0    0           0     3     0     0     0     10       0     0     1        2      1       0           18              247
     5:20 PM        0     4       2    0           1     2     1     0     1      9       1     0     2        0      1       0           24              255
     5:25 PM        0     1       0    0           0     0     0     0     0     16       1     0     3        4      0       0           25              259
     5:30 PM        0     0       3    0           1     1     0     0     0     10       0     0     3        1      1       0           20              266
     5:35 PM        0     2       3    0           2     0     0     0     0     14       0     0     4        2      0       0           27              273
     5:40 PM        0     2       4    0           0     1     0     0     0      7       0     0     2        3      0       0           19              272
     5:45 PM        0     0       0    0           2     1     0     0     0     11       0     0     2        1      0       0           17              268
     5:50 PM        0     3       4    0           0     1     0     0     1      6       1     0     2        4      0       0           22              272
     5:55 PM        0     0       1    0           0     1     2     0     0     12       0     0     0        0      2       0           18              272
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      0    16      68    0          16    20     8     0     4    116     16      0    36       16     12       0                  328
 Heavy Trucks       0     0       4                0     0     0           0      0       0           4        0      0                           8
  Pedestrians             0                              0                        4                            0                                  4
   Bicycles         0     0       0                1     0     0           0      0       0           0        0      0                           1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Deer St -- 2nd St                                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10736512
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                        75          147                         Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                 2.7        3.4

                        14    52     9
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                              7.1 0.0 11.1

       101   23                           59   117
                                                                                                                 2.0   4.3                       1.7      0.9
             82              0.84         55
                                                                                                                       1.2                       0.0
       184   79                            3    91
                                                                                                                 1.6   1.3                       0.0      2.2

                        32    65     0
                                                                                                                              3.1 4.6 0.0

                     134            97
                                                                                                                              0.7        4.1



                              1                                                                                                0    2    0


                                                                                                                       0                          0

             4                             7                                                                           1                          0

                                                                                                                       0                          0


                              2                                                                                                0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                           NA                                                                           NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count                    Deer St                        Deer St                   2nd St                      2nd St
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        1           6       0    0         1       5       1   0     4      4       6     0     0        5      3       0           36
     4:05 PM        8          11       0    0         4       5       3   0     2     12       5     0     0        2      5       0           57
     4:10 PM        1           7       1    0         3       6       2   0     3      5       4     0     0        6      4       0           42
     4:15 PM        2           5       0    0         1       2       0   0     2      9       2     0     1        5      2       0           31
     4:20 PM        3           3       0    0         0       3       0   0     1      5       5     0     1        1      4       0           26
     4:25 PM        0           5       0    0         1       2       1   0     1      6       7     0     0        0      4       0           27
     4:30 PM        2           6       1    0         6       4       1   0     1      3       5     0     0        4      3       0           36
     4:35 PM        3           5       0    0         0       6       2   0     2      7       3     0     0        4      2       0           34
     4:40 PM        4           4       0    0         1       3       0   0     1      5       2     0     0        2      1       0           23
     4:45 PM        5           8       0    0         0       3       0   0     2      6       3     0     0        7      3       0           37
     4:50 PM        1           2       0    0         2       4       2   0     1      4       6     0     0        1      8       0           31
     4:55 PM        1           8       0    0         0       2       0   0     4      3       5     0     0        5      5       0           33              413
     5:00 PM        4           7       0    0         3       8       2   0     2      7       6     0     0        4      4       0           47              424
     5:05 PM        3           3       0    0         1       4       3   0     3      8     10      0     0        6      6       0           47              414
     5:10 PM        1           6       0    0         3       2       1   0     3     11       9     0     0        4      7       0           47              419
     5:15 PM        1           6       0    0         0       6       0   0     2      7       6     0     2        5      5       0           40              428
     5:20 PM        2           9       0    0         0       5       1   0     1      7       5     0     0        4      4       0           38              440
     5:25 PM        2           3       0    0         0       1       0   0     0      7       4     0     0        2      5       0           24              437
     5:30 PM        3           4       0    0         0       6       2   0     3      7       5     0     1        7      5       0           43              444
     5:35 PM        5           7       0    0         0       6       1   0     2      8     12      0     0        5      6       0           52              462
     5:40 PM        4           2       0    0         0       5       2   0     0      7       8     0     0        5      1       0           34              473
     5:45 PM        1           1       0    0         2       2       2   0     2      9       6     0     1        6      2       0           34              470
     5:50 PM        0           3       2    0         0       3       1   0     2      4       5     0     0        6      3       0           29              468
     5:55 PM        2           8       0    0         0       1       0   0     0      5       6     0     0        4      4       0           30              465
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     32          64       0    0        28      56     24    0    32    104    100      0     0       56     68       0                  564
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0              4       0       4         4      0       0           0        0      0                          12
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                        4                           16                                 20
   Bicycles         0           0       0              0       1       0         0      1       0           0        0      0                           2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Deer St -- Lamonta Rd                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10736513
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                         0          0                           Peak-Hour: 4:00 PM -- 5:00 PM                                  0.0        0.0

                         0    0     0
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 4:20 PM -- 4:35 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

       161   0                             0   138
                                                                                                                 10.6   0.0                        0.0     10.1
             206             0.86        134
                                                                                                                        3.9                       10.4
       230   24                            4   216
                                                                                                                 3.5    0.0                        0.0      4.2

                        27    0     10
                                                                                                                               11.1 0.0 10.0

                        28          37
                                                                                                                               0.0        10.8



                              0                                                                                                 0    0     0


                                                                                                                        0                           0

             0                             0                                                                            1                           0

                                                                                                                        1                           0


                              0                                                                                                 1    0     0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                          NA                                                                             NA                         NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                    Deer St                        Deer St                Lamonta Rd                  Lamonta Rd
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                  Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                         Totals
     4:00 PM        3           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     23      4      0     1        6      0        0            37
     4:05 PM        1           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0     26      3      0     1       10      0        0            43
     4:10 PM        1           0       3    0         0       0       0   0     0     10      2      0     0       18      0        0            34
     4:15 PM        2           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     21      0      0     1       13      0        0            37
     4:20 PM        4           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     19      0      0     0       15      0        0            38
     4:25 PM        0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     12      5      0     0       16      0        0            33
     4:30 PM        4           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0     23      1      0     0       17      0        0            47
     4:35 PM        2           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     16      0      0     0       10      0        0            28
     4:40 PM        3           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     16      4      0     0       10      0        0            34
     4:45 PM        0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     11      1      0     0        4      0        0            16
     4:50 PM        3           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     17      4      0     1       12      0        0            38
     4:55 PM        4           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     12      0      0     0        3      0        0            20              405
     5:00 PM        0           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0     13      2      0     0       10      0        0            27              395
     5:05 PM        1           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0     20      1      0     1       11      0        0            36              388
     5:10 PM        4           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0      8      1      0     0        8      0        0            23              377
     5:15 PM        3           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     11      1      0     0        8      0        0            23              363
     5:20 PM        1           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     10      0      0     0       22      0        0            33              358
     5:25 PM        2           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0      5      0      0     0        9      0        0            17              342
     5:30 PM        2           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     12      2      0     0        7      0        0            24              319
     5:35 PM        1           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     10      2      0     0        9      0        0            23              314
     5:40 PM        2           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     13      1      0     0        5      0        0            21              301
     5:45 PM        1           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     13      2      0     0        6      0        0            22              307
     5:50 PM        0           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     16      1      0     0        8      0        0            26              295
     5:55 PM        3           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0      9      0      0     1        7      0        0            20              295
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles     32           0       8    0         0       0       0   0     0    216     24      0     0      192      0        0                   472
 Heavy Trucks       4           0       4              0       0       0         0     12      0            0       20      0                            40
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                        0                            0                                    0
   Bicycles         0           0       0              0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Juniper St -- Laughlin Rd                                                                                         QC JOB #: 10736514
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Wed, Apr 18 2012
                         0          0                           Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                         0    0     0
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

       224   0                             0   226
                                                                                                                 3.1   0.0                       0.0      3.1
             235             0.96        208
                                                                                                                       4.3                       3.4
       261   26                           18   255
                                                                                                                 3.8   0.0                       0.0      3.9

                        17    0     20
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

                        45          37
                                                                                                                              0.0        0.0



                              2                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                       0                          0

             1                             1                                                                           0                          0

                                                                                                                       0                          0


                              0                                                                                                1    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                          NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count                   Juniper St                     Juniper St              Laughlin Rd                  Laughlin Rd
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        4           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0     20      2      0     1       19      0       0           48
     4:05 PM        0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     23      1      0     1       10      0       0           35
     4:10 PM        1           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     14      0      0     0       16      0       0           31
     4:15 PM        5           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0     18      3      0     1       14      0       0           43
     4:20 PM        0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     10      1      0     3       13      0       0           27
     4:25 PM        3           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     13      1      0     1       18      0       0           36
     4:30 PM        1           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0     24      1      0     3       22      0       0           53
     4:35 PM        0           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     25      1      0     2       11      0       0           40
     4:40 PM        1           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     21      1      0     1       19      0       0           43
     4:45 PM        0           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0     25      3      0     2       13      0       0           45
     4:50 PM        3           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0     16      2      0     2       18      0       0           43
     4:55 PM        0           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     14      2      0     1       18      0       0           36              480
     5:00 PM        3           0       3    0         0       0       0   0     0     15      2      0     0       21      0       0           44              476
     5:05 PM        3           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     19      2      0     1       21      0       0           47              488
     5:10 PM        1           0       0    1         0       0       0   0     0     19      3      0     3       15      0       0           42              499
     5:15 PM        1           0       3    0         0       0       0   0     0     20      3      0     2       15      0       0           44              500
     5:20 PM        1           0       2    0         0       0       0   0     0     14      3      0     1       18      0       0           39              512
     5:25 PM        2           0       3    0         0       0       0   0     0     23      3      0     0       17      0       0           48              524
     5:30 PM        2           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     21      1      0     1       20      0       0           46              517
     5:35 PM        2           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     10      1      0     2        9      0       0           25              502
     5:40 PM        2           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     15      1      0     1       10      0       0           30              489
     5:45 PM        4           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     14      1      0     0       15      0       0           35              479
     5:50 PM        0           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     11      1      0     1       10      0       0           24              460
     5:55 PM        6           0       1    0         0       0       0   0     0     15      1      0     1       23      0       0           47              471
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      8           0      12    0         0       0       0   0     0    280     12      0    24      208      0       0                  544
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0              0       0       0         0     16      0            0        4      0                          20
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                        0                            4                                  4
   Bicycles         0           0       0              0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Combs Flat Rd -- Laughlin Rd                                                                                QC JOB #: 10736515
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                            DATE: Wed, Apr 11 2012
                     0           1                        Peak-Hour: 4:00 PM -- 5:00 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                     0     0     0
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 4:35 PM -- 4:50 PM
                                                                                                                        0.0 0.0 0.0

       150   1                         0    79
                                                                                                           4.7   0.0                       0.0      2.5
             103          0.89        72
                                                                                                                 3.9                       2.8
       200   96                        7   118
                                                                                                           4.0   4.2                       0.0      3.4

                     78    0     15
                                                                                                                        6.4 0.0 0.0

                    103          93
                                                                                                                        3.9        5.4



                           0                                                                                             0    0    0


                                                                                                                 0                          0

             0                         0                                                                         0                          0

                                                                                                                 0                          0


                           0                                                                                             0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                  NA




             NA                       NA                                                                         NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                  NA



 5-Min Count           Combs Flat Rd                  Combs Flat Rd             Laughlin Rd                  Laughlin Rd
     Period            (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                             Total
                  Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        8     0      2     0           0     0      0    0     0      5      8      0     0        1      0       0           24
     4:05 PM        5     0      3     0           0     0      0    0     0     10     10      0     1        5      0       0           34
     4:10 PM       13     0      2     0           0     0      0    0     0     11     10      0     1        6      0       0           43
     4:15 PM        5     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     1      6      5      0     0        9      0       0           27
     4:20 PM        6     0      2     0           0     0      0    0     0      7      7      0     1        6      0       0           29
     4:25 PM        8     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     0      7      8      0     0        5      0       0           29
     4:30 PM        7     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     0      4      6      0     1        9      0       0           28
     4:35 PM        7     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     0      8     12      0     1        6      0       0           35
     4:40 PM        5     0      0     0           0     0      0    0     0     14      7      0     1       10      0       0           37
     4:45 PM        7     0      0     0           0     0      0    0     0     14      6      0     0        6      0       0           33
     4:50 PM        3     0      0     0           0     0      0    0     0      9      8      0     1        5      0       0           26
     4:55 PM        4     0      2     0           0     0      0    0     0      8      9      0     0        4      0       0           27              372
     5:00 PM        5     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     0      5      3      0     1        2      0       0           17              365
     5:05 PM        6     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     0      9     14      0     1        4      0       0           35              366
     5:10 PM        7     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     0      5      5      0     0        2      0       0           20              343
     5:15 PM        8     0      2     0           0     0      0    0     0      4      6      0     0        6      0       0           26              342
     5:20 PM        9     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     0      5      8      0     1        7      0       0           31              344
     5:25 PM        7     0      6     0           0     0      0    0     0     13      5      0     0        2      0       0           33              348
     5:30 PM        5     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     0     10      2      0     1        7      0       0           26              346
     5:35 PM        2     0      0     0           0     0      0    0     0     10     10      0     1        2      0       0           25              336
     5:40 PM        9     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     0      6      6      0     0        8      0       0           30              329
     5:45 PM        3     0      3     0           0     0      0    0     0      6      7      0     0        6      0       0           25              321
     5:50 PM        3     0      0     0           0     0      0    0     0     10      6      0     2        5      0       0           26              321
     5:55 PM        4     0      1     0           0     0      0    0     0     11      6      0     0        7      0       0           29              323
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                 Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     76     0      4     0           0     0      0    0     0    144    100      0     8       88      0       0                  420
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      0                 0     0      0          0      0      4            0        0      0                           4
  Pedestrians             0                              0                        0                            0                                  0
   Bicycles         0     0      0                 0     0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Juniper St -- US 26                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10736516
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Wed, Apr 11 2012
                        31          48                          Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                 9.7        2.1

                        15    3     13
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 33.3 15.4

       447   33                           14   448
                                                                                                                 2.0   3.0                       0.0      2.0
             623             0.90        431
                                                                                                                       1.9                       2.1
       661   5                             3   642
                                                                                                                 2.0   0.0                       0.0      2.2

                         1    1     6
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

                        11          8
                                                                                                                              9.1        0.0



                              8                                                                                                0    0    0


                                                                                                                       0                          0

             1                            10                                                                           0                          2

                                                                                                                       0                          0


                              10                                                                                               0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                          NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count                   Juniper St                     Juniper St                 US 26                        US 26
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM        0           0       0    0         3       0       1   0     2     43      0      0     0       47      1       0           97
     4:05 PM        0           2       0    0         0       2       0   0     1     33      0      0     0       46      2       0           86
     4:10 PM        2           0       0    0         0       0       2   0     1     46      0      0     0       37      0       0           88
     4:15 PM        1           0       1    0         3       1       0   0     2     40      2      0     1       49      2       0          102
     4:20 PM        0           1       1    0         2       1       1   0     1     42      0      0     1       41      1       0           92
     4:25 PM        0           0       1    0         1       0       1   0     1     37      1      0     1       44      2       0           89
     4:30 PM        0           1       1    0         0       0       2   0     1     47      2      0     2       32      1       0           89
     4:35 PM        0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     44      1      0     1       40      1       0           87
     4:40 PM        0           0       0    0         2       0       1   0     2     52      0      0     1       33      0       0           91
     4:45 PM        1           0       3    0         2       0       1   0     5     55      0      0     0       36      0       0          103
     4:50 PM        0           0       0    0         4       2       2   0     1     62      0      0     0       30      1       0          102
     4:55 PM        0           0       0    0         0       0       2   0     1     43      0      0     0       43      0       0           89             1115
     5:00 PM        0           0       0    0         1       0       0   0     1     41      0      0     0       33      2       0           78             1096
     5:05 PM        0           0       0    0         0       0       2   0     5     51      1      0     0       45      0       0          104             1114
     5:10 PM        0           1       0    0         0       0       3   0     3     72      1      0     0       28      3       0          111             1137
     5:15 PM        0           0       1    0         0       0       1   0     6     58      0      0     1       37      1       0          105             1140
     5:20 PM        0           0       0    0         2       0       1   0     2     46      0      0     0       32      1       0           84             1132
     5:25 PM        0           0       1    0         1       0       2   0     2     51      2      0     0       31      0       0           90             1133
     5:30 PM        0           0       1    0         1       1       0   0     5     48      0      0     0       43      5       0          104             1148
     5:35 PM        1           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     4     33      0      0     2       38      2       0           80             1141
     5:40 PM        0           1       0    0         0       1       1   0     2     41      1      0     1       39      2       0           89             1139
     5:45 PM        1           0       0    0         1       0       2   0     4     31      0      0     0       35      0       0           74             1110
     5:50 PM        0           1       1    0         0       1       2   0     2     45      1      0     0       38      1       0           92             1100
     5:55 PM        0           1       0    0         2       0       1   0     2     27      1      0     0       31      3       0           68             1079
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      0           4       4    0         0       0     24    0    56    724      8      0     4      440     16       0                  1280
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0              0       0       0         4     20      0            0        4      0                           28
  Pedestrians                   4                              4                        0                            8                                  16
   Bicycles         0           0       0              0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Fairview St -- Lynn Blvd                                                                                          QC JOB #: 10736517
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Wed, Apr 11 2012
                        64          41                          Peak-Hour: 2:40 PM -- 3:40 PM                                 17.2        0.0

                        21    0     43
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 2:55 PM -- 3:10 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 25.6

       218   21                           20   217
                                                                                                                 6.9   0.0                        0.0      6.9
             182             0.65        197
                                                                                                                       1.6                        7.6
       203   0                             0   225
                                                                                                                 1.5   0.0                        0.0      6.2

                         0    0     0
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

                         0          0
                                                                                                                              0.0         0.0



                              0                                                                                                0     0    0


                                                                                                                       0                           1

             0                             0                                                                           0                           0

                                                                                                                       0                           0


                              0                                                                                                0     0    0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                          NA                                                                            NA                         NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                  Fairview St                    Fairview St               Lynn Blvd                    Lynn Blvd
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                        Totals
     2:10 PM        0           0      0     0         3       0      1    0     2      7      0      0     0        7      1        0           21
     2:15 PM        0           0      0     0         1       0      1    0     2     18      0      0     0        7      2        0           31
     2:20 PM        0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     11      0      0     0        7      1        0           19
     2:25 PM        0           0      0     0         2       0      1    0     0     12      0      0     0        7      2        0           24
     2:30 PM        0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0      8      0      0     0       12      1        0           21
     2:35 PM        0           0      0     0         1       0      1    0     1      8      0      0     0        5      5        0           21
     2:40 PM        0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     2     16      0      0     0        9      2        0           29
     2:45 PM        0           0      0     0         3       0      0    0     1     21      0      0     0        9      2        0           36
     2:50 PM        0           0      0     0         2       0      0    0     3     16      0      0     0       11      3        0           35
     2:55 PM        0           0      0     0         1       0      4    0     4     21      0      0     0       30      3        0           63              353
     3:00 PM        0           0      0     0         7       0      3    0     1     20      0      0     0       19      2        0           52              374
     3:05 PM        0           0      0     0        13       0      4    0     4     23      0      0     0       26      0        0           70              422
     3:10 PM        0           0      0     0         4       0      4    0     1     14      0      0     0       18      0        0           41              442
     3:15 PM        0           0      0     0         3       0      3    0     0     10      0      0     0       22      3        0           41              452
     3:20 PM        0           0      0     0         2       0      1    0     4      7      0      0     0       11      1        0           26              459
     3:25 PM        0           0      0     0         2       0      0    0     1     11      0      0     0       18      1        0           33              468
     3:30 PM        0           0      0     0         4       0      1    0     0      5      0      0     0       12      2        0           24              471
     3:35 PM        0           0      0     0         2       0      1    0     0     18      0      0     0       12      1        0           34              484
     3:40 PM        0           0      0     0         3       0      1    0     0     11      0      0     0        7      2        0           24              479
     3:45 PM        0           0      0     0         5       0      2    0     1      9      0      0     0       11      3        0           31              474
     3:50 PM        0           0      0     0         3       0      5    0     1     17      0      0     0       11      0        0           37              476
     3:55 PM        0           0      0     0         4       0      1    0     0     20      0      0     0       17      3        0           45              458
     4:00 PM        0           0      0     0         1       0      0    0     1      6      0      0     0        7      1        0           16              422
     4:05 PM        0           0      0     0         2       0      0    0     0     17      0      0     0       10      0        0           29              381
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles      0           0      0     0        84       0     44    0    36    256      0      0     0      300     20        0                  740
 Heavy Trucks       0           0      0              36       0      0          0      0      0            0       20      0                           56
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles         0           0      0               0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Combs Flat Rd -- US 26                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10736518
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                              DATE: Wed, Apr 11 2012
                    173          119                        Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                 2.3        3.4

                     27 113 33
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                          3.7 1.8 3.0

       384   26                         25   367
                                                                                                             3.9   3.8                       0.0      2.5
             292          0.94         287
                                                                                                                   3.8                       2.4
       433   115                        55   369
                                                                                                             3.9   4.3                       3.6      3.3

                     70    68    44
                                                                                                                          10.0 4.4 0.0

                    283          182
                                                                                                                          3.2        5.5



                           2                                                                                               0    0    0


                                                                                                                   0                          0

             3                           0                                                                         1                          2

                                                                                                                   0                          0


                           1                                                                                               0    1    0




                          NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                        NA                                                                          NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count           Combs Flat Rd                    Combs Flat Rd                US 26                        US 26
     Period            (Northbound)                     (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                  Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     4:00 PM       10     6       1    0             1    10      3    0     7     28     11      0     7       23      4       0          111         1150
     4:05 PM        6     3       2    0             2     5      4    0     5     20      5      0     4       26      1       0           83         1132
     4:10 PM       10     6       5    0             2    10      4    0     2     19     10      0     8       24      3       0          103         1144
     4:15 PM        2     6       4    0             1     5      0    0     2     24     10      0     7       14      2       0           77         1122
     4:20 PM        1     3       3    0             5     8      3    0     1     18      5      0     6       28      2       0           83         1103
     4:25 PM        2    11       6    0             1    10      2    0     4     21      3      0     2       13      1       0           76         1079
     4:30 PM       10     4       3    0             1     8      2    0     3     20     14      0     7       33      2       0          107         1092
     4:35 PM        7     6       9    0             1    11      1    0     2     18      5      0     5       19      1       0           85         1068
     4:40 PM        3     7       0    0             1    13      3    0     1     18      6      0     0       20      3       0           75         1060
     4:45 PM        7     4       7    0             1     4      3    0     3     31      6      0     7       29      3       0          105         1083
     4:50 PM        2     9       2    0             2    18      2    0     2     25     13      0     2       19      2       0           98         1086
     4:55 PM        6     2       2    0             5     3      1    0     3     27      8      0     5       34      1       0           97         1100
     5:00 PM        5     4       4    0             3     9      4    0     1     25      7      0     3       31      2       0           98         1087
     5:05 PM        3     4       4    0             4     9      2    0     2     35     13      0     7       21      3       0          107         1111
     5:10 PM        6     8       3    0             2    10      3    0     4     34     15      0     2       14      2       0          103         1111
     5:15 PM        9     8       3    0             3    14      2    0     1     20      5      0     6       18      5       0           94         1128
     5:20 PM        5     5       6    0             8     6      3    0     2     14     15      0     6       19      1       0           90         1135
     5:25 PM        7     7       1    0             2     8      1    0     2     25      8      0     5       30      0       0           96         1155
     5:30 PM        4     4       6    0             5     4      5    0     4     14      9      0     5       23      2       0           85         1133
     5:35 PM        3     3       5    0             3     7      5    0     1     17     11      0     9       18      0       0           82         1130
     5:40 PM        2     7       3    0             1     6      0    0     2     20      8      0     2       27      3       0           81         1136
     5:45 PM        5     4       3    0             4     9      3    0     1     21     12      0     2       14      0       0           78         1109
     5:50 PM        7     4       3    0             0     8      3    0     2     26      4      0     5       18      1       0           81         1092
     5:55 PM        2     4       3    0             4     8      2    0     3     17      3      0     3       17      2       0           68         1063
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                      Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     56    64      44    0            36   112    36     0    28    376    140      0    48      264     28       0                  1232
 Heavy Trucks       0     0       0                  0     0      0          0      4      4            0        4      0                           12
  Pedestrians             0                                0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles         0     0       0                  0     0      0          0      0      0            0        2      0                            2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Main St -- Lynn Blvd                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10736519
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                    DATE: Wed, Apr 11 2012
                     197            269                          Peak-Hour: 2:50 PM -- 3:50 PM                                  3.6         6.3

                         3    22 172
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 2:55 PM -- 3:10 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 22.7 1.2

       13    36                           219   234
                                                                                                                  15.4   0.0                         7.3      7.3
             12              0.74           8
                                                                                                                         0.0                         0.0
       48    0                              7   190
                                                                                                                  0.0    0.0                        14.3      1.1

                         2    14     6
                                                                                                                                100.07.1 0.0

                        29          22
                                                                                                                                20.7        13.6



                              1                                                                                                  0     2     0


                                                                                                                         0                            0

             0                              0                                                                            0                            0

                                                                                                                         0                            0


                              4                                                                                                  0     0     0




                              NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                           NA                                                                             NA                          NA




                              NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                    Main St                         Main St                 Lynn Blvd                    Lynn Blvd
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                   Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                       Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                         Totals
     2:20 PM        0           2       0    0         11       1       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      9         0            24
     2:25 PM        0           1       2    0          9       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        1      9         0            23
     2:30 PM        0           2       0    0          9       1       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        3      8         0            25
     2:35 PM        0           0       0    0         10       1       3   0     1      0      0      0     0        1      7         0            23
     2:40 PM        0           0       1    0         16       3       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        1     11         0            33
     2:45 PM        0           4       2    0         21       2       2   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      8         0            40
     2:50 PM        0           1       2    0         17       0       1   0     0      1      0      0     0        2     12         0            36
     2:55 PM        0           1       0    0         16       0       0   0    19      5      0      0     1        1     27         0            70              382
     3:00 PM        0           1       0    0         17       0       1   0     3      4      0      0     0        3     19         0            48              401
     3:05 PM        0           1       0    0         15       2       0   0     3      1      0      0     1        1     27         0            51              425
     3:10 PM        0           1       1    0         15       0       1   0     2      0      0      0     1        0     27         0            48              455
     3:15 PM        0           2       0    0         13       2       0   0     2      0      0      0     0        1     26         0            46              467
     3:20 PM        1           2       1    0          9       2       0   0     1      0      0      0     0        0     12         0            28              471
     3:25 PM        0           0       0    0         13       0       0   0     3      0      0      0     1        0     17         0            34              482
     3:30 PM        0           2       1    0          5       2       0   0     1      0      0      0     0        0     13         0            24              481
     3:35 PM        0           0       0    0         20       5       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0     14         0            39              497
     3:40 PM        0           0       0    0         14       5       0   0     0      1      0      0     1        0     12         0            33              497
     3:45 PM        1           3       1    0         18       4       0   0     2      0      0      0     2        0     13         0            44              501
     3:50 PM        0           1       3    0         15       4       0   0     0      1      0      0     1        0      9         0            34              499
     3:55 PM        0           1       0    0         18       4       0   0     0      0      0      0     4        0     17         0            44              473
     4:00 PM        0           4       1    0         13       3       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      8         0            30              455
     4:05 PM        0           3       2    0         17       3       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        1     11         0            37              441
     4:10 PM        0           1       0    0         16       0       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0     13         0            31              424
     4:15 PM        0           2       1    0         14       3       0   0     0      0      0      0     0        0     10         0            30              408
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                           Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles      0          12       0    0        192       8       4   0   100     40      0      0     8       20    292         0                   676
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0               0       4       0         0      0      0            4        0     20                             28
  Pedestrians                   8                               0                        0                            0                                     8
   Bicycles         0           0       0               0       2       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                              2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Combs Flat Rd -- Lynn Blvd                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10736520
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                           DATE: Wed, Apr 18 2012
                    254          140                     Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                 4.3        8.6

                     63 191       0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                       3.2 4.7 0.0

       127   55                         0   0
                                                                                                          3.9   3.6                       0.0      0.0
             0            0.85          0
                                                                                                                0.0                       0.0
       185   130                        0   0
                                                                                                          4.9   5.4                       0.0      0.0

                     64    85     0
                                                                                                                       4.7 11.8 0.0

                    321          149
                                                                                                                       5.0        8.7



                           0                                                                                            0    1    0


                                                                                                                0                          0

             0                          1                                                                       0                          0

                                                                                                                1                          0


                           4                                                                                            1    1    0




                          NA                                                                                                 NA




             NA                        NA                                                                       NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                 NA



 5-Min Count           Combs Flat Rd                 Combs Flat Rd              Lynn Blvd                    Lynn Blvd
     Period            (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                            Total
                  Left Thru Right      U        Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM        3     7      0     0          0    17      4    0     6      0     10      0     0        0      0       0           47            538
     4:05 PM        5     6      0     0          0    13      3    0     4      0     12      0     0        0      0       0           43            534
     4:10 PM        8     8      0     0          0    14      3    0     5      0     10      0     0        0      0       0           48            522
     4:15 PM        4     4      0     0          0    18      0    0     2      0     11      0     0        0      0       0           39            512
     4:20 PM        8     4      0     0          0    13      4    0     1      0      2      0     0        0      0       0           32            499
     4:25 PM        3     9      0     0          0    10      0    0     6      0      6      0     0        0      0       0           34            492
     4:30 PM        5     7      0     0          0    21      2    0     2      0     10      0     0        0      0       0           47            500
     4:35 PM        2    13      0     0          0    18      5    0     7      0      9      0     0        0      0       0           54            509
     4:40 PM        6     3      0     0          0     7      6    0     2      0      7      0     0        0      0       0           31            506
     4:45 PM        5     7      0     0          0    11      5    0     9      0     10      0     0        0      0       0           47            508
     4:50 PM        5     9      0     0          0    22      3    0     1      0      8      0     0        0      0       0           48            515
     4:55 PM       10     8      0     0          0    18      4    0     3      0      5      0     0        0      0       0           48            518
     5:00 PM       10     4      0     0          0    12      6    0     7      0      5      0     0        0      0       0           44            515
     5:05 PM        2     9      0     0          0    14      5    0     0      0     17      0     0        0      0       0           47            519
     5:10 PM        4    11      0     0          0    18      6    0     6      0     14      0     0        0      0       0           59            530
     5:15 PM        5    11      0     0          0    19      9    0     3      0     15      0     0        0      0       0           62            553
     5:20 PM        4     4      0     0          0    21      5    0     7      0     11      0     0        0      0       0           52            573
     5:25 PM        2     7      0     0          0    14      6    0     3      0      7      0     0        0      0       0           39            578
     5:30 PM        5     5      0     0          0    11      4    0     6      0     15      0     0        0      0       0           46            577
     5:35 PM        7     6      0     0          0    18      4    0     8      0      6      0     0        0      0       0           49            572
     5:40 PM        5     4      0     0          0    13      6    0     2      0     17      0     0        0      0       0           47            588
     5:45 PM        6     7      0     0          0    10      6    0     4      0      7      0     0        0      0       0           40            581
     5:50 PM        6    11      0     0          0    12      8    0     1      0     12      0     0        0      0       0           50            583
     5:55 PM        6     3      0     0          0     7      3    0     4      0      4      0     0        0      0       0           27            562
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                   Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U        Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     52   104      0     0          0   232    80     0    64      0    160      0     0        0      0       0                  692
 Heavy Trucks       0     4      0                0    12      0          4      0     12            0        0      0                          32
  Pedestrians             8                             0                        0                            4                                 12
   Bicycles         0     1      0                0     0      0          0      0      1            0        0      0                           2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Harwood St -- US 26                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10736521
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                     137            99                           Peak-Hour: 2:30 PM -- 3:30 PM                                 7.3        11.1

                        53    38    46
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 2:35 PM -- 2:50 PM
                                                                                                                               17.0 0.0 2.2

       537   44                            31   492
                                                                                                                  8.2   9.1                        3.2      7.5
             523             0.92         436
                                                                                                                        5.5                        7.8
       580   13                            25   601
                                                                                                                  5.7   0.0                        8.0      5.0

                        48    24    32
                                                                                                                               2.1 25.0 0.0

                        76          104
                                                                                                                               2.6        6.7



                              4                                                                                                 0    0     0


                                                                                                                        0                           0

             5                              6                                                                           0                           0

                                                                                                                        0                           0


                              8                                                                                                 0    0     0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                           NA                                                                            NA                         NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                  Harwood St                      Harwood St                  US 26                        US 26
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     2:00 PM        2           2       1    0          2       0     1     0     2     45      1      0     1       42      1       0           100
     2:05 PM        1           0       2    0          4       0     2     0     0     28      2      0     2       40      2       0            83
     2:10 PM        2           1       6    0          1       1     2     0     1     27      1      0     5       31      1       0            79
     2:15 PM        5           1       5    0          1       1     3     0     2     40      2      0     3       33      0       0            96
     2:20 PM        1           3       0    0          1       4     1     0     1     47      2      0     2       43      0       0           105
     2:25 PM        2           1       0    0          0       0     2     0     1     44      3      0     6       31      0       0            90
     2:30 PM        3           1       3    0          3       2     1     0     1     51      4      0     3       36      1       0           109
     2:35 PM        1           1       7    0          0       3     6     0     2     62      1      0     5       37      1       0           126
     2:40 PM        7           1       4    0          0       2     9     0     2     49      0      0     2       39      3       0           118
     2:45 PM        4           2       3    0          4       1     4     0     8     48      0      0     3       36      1       0           114
     2:50 PM        1           2       1    0          6       4     4     0     6     44      1      0     2       29      4       0           104
     2:55 PM        2           2       4    0         11      10     5     0     0     38      2      0     0       25      1       0           100             1224
     3:00 PM        3           4       3    0          3       3     4     0     2     45      1      0     0       34      5       0           107             1231
     3:05 PM        6           3       3    0          6       2     3     0     5     28      1      0     2       49      4       0           112             1260
     3:10 PM        2           3       1    0          1       3     5     0     4     27      1      0     2       39      4       0            92             1273
     3:15 PM        8           2       1    0          5       4     7     0     2     40      0      0     3       42      3       0           117             1294
     3:20 PM        5           3       0    0          3       1     3     0     7     47      1      0     2       39      2       0           113             1302
     3:25 PM        6           0       2    0          4       3     2     0     5     44      1      0     1       31      2       0           101             1313
     3:30 PM        0           3       1    0          1       0     6     0     7     51      0      0     0       23      4       0            96             1300
     3:35 PM        6           0       0    0          0       1     6     0     7     62      0      0     6       37      0       0           125             1299
     3:40 PM        3           2       1    0          6       8    10     0    12     49      2      0     2       26      2       0           123             1304
     3:45 PM        3           1       5    0          2       2     2     0     4     48      4      0     1       24      1       0            97             1287
     3:50 PM        4           1       0    0          4       3     3     0     3     44      1      0     0       27      4       0            94             1277
     3:55 PM        3           3       1    0          3       1     3     0     5     38      1      0     1       33      3       0            95             1272
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles     48          16      56    0         16      24    76     0    48    636      4      0    40      448     20       0                   1432
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0               0       0    24           8     56      0            4       20      0                            112
  Pedestrians                   4                               0                        8                            8                                   20
   Bicycles         0           0       0               0       0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 9th St -- US 26                                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10736522
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                     210            236                         Peak-Hour: 2:45 PM -- 3:45 PM                                 13.3        14.0

                         0   159 51
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 2:45 PM -- 3:00 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 14.5 9.8

       0     0                            57   101
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                         7.0      9.9
             0               0.85          0
                                                                                                                       0.0                         0.0
       0     0                            44   104
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                        13.6     12.5

                         0   179 53
                                                                                                                              0.0 16.2 15.1

                     203            232
                                                                                                                              14.3        15.9



                              0                                                                                                0     0     0


                                                                                                                       0                            0

             0                            12                                                                           0                            0

                                                                                                                       0                            0


                              0                                                                                                0     0     0




                              NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                           NA                                                                           NA                          NA




                              NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                     9th St                         9th St                   US 26                        US 26
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                  Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                         Totals
     2:15 PM        0          12       1    0         6      18       0   0     0      0      0      0     5        0      3        0            45
     2:20 PM        0          10       3    0         3      17       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      6        0            40
     2:25 PM        0          11       2    0         4      11       0   0     0      0      0      0     4        0      0        0            32
     2:30 PM        0           7       5    0         3      15       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      1        0            33
     2:35 PM        0           8       3    0         3       8       0   0     0      0      0      0     3        0      6        0            31
     2:40 PM        0          11       2    0         5      19       0   0     0      0      0      0     7        0      4        0            48
     2:45 PM        0          18       1    0         7       9       0   0     0      0      0      0     3        0      7        0            45
     2:50 PM        0          15       4    0         4      19       0   0     0      0      0      0     5        0      1        0            48
     2:55 PM        0          16      21    0         4      18       0   0     0      0      0      0     3        0      5        0            67              481
     3:00 PM        0           8       1    0         4      13       0   0     0      0      0      0     3        0      7        0            36              483
     3:05 PM        0          17       7    0         3      11       0   0     0      0      0      0     4        0      1        0            43              500
     3:10 PM        0          11       1    0         4      11       0   0     0      0      0      0     3        0      5        0            35              503
     3:15 PM        0          15       2    0         2       8       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      6        0            34              492
     3:20 PM        0          16       2    0         3      10       0   0     0      0      0      0     4        0      2        0            37              489
     3:25 PM        0          17       7    0         3      14       0   0     0      0      0      0     7        0      6        0            54              511
     3:30 PM        0          10       1    0         4      10       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      1        0            28              506
     3:35 PM        0          20       5    0         5      14       0   0     0      0      0      0     3        0      5        0            52              527
     3:40 PM        0          16       1    0         8      22       0   0     0      0      0      0     6        0     11        0            64              543
     3:45 PM        0           9       3    0         3      15       0   0     0      0      0      0     1        0      7        0            38              536
     3:50 PM        0          11       3    0         5      14       0   0     0      0      0      0     4        0      4        0            41              529
     3:55 PM        0          12       3    0         4      14       0   0     0      0      0      0     6        0      4        0            43              505
     4:00 PM        0          13       7    0         3      12       0   0     0      0      0      0     3        0      3        0            41              510
     4:05 PM        0          20       4    0         3      11       0   0     0      0      0      0     4        0      5        0            47              514
     4:10 PM        0          13       2    0         5       8       0   0     0      0      0      0     2        0      4        0            34              513
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles      0         196    104     0        60     184       0   0     0      0      0      0    44        0     52        0                   640
 Heavy Trucks       0          32      32             16      16       0         0      0      0           12        0      0                            108
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                        0                           28                                   28
   Bicycles         0           0       0              0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Knowledge St -- US 26                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10736523
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Apr 10 2012
                         0          0                          Peak-Hour: 4:25 PM -- 5:25 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                         0     0    0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

       567   0                            0   564
                                                                                                                2.5   0.0                       0.0      2.5
             455             0.91       564
                                                                                                                      3.3                       2.5
       457   2                            0   456
                                                                                                                3.3   0.0                       0.0      3.3

                         3     0    1
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                         2          4
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                               0                                                                                              0    0    0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

             0                            0                                                                           0                          2

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                               6                                                                                              0    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                   NA




             NA                         NA                                                                            NA                        NA




                              NA                                                                                                   NA



 5-Min Count                 Knowledge St                  Knowledge St                 US 26                        US 26
     Period                  (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                  Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                      Totals
     3:55 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     28      0      0     0       36      0       0           64          962
     4:00 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     37      0      0     0       54      0       0           91          974
     4:05 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     37      0      0     0       40      0       0           77          967
     4:10 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     36      0      0     0       40      0       0           76          973
     4:15 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     33      0      0     0       44      0       0           77          972
     4:20 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     30      0      0     0       35      0       0           65          945
     4:25 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     37      0      0     0       39      0       0           76          941
     4:30 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     53      1      0     0       42      0       0           96          968
     4:35 PM        0           0      1     0        0       0     0     0     0     26      0      0     0       37      0       0           64          928
     4:40 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     37      0      0     0       46      0       0           83          926
     4:45 PM        2           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     32      0      0     0       54      0       0           88          944
     4:50 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     34      0      0     0       45      0       0           79          936
     4:55 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     39      0      0     0       42      0       0           81          953
     5:00 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     48      0      0     0       46      0       0           94          956
     5:05 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     29      0      0     0       58      0       0           87          966
     5:10 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     44      0      0     0       58      0       0          102          992
     5:15 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     30      0      0     0       51      0       0           81          996
     5:20 PM        1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     46      1      0     0       46      0       0           94         1025
     5:25 PM        1           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     40      1      0     0       34      0       0           76         1025
     5:30 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     33      0      0     0       37      0       0           70          999
     5:35 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     39      0      0     0       35      0       0           74         1009
     5:40 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     29      0      0     0       34      0       0           63          989
     5:45 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     34      0      0     0       49      0       0           83          984
     5:50 PM        0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0     34      0      0     0       39      0       0           73          978
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                   Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles      0           0      0     0        0       0     0     0     0    484      0      0     0      648      0       0                  1132
 Heavy Trucks       0           0      0              0       0     0           0     20      0            0        4      0                           24
  Pedestrians                  16                             0                        0                            0                                  16
   Bicycles         0           0      0              0       0     0           0      0      0            0        1      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 5/3/2012 4:31 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Tom McCall Rd -- Ochoco Hwy                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10547504
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                               DATE: Tue, Oct 19 2010
                    117          59                        Peak-Hour: 3:05 PM -- 4:05 PM                                   12.8        15.3

                     44    7     66
                                                          Peak 15-Min: 3:30 PM -- 3:45 PM
                                                                                                                           6.8 14.3 16.7

       406   12                        38   410
                                                                                                            10.1   16.7                        10.5     11.0
             473          0.79        348
                                                                                                                   6.3                         10.6
       486   1                         24   611
                                                                                                            6.8    100.0                       16.7      7.9

                     14    9     72
                                                                                                                           7.1 33.3 9.7

                     32          95
                                                                                                                           18.8        11.6



                           0                                                                                                0     0     0


                                                                                                                   0                             0

             0                          0                                                                          0                             0

                                                                                                                   0                             0


                           0                                                                                                0     0     0




                          NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                       NA                                                                           NA                           NA




                          NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count          Tom McCall Rd                   Tom McCall Rd              Ochoco Hwy                  Ochoco Hwy
     Period            (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                  Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                  Total
                  Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right          U                       Totals
     2:35 PM        0     1       6    0            1     0     1     0     0     28      2      0     1       17      1          0            58          710
     2:40 PM        2     0       2    0            4     0     1     0     0     32      1      0     2       15      3          0            62          720
     2:45 PM        2     0       1    0            2     0     2     0     1     43      1      0     1       21      3          0            77          749
     2:50 PM        0     0       4    0            4     0     4     0     0     27      1      0     2       18      2          0            62          739
     2:55 PM        2     0       1    0            4     1     0     0     0     17      1      0     6       29      1          0            62          742
     3:00 PM        0     0       1    0            2     0     1     0     3     41      1      0     1       14      3          0            67          753
     3:05 PM        2     1       2    0            8     1     2     0     3     36      0      0     1       28      2          0            86          787
     3:10 PM        2     0       4    0            5     0     1     0     0     27      0      0     3       29      6          0            77          809
     3:15 PM        0     1       4    0            0     1     1     0     2     36      0      0     1       30      3          0            79          828
     3:20 PM        3     1       7    0            5     0     2     0     0     28      0      0     2       28      3          0            79          846
     3:25 PM        2     0       3    0            6     0     1     0     0     32      0      0     2       31      1          0            78          854
     3:30 PM        0     0      11    0            3     1    10     0     0     33      1      0     2       36      2          0            99          886
     3:35 PM        3     1      15    0            5     2     3     0     0     65      0      0     6       27      1          0           128          956
     3:40 PM        0     2      13    0           15     1    15     0     3     48      0      0     0       24      2          0           123         1017
     3:45 PM        0     1       3    0            7     0     2     0     1     38      0      0     2       26      4          0            84         1024
     3:50 PM        1     0       2    0            2     0     3     0     1     47      0      0     1       26      4          0            87         1049
     3:55 PM        1     1       5    0            6     0     2     0     0     40      0      0     1       32      5          0            93         1080
     4:00 PM        0     1       3    0            4     1     2     0     2     43      0      0     3       31      5          0            95         1108
     4:05 PM        3     1       3    0            2     2     3     0     1     22      0      0     1       29      3          0            70         1092
     4:10 PM        0     1       3    0            0     0     3     0     0     33      0      0     0       22      7          0            69         1084
     4:15 PM        0     0       0    0            4     0     1     0     1     38      0      0     1       30      6          0            81         1086
     4:20 PM        2     0       2    0            3     0     0     0     1     26      1      0     0       29      8          0            72         1079
     4:25 PM        0     0       5    0            9     0     3     0     2     51      1      0     1       27      1          0           100         1101
     4:30 PM        1     0       1    0           10     0     2     0     0     31      1      0     2       31      1          0            80         1082
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right          U
  All Vehicles     12    12    156     0           92    16   112     0    12    584      4      0    32      348     20          0                   1400
 Heavy Trucks       0     4       4                 8     0     8           4     16      4            4       48      0                               100
  Pedestrians             0                               0                        0                            0                                       0
   Bicycles         0     0       0                 0     0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                                0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 3/9/2012 10:14 AM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Tom McCall Rd -- OR 126                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10463801
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                   DATE: Thu, Nov 05 2009
                     55          36                          Peak-Hour: 4:15 PM -- 5:15 PM                                     3.6        11.1

                     16    0     39
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                               6.3 0.0 2.6

       373   8                         24   387
                                                                                                                 3.8   25.0                        0.0     3.4
             460          0.96        346
                                                                                                                       3.7                         3.2
       473   5                         17   535
                                                                                                                 4.0   0.0                        11.8     3.6

                     11    4     36
                                                                                                                               18.2 50.0 2.8

                     22          51
                                                                                                                               9.1        9.8



                           0                                                                                                         NA




             0                          0                                                                              NA                          NA




                           0                                                                                                         NA




                          NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                       NA                                                                               NA                          NA




                          NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count           Tom McCall Rd                  Tom McCall Rd                 OR 126                     OR 126
     Period             (Northbound)                   (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                                   Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                              Total
                   Left     Thru    Right         Left     Thru    Right     Left    Thru     Right   Left      Thru     Right                             Totals
     4:00 PM        1         0       3            4         0       0        1        38       0      1         26        3               77
     4:05 PM        0         0       5            4         0       2        0        33       0      3         33        2               82
     4:10 PM        1         1       3            3         0       0        1        38       1      1         28        6               83
     4:15 PM        1         0       2            4         0       3        1        34       1      2         31        2               81
     4:20 PM        2         2       5            2         0       2        0        33       1      2         32        3               84
     4:25 PM        1         0       5            6         0       3        1        53       0      0         15        1               85
     4:30 PM        1         0       5            2         0       2        0        30       1      0         33        2               76
     4:35 PM        2         0       1            2         0       2        0        39       1      1         29        1               78
     4:40 PM        1         1       3            6         0       1        0        25       0      0         24        3               64
     4:45 PM        0         0       2            0         0       2        1        56       1      2         21        1               86
     4:50 PM        0         1       2            3         0       0        0        37       0      4         24        1               72
     4:55 PM        0         0       2            7         0       0        4        44       0      2         26        3               88                956
     5:00 PM        1         0       4            1         0       1        0        39       0      3         22        2               73                952
     5:05 PM        0         0       1            3         0       0        0        34       0      0         36        3               77                947
     5:10 PM        2         0       4            3         0       0        1        36       0      1         53        2              102                966
     5:15 PM        0         0       2            3         0       0        0        40       1      0         29        1               76                961
     5:20 PM        0         0       1            2         0       1        0        43       0      1         18        0               66                943
     5:25 PM        1         0       3            3         0       2        1        45       0      0         16        2               73                931
     5:30 PM        0         0       1            2         0       0        0        47       0     11         28        2               91                946
     5:35 PM        1         0       1            0         0       0        0        37       1      0         16        0               56                924
     5:40 PM        0         0       1            2         0       1        0        39       2      1         15        3               64                924
     5:45 PM        0         0       0            2         0       1        0        37       0      2         22        1               65                903
     5:50 PM        0         0       0            3         0       0        0        30       1      2         16        1               53                884
     5:55 PM        0         0       0            2         0       0        0        40       0      3         12        0               57                853
 Peak 15-Min             Northbound                     Southbound                 Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates        Left     Thru    Right         Left     Thru    Right     Left    Thru     Right   Left      Thru     Right
  All Vehicles     12         0      36           28         0       4        4      436        0     16        444       28                       1008
 Heavy Trucks       4         0       0            0         0       0        0        12       0      0         20        0                        36
  Pedestrians                 0                              0                          0                         0                                  0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 3/9/2012 10:14 AM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Tom McCall Rd -- OR 126                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10641702
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                              DATE: Tue, Aug 02 2011
                    151          34                        Peak-Hour: 3:20 PM -- 4:20 PM                                  4.0         5.9

                     56    2     93
                                                          Peak 15-Min: 3:30 PM -- 3:45 PM
                                                                                                                          7.1 0.0 2.2

       413   6                         26   392
                                                                                                            8.5   33.3                        0.0      8.2
             455          0.80        348
                                                                                                                  5.9                         8.6
       467   6                         18   588
                                                                                                            6.4   16.7                       11.1      5.6

                     9     2     40
                                                                                                                          11.1 0.0 10.0

                     26          51
                                                                                                                          11.5        9.8



                           0                                                                                               0     0    0


                                                                                                                  0                            0

             0                          0                                                                         0                            0

                                                                                                                  0                            0


                           0                                                                                               0     0    0




                          NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                       NA                                                                          NA                          NA




                          NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count          Tom McCall Rd                   Tom McCall Rd                OR 126                       OR 126
     Period            (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                  Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                      Totals
     2:50 PM        0     0       3    0            2     0     2     0     4     42      1      0     1       16      6         0           77
     2:55 PM        0     0       4    0            4     0     1     0     2     29      0      0     2       30      1         0           73              806
     3:00 PM        1     0       1    0            2     2     3     0     1     27      0      0     1       27      3         0           68              792
     3:05 PM        1     1       7    0            3     0     0     0     0     28      0      0     1       26     11         0           78              808
     3:10 PM        0     0       0    0            4     0     2     0     0     25      1      0     3       31      3         0           69              810
     3:15 PM        0     0       5    0            6     0     1     0     3     26      1      0     1       31      5         0           79              834
     3:20 PM        2     0       3    0            4     0     2     0     0     25      0      0     3       38      1         0           78              854
     3:25 PM        1     0       3    0            9     0     4     0     1     41      0      0     1       19      2         0           81              875
     3:30 PM        1     0       5    0           11     0     8     0     0     51      1      0     1       32      2         0          112              928
     3:35 PM        1     1       3    0           20     0     9     0     3     45      0      0     1       24      6         0          113              974
     3:40 PM        1     0       3    0           16     0    14     0     0     35      3      0     1       32      1         0          106             1007
     3:45 PM        2     0       3    0            4     0     4     0     0     37      0      0     2       26      2         0           80             1014
     3:50 PM        0     0       1    0            4     2     1     0     0     37      0      0     1       32      1         0           79             1016
     3:55 PM        0     0       2    0            6     0     2     0     0     42      0      0     2       24      2         0           80             1023
     4:00 PM        0     0       9    0            6     0     3     0     0     37      0      0     1       25      4         0           85             1040
     4:05 PM        0     1       3    0            6     0     6     0     2     35      0      0     2       19      3         0           77             1039
     4:10 PM        1     0       2    0            4     0     3     0     0     27      2      0     2       45      1         0           87             1057
     4:15 PM        0     0       3    0            3     0     0     0     0     43      0      0     1       32      1         0           83             1061
     4:20 PM        0     0       0    0            5     0     3     0     0     33      0      0     1       30      1         0           73             1056
     4:25 PM        1     0       3    0            4     0     2     0     1     26      0      0     5       30      2         0           74             1049
     4:30 PM        1     1       4    0            4     0     3     0     0     55      1      0     0       37      3         0          109             1046
     4:35 PM        0     0       0    0            4     0     7     0     1     38      0      0     1       25      5         0           81             1014
     4:40 PM        2     0       1    0            7     0     2     0     0     34      0      0     0       28      3         0           77              985
     4:45 PM        0     0       5    0            5     0     2     0     1     30      0      0     1       20      3         0           67              972
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles     12     4      44    0          188     0   124     0    12    524     16      0    12      352     36         0                  1324
 Heavy Trucks       4     0       4                 0     0     8           4     28      4            0       36      0                             88
  Pedestrians             0                               0                        0                            0                                     0
   Bicycles         0     0       0                 0     0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 3/9/2012 10:14 AM                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
