                   REQUEST FOR COUNCIL ACTION
                                  DATE ACTION REQUESTED: July 6, 2015
Order XX                Ordinance __     Resolution       Motion            Information ___
No. 2015-0037           No.              No.
                                                          Contact Person (Preparer) for this
SUBJECT: Comprehensive Plan Map Amendment            Motion: Steve Olson, Associate Planner
from LDR to HDR, and Zoning Map Amendment            Dept.: Community Development
from R-1 to R-3 for a property located at 1317 Villa File No.: CPA-15-001/ZMA3-15-001
Road.
HEARING TYPE:          LEGISLATIVE           QUASI-JUDICIAL            NOT APPLICABLE

RECOMMENDATION:
The Planning Commission adopted Resolution 2015-307, recommending that the City Council adopt the
proposed Comprehensive Plan map amendment/Zoning map amendment for 1317 Villa Road. Order 2015-
0037 would amend the Comprehensive Plan map designation from Low Density Residential (LDR) to High
Density Residential (HDR) and amend the Zoning map designation from R-1 (Low Density Residential) to
R-3 (High Density Residential) for a property located at 1317 Villa Road, Yamhill County tax lot 3217BC-
800.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:

Proposal                                               Location map
Amend the Comprehensive Plan Map designation
of the property at 1317 Villa Road from LDR
(Low Density Residential) to HDR (High Density
Residential) and amend the Zoning designation
from R-1 (Low Density Residential) to R-3 (High
Density Residential). If this application is
approved then the applicant will apply for design
review approval for a multifamily apartment
project, to be named Martell Commons.

Site Information
The site is approximately 5.94 acres on tax lot
3217BC-800. The property is bifurcated by the
railroad right of way; the main parcel is 5.91
acres, and the small remnant parcel is 0.03 acres.
The remnant parcel is south of the railroad tracks
and entirely within the City stream corridor
overlay, so no development is proposed for the
remnant parcel. The main parcel contains a single
family house, and has remained in farm use as the
area around it urbanized.




City of Newberg: ORDER NO. 2015-0037                                                               PAGE 1
Surrounding uses:
    North across Park Lane: Developed with predominantly single family detached homes with primarily
      R-2 zoning, with some R-1 zoning along Villa Road.
    East across Villa Road: Developed with single family detached homes to the northeast. Most of the
      property east of the site adjacent to Villa Road is zoned either Institutional or R-1, but is
      undeveloped because it is in the stream corridor.
    West: The site abuts existing single family detached homes in an R-1 zone.
    South across the railroad corridor and the stream corridor: There are single family detached homes in
      an R-1 zone and George Fox University facilities to the southeast. To the southwest are duplexes that
      are part of the Friendsview Manor development.

Process:
This is a Type III application for a Comprehensive Plan map amendment and a Zoning map amendment. A
Type III application of this nature goes first to the Planning Commission for a recommendation and then to
the City Council for a final decision.

The applicant held a neighborhood meeting in December 2014 to discuss the proposal and the concept plan.
This was not required by the city, but enabled the applicant to learn about neighborhood concerns about
traffic impacts, the number of units proposed, and adequate parking. Based on the feedback, the applicant
revised the concept plan to reduce the number of units, increase the amount of parking provided per dwelling
unit, and reduce the number of buildings along the western property line.

It is important to note that the concept plan is not being approved at this time, and the applicant is not bound
by the concept plan in this Comprehensive Plan map amendment/Zoning map amendment application. If this
Comprehensive Plan map amendment/Zoning map amendment application is approved then the applicant
will apply for design review approval. A design review application would include more detailed information
about the design of the buildings, parking layout, preliminary grading and utility plans, landscaping and
outdoor recreation area plans, and street frontage improvements. A design review application is a Type II
process: there is public notice mailed to all property owners within 500 feet, the site will be posted with
signs, and there is a two-week period to submit public comment. The Community Development Director
then makes a decision on the application. Anyone who submits a comment is sent notice of the decision, and
there is a two-week appeal period. If the decision is appealed then it goes to the Planning Commission for a
public hearing and review.

Public and agency comments (summarized below; the full comments are included in Attachment 6):
   Agency Comments:
    Oregon Dept. of Transportation:
       Gerry Juster and I have reviewed this application and have determined that ODOT will not have any
       comments. This is due to the limited impact we expect the project will have on state facilities.
       Thank you for referring this application to ODOT for review. Please feel free to contact me or Gerry
       if you have questions or need additional information.
       Dan Fricke, Senior Transportation Planner
    Oregon Dept. of State Lands: A state permit will not be required for the proposed project because
       based on the submitted site plan the project appears to avoid impacts to jurisdictional wetlands and
       waters. This is a preliminary jurisdictional determination and is advisory only.
    PGE: Reviewed, no conflict



City of Newberg: ORDER NO. 2015-0037                                                                      PAGE 2
        Waste Management: Reviewed, no conflict. Will need input at the building permit stage for trash and
         recycling.
        Fire Dept: Reviewed, no conflict
        Police Dept.: This is a summary – the full comment is included in Attachment 6. The Department has
         concerns about pedestrian/vehicle mixed use safety, parking, and the number of driveways within
         such close proximity of one another. Park Lane must be widened to a full street width. The on-site
         parking for the apartments seems adequate, but inevitably there will be some on-street parking;
         consider removing on-street parking along the north side of the street to minimize congestion. It is
         very important that pedestrian and bike improvements are completed along Villa Road for safety.
         The driveway on Villa Road is very close to Park Lane, and may create a safety issue.

    Public Comments:
    The Planning Commission received several public comment letters (in Attachment 6) and substantial
    oral testimony at the 5/14/15 hearing (summarized in the minutes, Attachments 2 and 3). The primary
    concerns were about pedestrian and vehicle safety on Villa Road, and the potential for increased traffic
    and on-street parking in the neighborhood. Some commented that R-3 development should not be placed
    next to R-1 single-family homes, and that there were other locations better suited to R-3. There were also
    concerns about the impact to wildlife from development of the site. Please refer to the attachments for
    more details.


Issues & Analysis summary:
    1. Police Dept. comments: The department raised many valid concerns about street improvements,
       pedestrian safety, parking, and driveway locations. The decision on these design issues will actually
       be made during the design review application phase. The applicant is now aware of the Police
       Department concerns. If the Comprehensive Plan map amendment/Zoning map amendment is
       approved then the applicant will need to address these issues in their design review application. The
       concept plan for the site is not being approved as part of this application, and no decisions are being
       made on driveway location, parking, or the design of the street improvements that will be required.

    2. Do the relevant Comprehensive Plan policies support the change:
       The Comprehensive Plan includes policies regarding high density housing location, dispersal of high
       density housing, design of high density housing, and compatibility with surrounding development.
       These policies are addressed in more detail in the findings. The proposed site is adjacent to a major
       collector road, which complies with one of the Comprehensive Plan policies for the location of
       multifamily housing. Changing the site to HDR would comply with the city goal of dispersing high
       density housing throughout the city instead of concentrating it in any one area. In addition, any R-3
       development will have to meet the additional design review criteria for multi-unit housing. Overall,
       the proposed Comprehensive Plan map amendment/Zoning map amendment promote the efficient
       use of land within the urban growth boundary, improves housing diversity in this part of the city,
       provides multifamily housing close to urban services and employment, and is located along a major
       collector; the amendment is supported by Comprehensive Plan policies.

    3. Does the city need more HDR land and multifamily housing: The applicant has prepared a
       Housing Needs Analysis, which shows that Newberg does not have enough land in the urban growth
       boundary in any of the housing categories (low density, medium density or high density) to
       accommodate growth over the next 15 years. The greatest shortfall, however, is in the HDR category.
       Newberg has the current capacity to accommodate 91% of the projected LDR need, 51% of the
       projected Medium Density Residential (MDR) need, but only 11% of the projected HDR need.

City of Newberg: ORDER NO. 2015-0037                                                                    PAGE 3
         Changing LDR land to HDR would help address the shortfall, as the city currently has a greater need
         for HDR land than LDR land.

    4. Is this site suitable for HDR land: The main issues to address are the traffic impacts, and whether
       there are adequate public facilities to support the potential development
            Transportation improvements: The proposed development site is located adjacent to Villa
                Road and Park Lane and would take direct access from both streets. Park Lane is currently
                developed below City residential street standards. The future development would construct a
                1/2 street improvement on the south side of Park Lane to residential standards, and dedicate
                additional right of way. Villa Road is currently constructed below City major collector
                standards. The future development would construct a 1/2 street improvement on the west
                side of Villa Road to major collector standards, and dedicate additional right of way. The
                street frontage improvements and right of way dedication would take place after design
                review approval for the apartment project.

                  City transportation project: The City is currently beginning design of transportation
                   improvements to Villa Road from Haworth Avenue to Crestview Drive. This project is on
                   the city Capital Improvement Project list, and funded by transportation system development
                   charges (SDCs) the city levies on new development. During the development application
                   review for this apartment project, coordination of street improvements with the City-led
                   project will be necessary, and will be completed at that time. This project is not designed yet,
                   but a primary goal of the project is to improve pedestrian and bicycle facilities on this section
                   of Villa Road. The City does not yet know if there will be room for sidewalks and bike lanes
                   on both sides of the road, but believes there is room for a sidewalk and bike lane on at least
                   one side of the road.

                  Traffic impact: The application includes a traffic study that analyzes the impact the proposal
                   would have on trip generation & distribution, safety, and operational functions through the
                   year 2035 for several surrounding intersections. According to the applicant’s traffic impact
                   study, all intersections studied currently operate at acceptable levels of service during the
                   weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hours.

                   2016 Year Analysis
                      All of the study intersections except the Villa Road/HWY 99 intersection are forecast to
                      meet operation standards during the weekday p.m. peak hour. The site is anticipated to
                      be built out in 2016.
                           Without development of the site, the intersection of Highway 99 and Villa Road
                              will exceed capacity (ODOT’s standard is a v/c ratio of 0.85). The intersection
                              will operate at a v/c of 0.88.
                           With development of the site, the intersection of Villa Road and HWY 99 will
                              still operate at a v/c of 0.88. The development’s impact to this intersection is
                              minimal. All other study intersections operate at acceptable LOS. If the site is
                              developed in 2016 then no mitigation would be needed at the study intersections.

                   2035 Year Analysis
                      All of the study intersections except the Villa Road/HWY 99 intersection and the Villa
                      Road/Fulton Street intersection are forecast to meet operation standards during the
                      weekday p.m. peak hour.


City of Newberg: ORDER NO. 2015-0037                                                                          PAGE 4
                                 Without development of the site, the Villa Road/HWY 99 intersection is forecast
                                  to operate with a v/c ratio of 1.11 which exceeds the ODOT standard of 0.85, and
                                  the Villa Road/Fulton Street intersection is forecast to operate with a LOS F
                                  which exceeds the City’s standard of LOS D or better.
                                 With development of the site, all of the study intersections except the Villa
                                  Road/HWY 99 and Villa Road/Fulton Street intersections are forecast to continue
                                  meeting operational standards during the weekday p.m. peak hour. With full
                                  development of the site, the v/c ratio of the Villa Road/HWY 99 intersection is
                                  forecast to operate at 1.12 which is an increase of 0.01 from the undeveloped
                                  conditions. The impact of this development on that intersection is minimal, and
                                  no mitigation is proposed. ODOT has commented that the impact on state
                                  facilities is limited, and they had no additional requirements. No mitigation
                                  would be required for this project at the Villa/Fulton intersection, as the
                                  intersection will operate acceptably in 2016 upon development. The decrease in
                                  LOS to F for Villa/Fulton in 2035 is due to the increase in background traffic, as
                                  the intersection is expected to have a LOS of F in 2035 whether or not this site is
                                  developed. Appropriate changes to the traffic control at that intersection will be
                                  considered at that time (the traffic study suggested a 4-way stop as mitigation).

                   No mitigation will be required at nearby intersections. The applicant is still responsible for
                   the cost of street frontage improvements on Park Lane and Villa Road, however, and will
                   also pay Transportation SDCs toward their general impact on the transportation system (the
                   current transportation SDC is $2,143.68 per multifamily dwelling unit, so this becomes a
                   significant cost for a project with 128 dwelling units). SDC rates increase over time, so the
                   actual SDC to the applicant will depend on when development occurs.

                  Sight Distance: The sight distance from the proposed site’s frontage on Park Lane is
                   adequate for cars entering and exiting the site. The sight distance from the proposed site’s
                   Villa Road frontage may not be adequate depending on the final profile and alignment of
                   Villa Road. If adequate sight distance is not possible, the Villa Road access will be limited
                   to right in/right out movements only. Villa Road is proposed to continue as a 25 MPH road
                   through the developments frontage and through the large sag vertical curve to the south of
                   the property. Excessive speeds are a concern in this area. To help mitigate this problem, a
                   landscaped median (or other approved traffic calming measure) in a portion of the site’s Villa
                   Road frontage will be evaluated at the time of development. This can also serve to provide
                   right in/right out access restrictions at the Villa Road driveway access.

                  Public utility infrastructure: The proposed site has existing water and stormwater facilities
                   to serve the maximum density of the proposed zone change. There is an existing 8”
                   waterline in Villa Road and Park Lane and there is a 21” stormwater line at the southern
                   boundary of the property. The application contains a report on the water system which shows
                   adequate capacity. The post developed stormwater runoff rates will match pre-developed
                   rates with properly designed stormwater facilities.

                   The existing sewer system directly downstream of the site is currently at capacity and
                   development of the site at the existing R-1 zoning density would put several pipe segments
                   over capacity. A change in zoning from R-1 to R-3 would not significantly increase the
                   demand on the sewer system, and would not require a larger pipe size than is required with


City of Newberg: ORDER NO. 2015-0037                                                                           PAGE 5
                   the current zoning. The specifics of pipe upsizing will be determined during development
                   application review.

                  Availability of public services: The proposed site is within walking distance of many
                   services: Within ¼ mile of a small CPRD park (College Park, off Sierra Vista), the CPRD
                   pool, and George Fox University; within ½ mile of Joan Austin Elementary school; within ¾
                   mile of Newberg High School, and the Portland Road commercial area. This meets the
                   Comprehensive Plan policies of high density housing being located near public services and
                   public open spaces. It also means that residents of the proposed high density housing may
                   walk or bike to commercial areas, jobs, parks, and schools. Public transit is available on
                   Hwy 99W. An apartment project will pay a School District construction excise tax (currently
                   $1 per square foot for residential construction) and a Parks District SDC (currently $1,475
                   per dwelling unit).

The Planning Commission held hearings on May 14, 2015 and June 11, 2015 to consider the proposal. After
reviewing the evidence and hearing substantial public testimony, the Planning Commission adopted
Resolution 2015-307 recommending that the City Council approve the requested Comprehensive Plan map
amendment and Zoning map amendment. The proposal meets the applicable Development Code criteria and
Comprehensive Plan goals and policies, as summarized by the following points:
     There is a demonstrated need for HDR land in the city.
     There is adequate infrastructure to serve the site (water, sewer, stormwater and transportation), in
       part because of the City transportation improvement project for Villa Road.
     The site is adjacent to a major collector street, and has close proximity to many public services.

FISCAL IMPACT: No direct fiscal impact. The applicant must pay for any costs associated with future
development, such as street and utility improvements.

STRATEGIC ASSESSMENT (RELATE TO COUNCIL GOALS):
Some of the Council goals are:
    Create a clear vision for the future of Newberg, maintaining its small town feel.
    Maintain and modernize the City’s transportation and utilities infrastructure.
    Implement the highest practicable environmental standards

The Council’s adopted Comprehensive Plan for Newberg contains goals to: provide a range of housing
types and locations to ensure there is an adequate supply of housing for City residents of various income
levels; locate high density housing near collector or arterial streets; and not to concentrate multifamily
housing in particular areas of the city.

Newberg has maintained the feel of an independent small town and resisted becoming a bedroom
community to the Portland metropolitan area in part because it has a diverse economy and a population
with a broad range of incomes and backgrounds. This proposal will help to provide a range of housing
types within Newberg. It would also assist in upgrading the transportation and utility infrastructure in the
area, and would be developed in accordance with Newberg’s latest stormwater standards to protect the
creek and downstream rivers. The multifamily zone would be located next to a major collector street,
and would help disperse multifamily housing within the city.




City of Newberg: ORDER NO. 2015-0037                                                                     PAGE 6
ATTACHMENTS:
Order 2015-0037 with:
        Exhibit A: Findings
        Exhibit B: Location Map
        Exhibit C: Legal Description
        Exhibit D: Comprehensive Plan map
        Exhibit E: Zoning map
1. Planning Commission Resolution 2015-307 with:
        Exhibit A: Findings
        Exhibit B: Location Map
        Exhibit C: Legal Description
        Exhibit D: Comprehensive Plan Map
        Exhibit E: Zoning Map
2. 5/14/15 Planning Commission Meeting Minutes
3. 6/11/15 Planning Commission Meeting Minutes DRAFT
4. Planning Commission Staff Report (to the 5/14/15 meeting)
5. Application
6. Public Comments
7. Newberg Development Code & Comprehensive Plan (by reference)




City of Newberg: ORDER NO. 2015-0037                              PAGE 7
                                            ORDER NO. 2015-0037

                   AN ORDER AMENDING THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP
                   DESIGNATION FROM LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (LDR) TO HIGH
                   DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (HDR) AND AMENDING THE ZONING
                   DESIGNATION FROM R-1 (LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL) TO R-3 (HIGH
                   DENSITY RESIDENTIAL) FOR A PROPERTY LOCATED AT 1317 VILLA
                   ROAD, YAMHILL COUNTY TAX LOT 3217BC-800.


                                                RECITALS:

1.       DJ2 Holdings, LLC submitted an application requesting a Comprehensive Plan map amendment
         from LDR (Low Density Residential) to HDR (High Density Residential) and a Zoning map
         amendment from R-1 (Low Density Residential) to R-3 (High Density Residential) for property
         located at 1317 Villa Road, Yamhill County tax lot 3217BC-800

2.       The Planning Commission held hearings to consider the proposal on May 14, 2015 and June 11,
         2015. The Commission took public testimony, deliberated, and found that the application met the
         applicable criteria in the Newberg Development Code, and the goals and policies of the Newberg
         Comprehensive Plan as shown in the findings in Exhibit A.

3.       At their June 11, 2015 meeting the Planning Commission adopted Resolution 2015-307,
         recommending that the City Council approve the requested Comprehensive Plan map amendment
         and Zoning map amendment.

4.       The City Council held a hearing on July 6, 2015 to consider the proposal. After reviewing the
         evidence and hearing public testimony, the City Council finds that the application meets the
         applicable Development Code criteria and Comprehensive Plan goals and policies for approval.

THE CITY OF NEWBERG ORDERS AS FOLLOWS:

1.       The Comprehensive Plan designation is changed from Low Density Residential (LDR) to High
         Density Residential (HDR), and the Zoning designation is changed from R-1 (Low Density
         Residential) to R-3 (High Density Residential) for the property located at 1317 Villa Road, Tax Lot
         3217BC-800, as shown in Exhibit B and described in Exhibit C. Exhibit B and C are hereby adopted
         and by this reference incorporated.

2.       The findings shown in Exhibit A are hereby adopted and by this reference incorporated.




City of Newberg: ORDER NO. 2015-0037                                                                   PAGE 1
3.       The Newberg Comprehensive Plan land need and supply tables shall be amended to reflect the
         change, and the Newberg Comprehensive Plan map and Zoning map shall be amended to reflect the
         change.

     EFFECTIVE DATE of this order is the day after the adoption date, which is: July 7, 2015.
ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Newberg, Oregon, this 6th day of July, 2015, by the
following votes: AYE:         NAY:                ABSENT:                    ABSTAIN:


                                            _______________________________
                                            Sue Ryan, City Recorder

ATTEST by the Mayor this 9th day of July, 2015.


____________________
Bob Andrews, Mayor


ATTACHED:
Exhibit A: Findings
Exhibit B: Location Map
Exhibit C: Legal Description
Exhibit D: Comprehensive Plan map
Exhibit E: Zoning map




City of Newberg: ORDER NO. 2015-0037                                                             PAGE 2
                                                                           Exhibit A: Findings to
                                                                              Order 2015-0037

1317 Villa Road Comprehensive Plan Map Amendment & Zoning Amendment,
                     File: CPA-15-001/ZMA3-15-001


Section I. Newberg Development Code § 15.302.030: Procedures for
Comprehensive Plan Map and Zoning Map Amendments.
(A) Type III Plan and zoning map amendments – one parcel or small group of parcels.

(3) Amendment Criteria. The owner must demonstrate compliance with the following criteria:
      (a) The proposed change is consistent with and promotes the goals and policies of the Newberg
      Comprehensive Plan and this Code;

Finding: Section II of these findings addresses the Comprehensive Plan goals and policies. It can be found that
this proposal is consistent with and promotes numerous applicable goals and policies, as summarized below.

Density: The site contains 5.94 acres, or 258,746 square feet. Assuming that the net site area after right-of-way
dedications will be approximately 85% of the gross area, there would be an approximate net site area of 219,934
square feet. If the site develops as R-1 it would be expected to have approximately 30 single family homes. In
the R-3 zone the site would allow an approximate maximum net density of 147 dwelling units and a minimum of
88 dwelling units. The actual density will depend on the final site design and will be limited by parking
requirements, open space requirements, and stormwater facilities, but is expected by the applicant to be
approximately 128 units.

        15.302.032 Purposes of each zoning district.
        A. R-1 Low Density Residential District.
                1. The purpose of this land use designation is to provide for low density urban single-family
                residential uses at an average overall density of 4.4 units per gross buildable acre in the
                district. It is intended to provide a stable and healthful environment together with the full
                range of urban services.
                2. Typical housing types will include single-family dwellings and planned unit developments.
                The district also is intended to allow low intensity institutional uses that operate consistent
                with peaceful enjoyment of residential neighborhoods. The R-1 district is intended to be
                consistent with the low density residential (LDR) designation of the comprehensive plan.
        C. R-3 High Density Residential District.
                1. The purpose of this land use designation is to provide multifamily dwellings of different
                types and styles at an average overall density of 16.5 units per gross buildable acre in the
                district.
               2. Typical housing types will include duplexes, multifamily dwellings, and manufactured
               dwelling and mobile home parks. The district also is intended to allow low intensity
               institutional uses that operate consistent with peaceful enjoyment of residential
               neighborhoods. Density may vary depending on lot size, off-street parking area,
               transportation, landscaping and other site considerations. The R-3 district is intended to be
               consistent with the high density residential (HDR) designation of the comprehensive plan.

Comprehensive Plan Housing Land Needs and Buildable Land Supply History
Newberg’s Comprehensive Plan has consistently shown a significant need for additional HDR (High Density
Residential) land.

2005 Comprehensive Plan Land Need and Supply Amendments
In 2005, the City Council adopted amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, including updated residential land
need and supply numbers for LDR (Low Density Residential), MDR (Medium Density Residential) and HDR (High
Density Residential) land designations. The updates were based on data from the Housing and Residential Land
Needs Report compiled by Johnson-Gardner in 2004. The amendments were adopted and acknowledged
through the post-acknowledgment plan amendment process in 2005. The 2005 Comprehensive Plan has
residential land data for the 20-year period from 2005-2025, and the future planning period out to 2040. That
data shows that the City had a demonstrated need for 89 buildable acres of HDR (High Density Residential)
through 2025, and an additional 83 acres of HDR land through 2040:

                      Buildable Acres
        Plan                              Buildable Acres      Surplus (Deficit)   Buildable Acres Needed
                       Needed 2005-
     Designation                           in UGB (2004)        for 2005-2025            2026-2040
                           2025
         LDR                612                 359                 (253)                   735
         MDR                173                 142                  (31)                   191
         HDR                 89                  13                  (76)                    83
        Total            874                    514                 (380)                   1009
  Source: Newberg Ordinance 2005-2626

In 2009 the City proposed an update to the Housing Element of the Comprehensive Plan. This item was appealed
to LUBA and remanded; it has not yet been revised and readopted, so the 2005 amendments are the latest
acknowledged estimates.

This application: For the purposes of this application, the firm of Cogan Owens Greene prepared a housing
needs analysis using recent data on buildable lands, and a 2012 population projection for Newberg that has
been adopted by Yamhill County as part of a coordinated population projection for every part of Yamhill County.

       Excerpted from the application – Population Forecast:
       Portland State University’s Population Research Center developed a future population
       forecast for the Newberg Urban Area. This forecast was adopted by Yamhill County as
       the coordinated population forecast required by state law.
       This forecast is shown in Table III-2.
        Table III-2. Future Population Forecast – Newberg Urban Area
        Year Population Forecast
        2015    24,663
        2020    28,250 (corrected by city staff – the applicant used 25,250, which was a typographical error)
        2025    32,213
        2030    35,408
        2032    36,610
        2035    38,490
        Source: Population Research Center, Portland State University, Population Forecasts for
        Yamhill County, its Cities and Unincorporated Area, 2011-2035, 2012.


        Excerpted from the application – Housing Needs Analysis:
        Cogan Owens Greene prepared a Housing Needs Analysis (Exhibit G) based on the 2009
        inventory updated with current GIS data provided by City Staff, the projections from the
        Portland State Report, and refined for the remand findings from LUBA. This supplemental
        report is included in Exhibit G. It confirms that there will be a shortage of land available
        in 2030 for LDR, MDR, and HDR lands:




The proposed amendment would add 5.94 acres of HDR land to the buildable land inventory. This would meet
about 10% of the HDR need through 2030. The proposed amendment would decrease the amount of buildable
LDR land by 5.94 acres, or 1.5% of the LDR need through 2030. The city needs to have an adequate supply of all
types of land. This change from LDR to HDR is justified because there is currently a greater shortfall in HDR.

Adequate Infrastructure to Serve the Site
The applicant included an Infrastructure Analysis report. The proposed site has existing water and stormwater
facilities to serve the maximum density of the proposed zone change. There is an existing 8” waterline in Villa
Road and Park Lane and there is a 21” stormwater line at the southern boundary of the property. The
application contains a report on the water system which shows adequate capacity. The post developed
stormwater runoff rates will match pre-developed rates with properly designed stormwater facilities.

The existing sewer system directly downstream of the site is currently at capacity and development of the site at
the existing R-1 zoning would put several pipe segments over capacity. A change in zone from R-1 to R-3 would
not significantly increase the demand on the sewer system, and would not require a larger pipe size than is
required with the current zoning. The specifics of pipe upsizing would be determined during development
application review.

The proposed development site is located adjacent to Villa Road and Park Lane and would take direct access
from both streets. Park Lane is currently developed below City residential street standards. The development
would construct a 1/2 street improvement on the south side of Park Lane to residential standards. Villa Road is
currently developed below City major collector standards. The development would construct a 1/2 street
improvement on the west side of Villa Road to major collector standards. Right-of-way dedication would be
required along both street frontages; the extent of dedication would be determined at the design review phase.

The City is currently beginning design of transportation improvements to Villa Road from Hayworth Avenue to
Crestview Drive as a planned Capital Improvement Project. The project intends to improve the vertical alignment
of the road and complete multimodal improvements along Villa. During the development application review,
coordination of street improvements will be necessary, and will be completed at that time.

According to the applicant’s traffic impact study, all of the study intersections except the Villa Road/HWY 99
intersection are forecast to meet operation standards during the weekday p.m. peak hour at the time of
development in 2016. The impact of this development on that intersection is minimal and no mitigation is
proposed at the time of development. No mitigation would be required at study intersections upon
development in 2016. In the year 2035, all of the study intersections except the Villa Road/HWY 99 intersection
and the Villa Road/Fulton Street intersection are forecast to meet operation standards during the weekday p.m.
peak hour. The impact of this development on those intersections in the year 2035 is minimal and no mitigation
is necessary. ODOT has commented that the impact of the development at the Villa/99W intersection is limited,
and had no additional comments or requirements.

Availability of Public Services
The proposed site is within walking distance of many services: Within ¼ mile of a small CPRD park (College Park,
off Sierra Vista), the CPRD pool, and George Fox University; within ½ mile of Joan Austin Elementary school;
within ¾ mile of Newberg High School, A-dec’s industrial site, and the Portland Road commercial area. This
meets the Comprehensive Plan policies of high density housing being located near public services and public
open spaces. It also means that residents of the proposed high density housing may walk or bike to commercial
areas, jobs, parks, and schools. Public transit is available on Highway 99W.

Site is Suitable for HDR Development
The proposed site is suitable for HDR development because it meets the Comprehensive Plan policies of high
density housing location, dispersal of high density housing, design of high density housing, and compatibility
with surrounding development. The proposed site is adjacent to a major collector road which will provide
adequate access for higher density housing. There are few apartments north of the railroad tracks, so approval
would help the dispersal of R-3 housing within the city. Future development on the site will be compatible with
the surrounding area due to the design review criteria for multifamily housing and due to setbacks, lot coverage
limits, height limits, and landscaping buffer requirements. For example, the maximum permitted building height
in R-3 is limited to 30 feet (the same maximum height as R-1) for a distance of 50 feet from the abutting
boundary of a R-1 district. This ensures that building heights in R-3 will be compatible with abutting R-1
properties.

The application meets this criterion because the proposed change from LDR/R-1 to HDR/R-3 is consistent with
many goals and policies in the Comprehensive Plan, and the Development Code.



        (b) Public facilities and services are or can be reasonably made available to support the uses
        allowed by the proposed change.


Finding: The application included an Infrastructure Analysis report. Public facilities and services are available to
support the proposed uses. There is an existing 10-inch and 12-inch sanitary sewer line to the property, with a
manhole connection at the southern edge of the property. The applicant’s sanitary sewer calculations report
indicates, and City staff concurs, that there is not adequate capacity in the downstream sanitary sewer system to
support further development, but that the sewer system can be upsized to support the development. The
sanitary sewer master plan identifies the necessary pipe size required to serve the basin if fully developed with
current zoning. The zone change at the maximum density does not change the needed pipe diameter needed
for development in the basin. There are existing water lines in Villa Road and Park Lane. A fire flow analysis will
be completed at the time of development and water pipe upsizing will be completed with the development.
There is adequate capacity to the site which can be reasonably provided through the City’s water storage and
distribution system. There is an existing 21” stormwater line at the southern boundary of the site which could
serve the site.

The site is accessed by Park Lane and Villa Road, both of which are not fully improved streets. A 1/2 street
improvement on Park Lane and Villa Road will be required at the time of development. Additional right of way
dedication will also be required. Park Lane is a residential street with an ultimate curb-to-curb width of 32 feet.
Villa Road is a Major Collector with an ultimate curb-to-curb width of 34 feet with two 12-foot travel lanes, 5-
foot bike lanes, and setback sidewalk. Portions of Villa Road may include a landscaped median. No parking will
be allowed on Villa Road. According to the applicant’s traffic impact study, all of the study intersections except
the Villa Road/HWY 99 intersection are forecast to meet operation standards during the weekday p.m. peak
hour at the time of development in 2016. The impact of this development on that intersection is minimal and
no mitigation is proposed at the time of development. In the year 2035, all of the study intersections except the
Villa Road/HWY 99 intersection and the Villa Road/Fulton Street intersection are forecast to meet operation
standards during the weekday p.m. peak hour. The impact of this development on the Villa Road/Hwy 99W
intersection and the Villa/Fulton intersection in the year 2035 is minimal and no mitigation is necessary. The
increase in traffic at both of these intersections in 2035 is primarily due to the increase in background traffic.

The application meets this criterion because public facilities and services are or can be reasonably made
available to support the uses allowed by the proposed change from LDR/R-1 to HDR/R-3.
        (c) Compliance with the State Transportation Planning Rule (OAR 660-012-0060) for
        proposals that significantly affect transportation facilities.


Finding: The State Transportation Planning Rule is meant to determine whether proposals “significantly affect”
existing or planned transportation facilities, and if they do affect them, to ensure that they are properly
mitigated. The Rule says that:

        “a plan or land use regulation amendment significantly affects a transportation facility if it would: (a)
        Change the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; (b) Change
        standards implementing a functional classification system; or (c) As measured at the end of the planning
        period identified in the adopted transportation system plan: (A) Allow land uses or levels of development
        that would result in types of levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional
        classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; (B) Reduce the performance of an existing
        or planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the
        TSP or comprehensive plan; or (C) Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation
        facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard
        identified in the TSP or comprehensive plan.”

The proposed plan amendment site is located adjacent to Villa Road, which is classified as a Major Collector in
the City’s Transportation System Plan, and Park Lane, which is classified as a Residential Street in the City’s
Transportation System Plan. The proposal would not: (a) change the functional classification of Villa Road or
Park Lane; or (b) change standards implementing a functional classification system.

One of the main purposes of the traffic impact study included with the applicant’s application package is to
determine whether the project meets subsection (c) of the Transportation Planning Rule. The traffic study
analyzed the trip generation and distribution, safety analysis, and operational analysis of the proposed project
to determine the impact the proposal will have on the transportation system. The trip generation is based on
the maximum possible gross density allowed by the proposed zone; in this case that would be 168 possible
dwelling units. That number is compared with the trips that would be generated by the possible maximum
density allowed by the R-1 zone, 30 units. The traffic study indicates that the proposed zone change could result
in a net increase of 74 trips during the evening peak hour, with 25 exiting the site and 49 entering the site. In
the morning peak hour, the maximum density could result in a net increase of 55 trips, with 9 entering and 46
exiting the site. The actual trips generated by the site may be fewer due to the unlikelihood of the site being
built out at the maximum density – with the topographic and environmental constraints, the site build out will
more likely be around 128 units.

Sight distance from the site frontage was examined and determined to be adequate along Park Lane. Sight
distance from the site frontage along Villa Road is not adequate. Depending on the ultimate vertical and
horizontal profiles of Villa Road, the Villa Road access may be limited to right in/right out access only. A
landscaped median would be installed on Villa Road to facilitate this restriction, as well as to provide for some
natural traffic calming.
During a five year period between January 2009 and December 2013, there were no accidents reported at any of
the study intersections except for the Villa Road/HWY 99 intersection. At this intersection there were 33
crashes, 24 of which were rear-end collisions. The crash rate per million entering vehicles at this intersection
was below 1.0. Additionally, the crash history for the segment of Villa Road, not including the study
intersections, was analyzed between Park Lane and HWY 99. Of the four crashes reported in this segment, three
involved bicycles. Bicycle and pedestrian improvements are planned for the development, which will help
mitigate the bicycle incidents. No mitigations are proposed for the Villa Road/HWY 99 intersection.

The traffic study also looked at capacity analysis for the area and surrounding intersections for the expected
project build-out in 2016 and to 2035. Capacity analysis looks at the volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratio for
intersections; in other words, how much traffic an intersection can handle before it’s at peak capacity, which
would be a ratio of 1.0. The intersection is then given a letter grade ranging from A (best) to F (worst) for its
level of service based on the v/c ratio for the intersection. The traffic study analysis shows that all of the
surrounding intersections are operating at an acceptable level of service under all analysis scenarios, except for
the Villa Road/HWY99 intersection in 2016 and 2035, and the Villa Road/Fulton Street intersection in 2035.

        With full build out in 2016, the Villa Road/HWY 99 intersection is forecast to operate at a v/c ratio of
         0.88 which is over the ODOT standard of 0.85. Without this development, the v/c ratio would be 0.88.
         The impact of this development is minimal at this intersection. In the 2035 analysis, the Villa
         Road/HWY 99 intersection is forecasted to operate at a v/c ratio of 1.12 with full development of the
         site and 1.11 without development of the site. This also is a minimal impact and no mitigations is
         proposed. ODOT has confirmed this by stating that the project will have a limited impact on state
         facilities, and did not have any additional comments.

        The intersection of Villa Road/Fulton Street in 2035 is anticipated to have a level of service of F with or
         without full build out of this proposed development. However, at the 2016 build-out, the Villa
         Road/Fulton intersection is forecast to operate at a level of service D, which is within City standards.
         Because of this, no mitigation to this intersection is anticipated at the time of development until a
         future date when the intersection warrants mitigation.

According to the traffic study, the future trips generated from the proposed zone change will not “significantly
affect” the transportation system. Less than 400 of the additional daily trips are anticipated to reach the
Villa/99W intersection, which under the Oregon Highway Plan standards does not cause “further degradation”
of state highway facilities. ODOT has stated that the project will have a limited impact on state facilities, and did
not have additional comments or requirements. Therefore, the proposal meets the State Transportation
Planning Rule because it does not significantly affect transportation facilities: (A) It does not allow a level of
development that would result in levels of travel inconsistent with the functional classification of the existing
transportation facilities; (B) It does not reduce the performance of the existing transportation facilities below
the minimum acceptable performance standards; and (C) It does not significantly worsen the performance of an
existing transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable
performance standard.
Section II. Applicable Statewide Planning Goals and Newberg Comprehensive
Plan Goals & Policies

        A. Citizen Involvement Goal
        Goal: To maintain a Citizen Involvement Program that offers citizens the opportunity for
        involvement in all phases of the planning process.

Finding: Part of the citizen involvement program includes opportunities for citizen involvement in planning. In
this case, citizens have an opportunity to comment on this proposal, both in writing and by testifying at either
the Planning Commission or City Council hearings. In addition, the applicant for this proposal held a
neighborhood meeting for the purpose of discussing the project with neighbors before the official public process
started. This application is consistent with this goal because the public hearing process offers citizens the
opportunity to comment on the proposal, and appeal the decision if they are unsatisfied.

        Statewide Planning Goal 10: To provide for the housing needs of citizens of the state.

        Buildable lands for residential use shall be inventoried and plans shall encourage the
        availability of adequate numbers of needed housing units at price ranges and rent levels which
        are commensurate with the financial capabilities of Oregon households and allow for
        flexibility of housing location, type and density.

        NCP I. Housing Goals and Policies
        Goal: To provide for a diversity in the type, density and location of housing within the City to
        ensure there is an adequate supply of affordable housing units to meet the needs of City
        residents of various income levels.

        2. Location Policies. a: Medium and high density areas should be located for immediate access
        to collector streets or minor arterials and should not cause traffic to move through low density
        areas. High density areas should be easily accessible to arterial streets. They should also be
        located near commercial services and public open spaces.

        3. Mix Policies. b: Low and moderate income housing should not be concentrated within
        particular areas of the City.

        3.j: The City shall encourage innovation in housing types and design as a means of offering a
        greater variety of housing and reducing housing costs.

        3.k: The City shall encourage an adequate supply of rental housing dispersed throughout the
        city to meet the needs of renters.

Finding:

The City has an obligation, reflected here in the comprehensive plan policies, to ensure that there is adequate
housing of all density types and for every income level. The proposed zone change would help the City remedy
its deficit of available multi-family housing.
The proposed site is located adjacent to a major collector, and most traffic from the site is expected to use Villa
Road, not local residential streets. Villa Road gives easy access to Portland Road/Hwy 99W, a major arterial. In
addition, the site is within walking distance of many services: Within ¼ mile of a small CPRD park (College Park,
off Sierra Vista), the CPRD pool, and George Fox University; within ½ mile of Joan Austin Elementary school;
within ¾ mile of Newberg High School, A-dec’s industrial site, and the Portland Road commercial area. This
meets the Comprehensive Plan policies of high density housing being located near public services and public
open spaces. It also means that residents of the proposed high density housing may walk or bike to commercial
areas, jobs, parks, and schools. Public transit is available on Highway 99W.

Any future development on the site under the proposed R-3 zoning will require a design review process where
the applicant will need to meet not only the basic design review criteria, but also the additional multi-family
design review criteria. The City would have future opportunities to influence the design of the development and
encourage innovation of housing types and design. The proposal is consistent with many of the housing policies
in the Comprehensive Plan.

        J. Urban Design Goals and Policies
        Goal 1: To maintain and improve the natural beauty and visual character of the City.
        1. General Policies. b: Design review should be provided for all new developments more
        intensive than duplex residential use.

        1.1.l: The City shall encourage compatible architectural design of new structures in the
        community.

        1.1.n: The City shall encourage innovative design and ensure that developments consider site
        characteristics and the impact on surrounding areas.

        1.1.r: Developments of medium or high density shall be of a quality and design which will
        effectively offset the greater density.

Finding: Any future development on this property under the proposed R-3 zoning will require design review
approval. The Newberg Development Code also has supplementary design review standards that multi-family
developments must meet, including compatibility with adjacent sites. The site characteristics for future
development would be looked at closely to encourage the best design of the property and to properly mitigate
any impacts on surrounding uses. The proposal is consistent with many of the urban design goals and policies in
the Comprehensive Plan.

        K. Transportation Goals and Policies
        Goal 3: Promote reliance on multiple modes of transportation and reduce reliance on the
        automobile.
        Policy b.2: The City shall encourage higher density development in residential areas near
        transit corridors, commercial areas and employment centers, including the downtown.

Finding: The site is within walking distance of many services: Within ¼ mile of a small CPRD park (College Park,
off Sierra Vista), the CPRD pool, and George Fox University; within ½ mile of Joan Austin Elementary school;
within ¾ mile of Newberg High School, A-dec’s industrial site, and the Portland Road commercial area. This
means that residents of the proposed high density housing may walk or bike to commercial areas, jobs, parks,
and schools. Public transit is available on Highway 99W. The proposal is consistent with transportation goals
and policies in the Comprehensive Plan.



        L. Public Facilities and Services Goals and Policies
        Goal: To plan and develop a timely, orderly and efficient arrangement of public facilities and
        services to serve as a framework for urban development.

        1. All Facilities & Services Policies. f: Maximum efficiency for existing urban facilities and
        services will be encouraged though infill of vacant City land.

        2. Sewers and Water Policies. c: Developments with urban densities should be encouraged to
        locate within the area which can be serviced by Newberg’s present sanitary sewer system.

Finding: It is appropriate to use land within the city limits to its highest and best use in order to preserve the
efficiency of public facilities to serve urban development. The proposed site has existing sewer and water
facilities available, and with reasonable improvements can have adequate capacity to serve the maximum
density of the proposed zone change. It is more efficient to use an existing site such as this as opposed to
extending new public utilities to an undeveloped vacant parcel without such services.

There is an existing 12-inch sewer line with a manhole at the Southern property edge in Villa Road. The
application contains a report on sanitary sewer calculations done by 3J Engineering, calculating the demand flow
of the existing sewer line with existing & potential maximum R-1 density (1,225-gmp) and existing & potential
maximum R-3 density (1,242-gmp). The total existing flow in the 12-inch sewer, based on the City’s master plan,
is approximately 1,203-gpm. While the zone change would create a slight increase in sewer flows, the relative
increase to the existing system is only 3.2%, and only 1.4% over the allowed R-1 zoning. Therefore, the 12”
sewer pipe is currently at capacity, and any development of this site would place this pipe and downstream
pipes over capacity. The City’s master plan identifies segments of pipe in this area to be upsized to an 18” pipe.
As part of the development application, the applicant will study the flows in these pipe segments to verify the
master plan. Several segments of pipe may need to be upsized as part of the development.

Finding: Overall, the proposal is consistent with many goals and policies in the Comprehensive Plan regarding
public participation, housing, urban design, transportation, and public facilities.
Exhibit B: Location Map
Exhibit C: Legal Description
Exhibit D: Comprehensive Plan Map
Exhibit E: Zoning Map
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 2
ATTACHMENT 2
ATTACHMENT 2
ATTACHMENT 2
ATTACHMENT 2
ATTACHMENT 2
ATTACHMENT 2
                                                                                              ATTACHMENT 3
                                      NEWBERG PLANNING COMMISSION MINUTES
                                                         June 11, 2015, 7:00 PM
                                   PUBLIC SAFETY BUILDING (401 E. THIRD STREET)


Chair Gary Bliss called the meeting to order at 7:00 p.m.

ROLL CALL
Members Present:              Gary Bliss, Chair                       Philip Smith            Jason Dale
                              Matthew Fortner                         Allyn Edwards           Cathy Stuhr
                                                                      Luis Saavedra/student

Members Absent:               Art Smith excused

Staff Present:                Steve Olson, Associate Planner
                              Doug Rux, Community Development Director
                              Bobbie Morgan, Planning Secretary
                              Kaaren Hoffman, City Engineer

PUBLIC COMMENTS: None.

CONSENT CALENDAR: PC Philip Smith said there was an error in last month’s meeting minutes on page 3.
The comments he made were attributed to Commissioner Art Smith and should be corrected to his name.

MOTION: Commissioner Philip Smith moved to adopt the meeting minutes for May 14, 2015, as amended.
Seconded by Commissioner Cathy Stuhr and passed 6-0.

QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARING:

APPLICANT: DJ2 Holdings, LLC
REQUEST: Comprehensive Plan map amendment from LDR (low density residential) to
HDR (high density residential), with corresponding Zoning map amendment from R-1 to R-3.
LOCATION: 1317 Villa Road
TAX LOT: 3217BC-800 FILE NO.: CPA-15-001/ZMA3-15-001
RESOLUTION NO.: 2015-307
CRITERIA: Newberg Development Code 15.302.030(A) (3), applicable Comprehensive Plan goals and
policies

Chair Gary Bliss reopened the hearing at 7:05 p.m. He asked if any Commissioner had ex parte contact to
declare since the last hearing. There was none.

The public testimony portion of the hearing was closed at the meeting on May 14, 2015, and the hearing would
be continued at the point of deliberation.

Final Comments from Staff and recommendation:

AP Steve Olson commented the resolution was updated with that night’s date, but the contents were the same.
Staff recommended adoption of the resolution which included the findings that stated the proposal met the
Development Code criteria and applicable Comprehensive Plan Goals and Policies.



City of Newberg: Planning Commission Minutes (June 11, 2015)                                                Page 1 of 4
                                                                                          ATTACHMENT 3
PC Cathy Stuhr asked for clarification on page 466 & 467 of the packet regarding the State Transportation
Planning Rule. She questioned if the application met Criteria C as it worsened the performance of an
intersection, but the report said it would not significantly affect the transportation system.

AP Steve Olson replied ODOT’s analysis said it was at acceptable levels and did not significantly affect the
transportation system. They were relying on ODOT’s interpretation and analysis, and agreed with it.

Chair Gary Bliss asked about the City’s project on Villa Road. The design of the half street in front of this
project might put a height differential in the southbound and northbound lanes. Was there adequate room for
the road and sidewalks?

CE Kaaren Hoffman explained construction would begin in 2016. The design was not done yet to know what
the differential would be, or how it would be addressed. There would be bicycle and pedestrian connectivity,
but she did not know if they would be on both sides of the road or only one side.

Planning Commission Deliberation including discussion of criteria with findings of fact:

MOTION: Commissioner Philip Smith moved to adopt Resolution No. 2015-307 as prepared by staff.
Commissioner Allyn Edwards seconded the motion.

PC Phillip Smith said the proposal was to rezone from R-1 to R-3. Improvements were needed and the
developer would have to pay for the improvements. There was a need for R-3 land. The location was good and
fit the City’s adopted plan to spread R-3 through the City and not concentrate it in one area. The owner of the
land wanted to develop this way to meet the City’s needs. It did bring change to the neighborhood and the Code
protected what could be put on the property. The neighbors were concerned that R-3 would be too much, but
design review would get into the details which was not this current stage. There was also concern about safety,
especially regarding traffic and pedestrian access on Villa Road. The main complaint was due to the train
trestle, hill, and curve on Villa Road and testimony stated it presented an unsolvable problem. He did not agree
as good engineering could significantly improve the road. He especially wanted to see a street design that
addressed pedestrian, vehicle, and bicycle safety. He planned to vote in favor of the zone change.

PC Cathy Stuhr agreed traffic was the most important issue and there was a need for higher density land. They
heard loud and clear that it was already a bad situation and this project would likely worsen it. It would also
make it worse around George Fox. She questioned if the application met the State Transportation Planning
Rule and she thought it was possible to interpret that it did not. She was concerned about the issues of parking
and speeding that to date had not been solved. She was also concerned that there was adequate infrastructure to
serve the site. It was not efficient to put the highest possible density in an area that already had significant
pedestrian and bike traffic issues and unique characteristics. There were significant challenges to remedy the
existing conflicts that would be exacerbated by this project.

PC Allyn Edwards commented it had been determined that there was a need for high density housing. The type
of housing could be controlled through the design review process. The type of housing could also reduce the
concerns of traffic, such as condominiums or permanent housing that catered to families. He asked if the
sidewalks could be built around the trestle rather than through it.

City Engineer Kaaren Hoffman answered it was a possibility. The design would be completed in the fall/winter
of 2015.

PC Allyn Edwards thought there was a need and it was a matter of how the design review would be presented.

Student Luis Saavedra said it all depended on how it was designed.

City of Newberg: Planning Commission Minutes (June 11, 2015)                                             Page 2 of 4
                                                                                            ATTACHMENT 3
PC Jason Dale had no comments.

PC Matthew Fortner was most concerned about the safety. If they disregarded the warnings, it could be a
problem in the future. It was originally zoned R-1 for a reason. There were other properties in the City that
could be converted to R-3.

PC Phillip Smith discussed the definition of “significantly affect” and agreed with Commissioner Stuhr that this
project significantly affected the transportation system and needed to be mitigated. The real problem with Villa
Road was not this project but the larger development that would happen in the future on the north side of
Mountain View. He thought it met the definition and they could ask for mitigation. He did not think it could be
denied on that basis since it met City goals, served City interest, and was what the owner of the property wanted
to do.

Chair Gary Bliss had looked over the criteria for the zone change. There was a shortage of high density
residential. It provided diversity in housing. Public services could reasonably be made available. The sewer
issue could be addressed during design review. The City was going to make improvements to Villa Road.
Approving the rezoning was not approving the development. Conditions could be made on the development if
needed. He thought it was in compliance with the State Transportation Planning Rule, it met the objective of
the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Development Code, there was a public need, it was adjacent to a major
collector, and it provided an adequate supply of rental properties. The City and developer needed to work
together to come up with a plan where it could be done concurrently. He was ready to vote in favor of the
motion.

PC Cathy Stuhr asked if they were comfortable with the findings to support the decision. There had been many
comments made that the future road plan was going to address all of concerns that had been raised.

AP Steve Olson said they did not have any more information to add, as the Villa road improvement design was
not complete.

Chair Gary Bliss said in order to make a right in, right out work on Villa Road they needed a median as people
ignored signs. There needed to be a barrier.

PC Jason Dale thought whether this was developed as R-1 or R-3, the roadway would be designed the same.
The only difference was the volume of the traffic based upon the extra residents, but he did not think it was a
significant difference. He thought it should be approved.

Motion passed 5-1-1 with PC Cathy Stuhr opposed and PC Art Smith absent.


AP Steve Olson said the next step in the process was sending the recommendation to the City Council which
was scheduled for July 6.

ITEMS FROM STAFF:

CD Doug Rux reviewed the staff report he presented to the Council at the last Council meeting and stated the
Affordable Housing Commission had developed a set of recommendations on the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund that would go to the Council on June 15. Staff was continuing to have discussions regarding the
Crestview Crossing project.

ITEMS FROM COMMISSIONERS:


City of Newberg: Planning Commission Minutes (June 11, 2015)                                              Page 3 of 4
                                                                                           ATTACHMENT 3
PC Allyn Edwards commented on staff’s proactive role with the community.

CD Doug Rux said he, the City Manager, and staff were discussing meeting with people who had done
developments in Newberg in the past to get their perspective for what the issues were and what needed to be
adjusted. They were also looking at improving internal processes and staff reports to make things more user
friendly and transparent.

PC Allyn Edwards thanked him for the efforts being made.

Chair Gary Bliss adjourned the meeting at 7:55 p.m.

Approved by the Newberg Planning Commission this ____ day of ___________, 2015.


          _______________________________                      _____________________________
          Bobbie Morgan, Planning Secretary                    Gary Bliss, Planning Commission Chair




City of Newberg: Planning Commission Minutes (June 11, 2015)                                           Page 4 of 4
                                                 Community Development Department
                                                 P.O. Box 970 ▪ 414 E First Street ▪ Newberg, Oregon 97132
                                                 503-537-1240 ▪ Fax 503-537-1272 ▪ www.newbergoregon.gov



                                                     STAFF REPORT
          Type III Comprehensive Plan Map Amendment & Zoning Map Amendment
                        CPA-15-001/ZMA3-15-001: Martell Commons

FILE NUMBER:                CPA-15-001/ZMA3-15-001

REQUEST:                    Amend the Comprehensive Plan Map designation of the property at 1317 Villa Road from
                            LDR (Low Density Residential) to HDR (High Density Residential) and amend the Zoning
                            designation from R-1 (Low Density Residential) to R-3 (High Density Residential)

APPLICANT:                  DJ2 Holdings, LLC (represented by AKS Engineering & Forestry, LLC)

OWNER:                      Martell Family Farms, LLC

LOCATION:                   1317 Villa Road, Yamhill County tax lot 3217BC-800

DESIGNATION:                Comprehensive Plan designation of LDR (Low Density Residential); Zoning designation of
                            R-1 (Low Density Residential), with a small Stream Corridor overlay section

CODE CRITERIA:              Newberg Development Code § 15.302.030(A)(3), applicable Comprehensive Plan goals &
                            policies

HEARING DATE:               Planning Commission Hearing on May 14, 2015

ATTACHMENTS:
1. Planning Commission Resolution 2015-307 with:
   Exhibit A: Findings
   Exhibit B: Location Map
   Exhibit C: Legal Description
   Exhibit D: Comprehensive Plan Map
   Exhibit E: Zoning Map
2. Public & Agency Comments
3. Aerial Photo
4. Application
5. Newberg Development Code & Comprehensive Plan
   (by reference)




Z:\WP5FILES\FILES.CPA\2015\CPA-15-001.ZMA3-15-001 Martell Commons\PC staff report.resolution.findings\Staff report, resolution,
findings\CPA-15-001 ZMA3-15-001 Martell Commons PC Staff Report 5.4.15.docx
                                                                                                                                   ATTACHMENT 5
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Aldersgate Ln -- E Crestview Dr                                                                                  QC JOB #: 12789209
 CITY/STATE: Newberg, OR                                                                                                    DATE: Thu, Sep 11 2014
                         0          0                          Peak-Hour: 7:05 AM -- 8:05 AM                                 0.0        0.0

                         0    0     0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:15 AM -- 7:30 AM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       84    0                           0    83
                                                                                                                3.6   0.0                      0.0       3.6
             147             0.63       81
                                                                                                                      4.1                      3.7
       149   2                           2   151
                                                                                                                4.0   0.0                      0.0       4.0

                         3    0     4
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                         4          7
                                                                                                                             0.0        0.0



                              1                                                                                               0    0    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             4                           0                                                                            1                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                              3                                                                                               0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                         NA                                                                            NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count                 Aldersgate Ln                Aldersgate Ln                E Crestview Dr            E Crestview Dr               Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
     7:00 AM       0            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0      5      0      0    0      1      0    0               7
     7:05 AM       0            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0     12      0      0    1      6      0    0              20
     7:10 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0     11      0      0    0      2      0    0              13
     7:15 AM       0            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0     26      2      0    0      5      0    0              34
     7:20 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0     23      0      0    1      5      0    0              29
     7:25 AM       1            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0     21      0      0    0     10      0    0              32
     7:30 AM       1            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0     15      0      0    0      8      0    0              25
     7:35 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      8      0      0    0     13      0    0              21
     7:40 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      8      0      0    0      7      0    0              15
     7:45 AM       0            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0      6      0      0    0      5      0    0              12
     7:50 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      1      0      0    0      8      0    0               9
     7:55 AM       1            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      9      0      0    0      3      0    0              13              230
     8:00 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      7      0      0    0      9      0    0              16              239
     8:05 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      2      0      0    0      9      0    0              11              230
     8:10 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      6      0      0    0      8      0    0              14              231
     8:15 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      8      0      0    0     11      0    0              19              216
     8:20 AM       0            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0     13      0      0    0      2      0    0              16              203
     8:25 AM       0            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0      7      0      0    0      4      0    0              12              183
     8:30 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      9      0      0    0      8      0    0              17              175
     8:35 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      4      0      0    0      1      0    0               5              159
     8:40 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      5      0      0    0      3      0    0               8              152
     8:45 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      7      0      0    0      3      0    0              10              150
     8:50 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      7      0      0    0      5      0    0              12              153
     8:55 AM       0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0      6      0      0    0      4      0    0              10              150
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                   Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                     Total
  All Vehicles     4            0      4     0      0        0      0     0        0    280      8      0    4     80      0    0                     380
 Heavy Trucks      0            0      0            0        0      0              0      8      0           0      0      0                            8
  Pedestrians                   0                            4                            8                         0                                  12
    Bicycles       0            0      0            0        0      0              0      1      0           0      0      0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/12/2015 11:33 AM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                         ATTACHMENT 5
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Aldersgate Ln -- Park Ln                                                                                               QC JOB #: 12789207
 CITY/STATE: Newberg, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Thu, Sep 11 2014
                         6          4                            Peak-Hour: 7:05 AM -- 8:05 AM                                     0.0        0.0

                         0    2     4
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:15 AM -- 7:30 AM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                            0      8
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0               0.77         0
                                                                                                                            0.0                      0.0
       0     0                            8   36
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         0    4     31
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0

                         9          35
                                                                                                                                   0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                     0    0    0



                                                                                                                            0                          0

             6                            1                                                                                 0                          0

                                                                                                                            0                          1

                              0                                                                                                     0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                 NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                 Aldersgate Ln                  Aldersgate Ln                    Park Ln                     Park Ln                    Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       0            1      1     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                2
     7:05 AM       0            0      3     0        0        1      0     0        0       0      0      0    2        0      0    0                6
     7:10 AM       0            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                1
     7:15 AM       0            1      3     0        2        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                7
     7:20 AM       0            1      3     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                4
     7:25 AM       0            1      3     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                5
     7:30 AM       0            0      4     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    2        0      0    0                6
     7:35 AM       0            0      3     0        1        1      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                5
     7:40 AM       0            0      4     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                5
     7:45 AM       0            1      2     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                3
     7:50 AM       0            0      3     0        1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                4
     7:55 AM       0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                0              48
     8:00 AM       0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    1                3              49
     8:05 AM       0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    3        0      1    0                6              49
     8:10 AM       0            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                4              52
     8:15 AM       0            0      4     0        1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                5              50
     8:20 AM       0            1      1     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                3              49
     8:25 AM       0            0      4     0        1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                5              49
     8:30 AM       0            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                1              44
     8:35 AM       0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                1              40
     8:40 AM       0            1      1     0        1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                4              39
     8:45 AM       0            0      1     0        1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                2              38
     8:50 AM       0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                1              35
     8:55 AM       0            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                2              37
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     0           12     36     0        8        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    8        0      0    0                       64
 Heavy Trucks      0            0      0              0        0      0              0       0      0           0        0      0                             0
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                             4                           0                                    4
    Bicycles       0            0      0              0        0      0              0       0      0           0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/12/2015 11:33 AM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                         ATTACHMENT 5
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Villa Rd -- Park Ln                                                                                                    QC JOB #: 12789205
 CITY/STATE: Newberg, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Thu, Sep 11 2014
                    253             139                          Peak-Hour: 7:05 AM -- 8:05 AM                                     2.4        2.2

                         0   253     0
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 7:15 AM -- 7:30 AM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 2.4 0.0


       9     1                             0     0
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0               0.69          0
                                                                                                                            0.0                      0.0
       39    38                            0     0
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         9   138     0
                                                                                                                                   0.0 2.2 0.0

                    291             147
                                                                                                                                   2.1        2.0



                              2                                                                                                     1    2    0



                                                                                                                            0                          0

             0                             9                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                            0                          0

                              1                                                                                                     0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                           NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                    Villa Rd                       Villa Rd                      Park Ln                     Park Ln                    Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       0            3       0    0        0       15       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               20
     7:05 AM       1            7       0    0        0       22       0    0        0       0      1      0    0        0      0    0               31
     7:10 AM       0            5       0    0        0       23       0    0        0       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               31
     7:15 AM       1            7       0    0        0       37       0    0        1       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               49
     7:20 AM       1           15       0    0        0       34       0    0        0       0      7      0    0        0      0    0               57
     7:25 AM       1           21       0    0        0       29       0    0        0       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               54
     7:30 AM       2           11       0    0        0       30       0    0        0       0      5      0    0        0      0    0               48
     7:35 AM       0           18       0    0        0       18       0    0        0       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               39
     7:40 AM       2            8       0    0        0       16       0    0        0       0      6      0    0        0      0    0               32
     7:45 AM       0           12       0    0        0        9       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               23
     7:50 AM       0            7       0    0        0       11       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               20
     7:55 AM       0           12       0    0        0       14       0    0        0       0      1      0    0        0      0    0               27              431
     8:00 AM       1           15       0    0        0       10       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               28              439
     8:05 AM       3           10       0    0        0       17       0    0        0       0      4      0    0        0      0    0               34              442
     8:10 AM       2           14       0    0        0        7       0    0        0       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               26              437
     8:15 AM       0           10       0    0        0       12       0    0        0       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               25              413
     8:20 AM       1            7       0    0        0       19       0    0        1       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               31              387
     8:25 AM       0            9       0    0        0       14       0    0        0       0      5      0    0        0      0    0               28              361
     8:30 AM       0           13       0    0        0       15       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               30              343
     8:35 AM       1            4       0    0        0       12       0    0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0               17              321
     8:40 AM       1           10       0    0        0       14       0    0        0       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               28              317
     8:45 AM       0            8       0    0        0       15       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               25              319
     8:50 AM       1            8       0    0        0       23       0    0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0               32              331
     8:55 AM       1           12       0    0        0       18       0    0        0       0      1      0    0        0      0    0               32              336
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     12        172        0    0        0      400       0    0        4       0     52      0    0        0      0    0                      640
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0             0        4       0             0       0      0           0        0      0                             4
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                             0                          12                                   12
    Bicycles       0            0       0             0        1       0             0       0      0           0        0      0                             1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/12/2015 11:33 AM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                     ATTACHMENT 5
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Villa Rd -- Fulton St                                                                                              QC JOB #: 12789203
 CITY/STATE: Newberg, OR                                                                                                      DATE: Thu, Sep 11 2014
                   243          212                          Peak-Hour: 7:05 AM -- 8:05 AM                                     2.5        3.3

                   70 169        4
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                               2.9 2.4 0.0


      137    121                       1     4
                                                                                                                  1.5   0.8                      0.0       0.0
             1           0.84          1
                                                                                                                        0.0                      0.0
      179    57                        2     9
                                                                                                                  1.1   1.8                      0.0       0.0

                   66     90     4
                                                                                                                               0.0 6.7 0.0

                   228          160
                                                                                                                               2.2        3.8



                          3                                                                                                     2    1    0



                                                                                                                        2                          0

             15                        3                                                                                0                          1

                                                                                                                        1                          0

                          2                                                                                                     0    0    0




                         NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                       NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                Villa Rd                       Villa Rd                      Fulton St                   Fulton St                  Total       Hourly
     Period              (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM     1          6       1    0        0       13       1    0         9      1       4     0    0        0       0   0               36
     7:05 AM     3          3       0    0        0       17       4    0        12      0       9     0    0        0       0   0               48
     7:10 AM     0          3       0    0        0       13       3    0        16      0       7     0    1        0       0   0               43
     7:15 AM     3          6       0    0        0       11       0    0        17      0       4     0    0        0       0   0               41
     7:20 AM     1         14       1    0        0       17       5    0        12      0       5     0    0        0       0   0               55
     7:25 AM     3         13       0    0        1       18       5    0         7      0       5     0    0        0       0   0               52
     7:30 AM     4          8       0    0        1       20       9    0        17      0       5     0    0        0       1   0               65
     7:35 AM     3          6       0    0        0       13       7    0        10      0       4     0    0        0       0   0               43
     7:40 AM     7          6       0    0        2       12       9    0         7      0       3     0    0        0       0   0               46
     7:45 AM    16          9       0    0        0       11       8    0         3      0       3     0    0        0       0   0               50
     7:50 AM    11          6       1    0        0       19      15    0         9      1       7     0    0        0       0   0               69
     7:55 AM    10         12       1    0        0       12       4    0        10      0       4     0    1        1       0   0               55              603
     8:00 AM     5          4       1    0        0        6       1    0         1      0       1     0    0        0       0   0               19              586
     8:05 AM     1          2       0    0        0        6       0    0         1      0       3     0    0        0       0   0               13              551
     8:10 AM    12         15       1    0        0       14       2    0         5      0       4     0    0        0       0   0               53              561
     8:15 AM     7          8       1    0        0       15       5    0         5      0       7     0    1        0       1   0               50              570
     8:20 AM     5         10       1    0        0       17       6    0         3      0       9     0    0        0       0   0               51              566
     8:25 AM     5         11       1    0        1       17       2    0         4      0       6     0    1        0       0   0               48              562
     8:30 AM     7         11       0    0        0       14       5    0         4      0       5     0    0        0       0   0               46              543
     8:35 AM     1          4       2    0        0        8       6    0         5      0       7     0    0        0       0   0               33              533
     8:40 AM     6         10       0    0        0       14       2    0         2      0       4     0    0        0       0   0               38              525
     8:45 AM     6          8       1    0        0       21       6    0         3      0       9     0    0        0       0   0               54              529
     8:50 AM     6          9       1    0        0       21       3    0         9      0      10     0    1        0       0   0               60              520
     8:55 AM    14         15       1    0        0       19       3    0         5      0       5     0    1        0       0   0               63              528
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles 148       108        8    0        0      168     108    0        88      4      56     0    4        4       0   0                      696
 Heavy Trucks    0          8       0             0        8       0              0      0       0          0        0       0                           16
  Pedestrians               0                              0                            24                           0                                   24
    Bicycles     0          0       0             0        1       1             0       0       1          0        1       0                            4
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/12/2015 11:33 AM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                        ATTACHMENT 5
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Villa Rd -- Hwy 99W                                                                                                   QC JOB #: 12789201
 CITY/STATE: Newberg, OR                                                                                                         DATE: Thu, Sep 11 2014
                    223          241                            Peak-Hour: 7:05 AM -- 8:05 AM                                     1.8        2.9

                    48     59 116
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 7:35 AM -- 7:50 AM
                                                                                                                                  2.1 0.0 2.6


      1239   88                         93    944
                                                                                                                    12.5   0.0                       1.1     10.0
             1219         0.90         844
                                                                                                                           5.5                      11.0
      1309   2                           7   1345
                                                                                                                    5.1    0.0                       0.0      5.4

                    345 62        9
                                                                                                                                  17.7 9.7 22.2

                    67           416
                                                                                                                                  0.0        16.6



                           1                                                                                                       0    0     0



                                                                                                                           0                           1

             0                           2                                                                                 0                           0

                                                                                                                           0                           0

                           2                                                                                                       1    0     0




                          NA                                                                                                            NA




             NA                        NA                                                                                  NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                            NA



 5-Min Count                 Villa Rd                         Villa Rd                   Hwy 99W                      Hwy 99W                       Total       Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                Totals
 Beginning At Left         Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right      U    Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM    21           7       1    0           3       4       3    0        12  108      0      0     0       51     4     0                214
     7:05 AM    18           4       2    0          18       4       2    0         5  110      0      0     0       69     2     0                234
     7:10 AM    26           3       1    0          14       7       1    0         3  118      0      0     0       49     4     0                226
     7:15 AM    14           4       1    0           7       5       1    0         9  104      0      0     0       59     1     0                205
     7:20 AM    21           3       0    0          12       3       3    0         6   97      0      0     0       65     6     0                216
     7:25 AM    23           1       0    0           8       8       3    0         3  117      0      0     2       71     8     1                245
     7:30 AM    32           3       0    0          13       7       7    0         5  110      0      0     0       76     5     0                258
     7:35 AM    36           4       1    0           9       3       7    0         6  122      0      0     2      104     6     0                300
     7:40 AM    32          10       2    0           8       5       4    0         5   96      1      0     1       70     8     0                242
     7:45 AM    50           8       1    0           9       7       4    0         8   89      1      0     0       74    12     0                263
     7:50 AM    29           8       1    0           4       3       5    0        18   93      0      0     0       80    18     0                259
     7:55 AM    32           9       0    0           9       4       6    0         7   65      0      2     0       64    15     0                213            2875
     8:00 AM    32           5       0    0           5       3       5    0        11   98      0      0     1       63     8     0                231            2892
     8:05 AM    43           9       1    0          15      10      16    0         8   83      0      0     1       50     7     0                243            2901
     8:10 AM    33           9       0    0           9       3      12    0         6   65      0      1     2       71    10     0                221            2896
     8:15 AM    23           5       1    0           8       3       7    0         3  110      0      0     2       76    19     0                257            2948
     8:20 AM    16          11       0    0          12       6      11    0        12   88      0      0     1       57     8     0                222            2954
     8:25 AM    38           8       1    0           9       9       8    0        10   90      0      1     0       61    14     1                250            2959
     8:30 AM    37          10       0    0          11       4      10    0         7   83      0      0     0       65     7     0                234            2935
     8:35 AM    38           5       0    0           8       4       6    0         7   84      0      0     4       51    10     0                217            2852
     8:40 AM    21           8       1    0          10       1       3    1         5  120      1      0     1       85     6     0                263            2873
     8:45 AM    29           8       0    0           8       4       5    0        16  100      0      0     0       59    12     0                241            2851
     8:50 AM    41           6       0    0          24       8      12    0         8   87      1      0     2       59    11     0                259            2851
     8:55 AM    24          13       1    0           7       6       3    0         9   81      0      1     0       65    10     0                220            2858
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                       Southbound                  Eastbound                    Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right      U    Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles 472          88      16    0         104      60      60    0        76 1228      8      0     12     992   104     0                       3220
 Heavy Trucks   64           8       0                0       0       4              0   80      0             0      96     0                              252
  Pedestrians                4                                0                           0                            0                                     4
    Bicycles     0           0       0                0       0       0              0    0      0            0        0     0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/12/2015 11:33 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                    ATTACHMENT 5
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Aldersgate Ln -- E Crestview Dr                                                                                   QC JOB #: 12789210
 CITY/STATE: Newberg, OR                                                                                                     DATE: Wed, Sep 10 2014
                         0          0                          Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  0.0        0.0

                         0    0     0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0


       114   0                           0    115
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             56              0.97       112
                                                                                                                       0.0                      0.0
       60    4                           3    58
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                         2    0     2
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

                         7          4
                                                                                                                              0.0        0.0



                              2                                                                                                0    0    0



                                                                                                                       0                          0

             4                           1                                                                             2                          1

                                                                                                                       0                          0

                              4                                                                                                1    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                     NA




             NA                         NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                     NA



 5-Min Count                 Aldersgate Ln                 Aldersgate Ln                E Crestview Dr            E Crestview Dr               Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      5      0      0    0      5      0    0              10
    4:05 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      2      0      0    0     10      0    0              12
    4:10 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      3      0      0    0     15      0    0              18
    4:15 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      3      0      0    0     11      0    0              14
    4:20 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      2      1      0    0      6      0    0               9
    4:25 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      0      0      0    1      9      0    0              10
    4:30 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      4      0      0    0      9      0    0              13
    4:35 PM        1            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0     10      0      0    0      7      0    0              18
    4:40 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      2      1      0    2      9      0    0              14
    4:45 PM        0            0      1     0       0        0      0     0        0      4      0      0    3      6      0    0              14
    4:50 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      5      0      0    0      8      0    0              13
    4:55 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      3      0      0    0     11      0    0              14              159
    5:00 PM        0            0      2     0       0        0      0     0        0      7      1      0    0      9      0    0              19              168
    5:05 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      3      0      0    1      4      0    0               8              164
    5:10 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      4      0      0    0     16      0    0              20              166
    5:15 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      6      0      0    0     12      0    0              18              170
    5:20 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      3      0      0    0     13      0    0              16              177
    5:25 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      7      1      0    0      7      0    0              15              182
    5:30 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      4      0      0    1      6      0    0              11              180
    5:35 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      5      0      0    0     10      0    0              15              177
    5:40 PM        1            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      3      0      0    0     13      0    0              17              180
    5:45 PM        1            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      5      0      0    0      6      0    0              12              178
    5:50 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      7      2      0    0      6      0    0              15              180
    5:55 PM        0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0      2      0      0    1     10      0    0              13              179
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                    Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                     Total
  All Vehicles     0            0      0     0       0        0      0     0        0     52      0      0    4    128      0    0                     184
 Heavy Trucks      0            0      0             0        0      0              0      0      0           0      0      0                           0
  Pedestrians                   0                             0                            0                         0                                  0
    Bicycles       0            0      0             0        0      0              0      0      0           0      0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/8/2015 5:36 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                       ATTACHMENT 5
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Aldersgate Ln -- Park Ln                                                                                             QC JOB #: 12789208
 CITY/STATE: Newberg, OR                                                                                                        DATE: Wed, Sep 10 2014
                         8          9                         Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                      0.0        11.1

                         0    1     7
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


       0     0                            7   57
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                      14.3       3.5
             0               0.97         0
                                                                                                                          0.0                       0.0
       0     0                           50   25
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                       2.0       0.0

                         0    2     18
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                       51           20
                                                                                                                                 2.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                   0    0     0



                                                                                                                          0                           0

             1                            1                                                                               0                           0

                                                                                                                          0                           0

                              1                                                                                                   0    0     0




                             NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                          NA                                                                               NA                        NA




                             NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count                 Aldersgate Ln                Aldersgate Ln                    Park Ln                     Park Ln                     Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                 (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0            0      1     0      1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    6        0      0    0                 8
    4:05 PM        0            0      1     0      1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      1    0                 4
    4:10 PM        0            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    3        0      0    0                 4
    4:15 PM        0            0      1     0      1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    3        0      2    0                 7
    4:20 PM        0            0      2     0      1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                 3
    4:25 PM        0            0      2     0      1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0                 3
    4:30 PM        0            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    2        0      0    0                 3
    4:35 PM        0            0      0     0      2        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    2        0      1    0                 5
    4:40 PM        0            0      4     0      1        1      0     0        0       0      0      0    0        0      2    0                 8
    4:45 PM        0            1      4     0      1        3      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                10
    4:50 PM        0            0      2     0      0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    3        0      1    0                 6
    4:55 PM        0            1      4     0      1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    2        0      1    0                 9              70
    5:00 PM        0            1      3     0      0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      2    0                 7              69
    5:05 PM        0            0      0     0      0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    5        0      0    0                 5              70
    5:10 PM        0            0      2     0      0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    4        0      1    0                 7              73
    5:15 PM        0            1      2     0      0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    6        0      1    0                10              76
    5:20 PM        0            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    3        0      0    0                 4              77
    5:25 PM        0            0      2     0      1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    4        0      0    0                 7              81
    5:30 PM        0            0      3     0      1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    3        0      1    0                 8              86
    5:35 PM        0            0      1     0      1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    6        0      1    0                 9              90
    5:40 PM        0            0      2     0      3        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    8        0      0    0                13              95
    5:45 PM        0            0      1     0      0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    1        0      0    0                 2              87
    5:50 PM        0            0      1     0      1        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    4        0      1    0                 7              88
    5:55 PM        0            0      0     0      0        1      0     0        0       0      0      0    5        0      0    0                 6              85
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                   Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     0            4     16     0      0        0      0     0        0       0      0      0    60       0      8    0                        88
 Heavy Trucks      0            0      0            0        0      0              0       0      0            0       0      0                              0
  Pedestrians                   0                            0                             0                           0                                     0
    Bicycles       0            0      0            0        0      0              0       0      0           0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/8/2015 5:36 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                         ATTACHMENT 5
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Villa Rd -- Park Ln                                                                                                    QC JOB #: 12789206
 CITY/STATE: Newberg, OR                                                                                                          DATE: Wed, Sep 10 2014
                    158             217                         Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                      0.6        0.5

                         5   153     0
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                   20.0 0.0 0.0


       57    1                             0     0
                                                                                                                      1.8   0.0                      0.0       0.0
             0               0.85          0
                                                                                                                            0.0                      0.0
       27    26                            0     0
                                                                                                                      0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                       52 216        0
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.5 0.0

                    179             268
                                                                                                                                   0.0        0.4



                              1                                                                                                     0    2    0



                                                                                                                            0                          0

             0                             8                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                            0                          0

                              0                                                                                                     0    2    0




                             NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                           NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                    Villa Rd                       Villa Rd                      Park Ln                     Park Ln                    Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        6           15       0    0        0        9       0    0        1       0      1      0    0        0      0    0               32
    4:05 PM        4           19       0    0        0        9       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               34
    4:10 PM        2           21       0    0        0       10       1    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               36
    4:15 PM        6           17       0    1        0        7       0    0        0       0      1      0    0        0      0    0               32
    4:20 PM        0           16       0    0        0        9       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               27
    4:25 PM        0           16       0    0        0        6       0    0        1       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               25
    4:30 PM        2           14       0    0        0       13       0    0        0       0      1      0    0        0      0    0               30
    4:35 PM        3           14       0    0        0       19       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               38
    4:40 PM        2           19       0    0        0       19       1    0        0       0      6      0    0        0      0    0               47
    4:45 PM        3            7       0    0        0       12       0    0        1       0      4      0    0        0      0    0               27
    4:50 PM        4           12       0    0        0        8       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               26
    4:55 PM        2           12       0    0        0        4       0    0        1       0      4      0    0        0      0    0               23              377
    5:00 PM        4           20       0    0        0       10       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               36              381
    5:05 PM        5           18       0    0        0       14       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               39              386
    5:10 PM        3           28       0    0        0       17       2    0        0       0      1      0    0        0      0    0               51              401
    5:15 PM        9           15       0    0        0       15       1    0        0       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               43              412
    5:20 PM        2           22       0    0        0       12       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               38              423
    5:25 PM        4           15       0    0        0       17       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               38              436
    5:30 PM        3           14       0    0        0       10       1    0        0       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               31              437
    5:35 PM        6           18       0    0        0       15       0    0        1       0      1      0    0        0      0    0               41              440
    5:40 PM        5           24       0    0        0        6       1    0        0       0      5      0    0        0      0    0               41              434
    5:45 PM        2           17       0    0        0       13       0    0        0       0      3      0    0        0      0    0               35              442
    5:50 PM        6           10       0    0        0       15       0    0        0       0      2      0    0        0      0    0               33              449
    5:55 PM        3           15       0    0        0        9       0    0        0       0      0      0    0        0      0    0               27              453
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     68        244        0    0        0      184      12    0        0       0     24      0    0        0      0    0                      532
 Heavy Trucks       0           0       0             0        0       0             0       0      0           0        0      0                            0
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                             0                           4                                   4
    Bicycles       0            0       0             0        0       0             0       0      0           0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/8/2015 5:36 PM                                            SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                      ATTACHMENT 5
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Villa Rd -- Fulton St                                                                                               QC JOB #: 12789204
 CITY/STATE: Newberg, OR                                                                                                       DATE: Wed, Sep 10 2014
                    290          288                         Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                      1.0        1.0

                    151 139       0
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                0.7 1.4 0.0


       233   115                        1     4
                                                                                                                   1.3   0.9                      0.0       0.0
             0            0.87          0
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.0
       187   72                         3     6
                                                                                                                   1.1   1.4                      0.0       0.0

                       82 172     6
                                                                                                                                2.4 1.2 0.0

                    214          260
                                                                                                                                1.4        1.5



                           8                                                                                                     0    1    0



                                                                                                                         3                          0

             13                         1                                                                                0                          3

                                                                                                                         1                          0

                           1                                                                                                     1    4    1




                          NA                                                                                                          NA




             NA                        NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                 Villa Rd                       Villa Rd                      Fulton St                   Fulton St                  Total       Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM         7       16       0    0        0       11       9    0         4      1       7     0    1        1       1   0               58
    4:05 PM         7       17       0    0        0       11       6    0         8      0      14     0    0        0       0   0               63
    4:10 PM         6       21       0    0        0        8       8    0         5      0       8     0    0        0       0   0               56
    4:15 PM         6       15       0    0        0       10      11    0         9      0      12     0    1        1       0   0               65
    4:20 PM         2       12       1    0        0        8       9    0         7      0      10     0    0        0       0   0               49
    4:25 PM         8       18       2    0        0        5      10    0         8      0      12     0    0        0       1   0               64
    4:30 PM         5       10       1    0        0       15       7    0         6      0       7     0    4        0       0   0               55
    4:35 PM         8       17       0    0        0       16       9    0         6      0       9     0    0        0       0   0               65
    4:40 PM         5        9       1    0        0       10       8    0        11      0       9     0    0        0       0   0               53
    4:45 PM        10       12       2    0        0       14       6    0         6      0       6     0    0        0       0   0               56
    4:50 PM         6        9       0    0        0       15       9    0         9      0      13     0    1        0       0   0               62
    4:55 PM         9       12       0    0        0       11       8    0        12      0       6     0    0        0       1   0               59              705
    5:00 PM         8       14       0    0        0       10       9    0        10      0       7     0    0        0       0   0               58              705
    5:05 PM        12       18       1    0        0       13      16    0         9      0       7     0    0        0       0   0               76              718
    5:10 PM         4       17       1    0        0       12      13    0        10      0       4     0    1        0       1   0               63              725
    5:15 PM         2       21       0    0        0       16      11    0        14      0       9     0    1        0       0   0               74              734
    5:20 PM         4       13       0    0        0       12      10    0        16      0      10     0    1        0       0   0               66              751
    5:25 PM         8       17       0    0        0       11      16    0        11      0       6     0    0        0       0   0               69              756
    5:30 PM         5        9       0    0        0       13      15    0         9      0       3     0    0        0       0   0               54              755
    5:35 PM         7       11       1    0        0       20      11    0         5      0       3     0    0        0       0   0               58              748
    5:40 PM         7       14       0    0        0        7       9    0        13      0       4     0    0        0       0   0               54              749
    5:45 PM         6       11       0    0        0       11      12    0         5      0       4     0    0        0       0   0               49              742
    5:50 PM         5       12       1    0        0        7      14    0         8      0       7     0    0        0       0   0               54              734
    5:55 PM        14       15       2    0        0        7      15    0         5      0       8     0    0        0       0   0               66              741
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U       Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     72     224        8    0        0      164     160    0      132       0      80     0    8        0       4   0                      852
 Heavy Trucks       0        0       0             0        0       0             0       0       0          0        0       0                            0
  Pedestrians                0                              8                            12                           0                                   20
    Bicycles       0         2       0             0        0       0             0       0       0          0        0       0                            2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/8/2015 5:36 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
                                                                                                                                     ATTACHMENT 5
Type of peak hour being reported: System Peak                                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Villa Rd -- Hwy 99W                                                                                                QC JOB #: 12789202
 CITY/STATE: Newberg, OR                                                                                                      DATE: Wed, Sep 10 2014
                    295          242                            Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  0.7        1.2

                    98     60 137
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                               2.0 0.0 0.0


      2179   63                          82   1546
                                                                                                                  3.8   0.0                      1.2      3.1
             1210         0.95         1446
                                                                                                                        3.7                      3.3
      1278   5                           18   1364
                                                                                                                  3.5   0.0                      0.0      3.4

                    630 102 16
                                                                                                                               5.4 2.0 6.3

                    82           748
                                                                                                                               0.0        4.9



                           1                                                                                                    1    1    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

             25                           6                                                                             0                          2

                                                                                                                        0                          1

                           15                                                                                                   1    1    1




                          NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                         NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                 Villa Rd                          Villa Rd                   Hwy 99W                   Hwy 99W                     Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left         Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM     46          14       0    0           18      13      17    0         3   83      0      2      1  117     5     0              319
    4:05 PM     54           7       4    0           24       4       8    0        10   99      0      0      1  103     7     0              321
    4:10 PM     47           9       1    0            7       4       8    0         5  100      0      0      2  137     9     0              329
    4:15 PM     46          13       1    0           14       7       8    0         8   96      1      0      0  114     8     0              316
    4:20 PM     39           5       0    0           16       4       3    0         9   83      0      0      1  103     3     0              266
    4:25 PM     54          17       0    0           17       6       3    0         3  112      0      2      2  135    13     0              364
    4:30 PM     32           6       1    0           14      12       9    0         2   90      0      1      1  100     7     0              275
    4:35 PM     67          10       2    0           22       8      13    0         3   73      0      0      1   92     8     0              299
    4:40 PM     32           5       1    0           14       6       2    0         5  111      2      1      1  120    16     0              316
    4:45 PM     57          15       0    0           14       6      10    0         7   85      1      0      2   90     8     1              296
    4:50 PM     59           4       1    0           19       8      12    0         2   90      1      2      3  128     4     0              333
    4:55 PM     46          13       1    0           10       9       5    0         3   83      1      2      2   93     7     0              275            3709
    5:00 PM     51           7       1    0            8       4       5    0         6  106      1      0      1  115     4     0              309            3699
    5:05 PM     64          10       1    0           14       2      11    0         2  114      1      0      1  150     7     0              377            3755
    5:10 PM     44          13       1    0            9       7       9    0         2   87      0      1      2  112     8     1              296            3722
    5:15 PM     47           5       2    0           21       5       6    0         5  118      0      0      0  124     8     0              341            3747
    5:20 PM     59           5       4    0           13       7      15    0         3  109      1      0      2  137     7     0              362            3843
    5:25 PM     59           9       3    0           14       7      11    0         8   86      0      0      3  104     7     0              311            3790
    5:30 PM     41           9       1    0            8       3      11    0         3   88      1      1      3  115     4     0              288            3803
    5:35 PM     31          13       0    0           12       7       9    0         5  111      0      2      0  122     3     0              315            3819
    5:40 PM     80           2       1    0           11       3       9    0         4   91      0      0      2  132    10     0              345            3848
    5:45 PM     45           7       1    0           10       6       5    0         5   95      1      1      0   99     4     0              279            3831
    5:50 PM     48           8       0    0           10       9       3    0         6   98      0      0      1  120     9     0              312            3810
    5:55 PM     61          14       1    0            7       0       4    0         9  107      0      0      2  116    11     0              332            3867
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                        Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles 620         112      16    0          176      56     104    0        36 1276      4      4     12 1544    92     4                     4056
 Heavy Trucks   40           0       0                 0       0       0              0   28      0             0   56     0                            124
  Pedestrians               16                                 0                          32                         4                                   52
    Bicycles     1           0       1                 0       0       0              0    0      0             0    1     0                              3
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 1/8/2015 5:36 PM                                            SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
