                                  County of Santa Cruz
                                              PLANNING DEPARTMENT
                                    701 OCEAN STREET, 4TH FLOOR, SANTA CRUZ, CA 95060
                                           (831) 454-2580 FAX: (831) 454-2131
                                   KATHLEEN MOLLOY PREVISICH, PLANNING DIRECTOR
                                                  www.sccoplanning.com
             NOTICE OF INTENT TO ADOPT A MITIGATED NEGATIVE DECLARATION

                        NOTICE OF PUBLIC REVIEW AND COMMENT PERIOD
Pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, the following project has been reviewed by the County
Environmental Coordinator to determine if it has a potential to create significant impacts to the environment
and, if so, how such impacts could be solved. A Negative Declaration is prepared in cases where the project is
determined not to have any significant environmental impacts. Either a Mitigated Negative Declaration or
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) is prepared for projects that may result in a significant impact to the
environment.
Public review periods are provided for these Environmental Determinations according to the requirements of
the County Environmental Review Guidelines. The environmental document is available for review at the
County Planning Department located at 701 Ocean Street, in Santa Cruz. You may also view the
environmental document on the web at www.sccoplanning.com under the Planning Department menu. If you
have questions or comments about this Notice of Intent, please contact Todd Sexauer of the Environmental
Review staff at (831) 454-3511.
The County of Santa Cruz does not discriminate on the basis of disability, and no person shall, by reason of a
disability, be denied the benefits of its services, programs or activities. If you require special assistance in
order to review this information, please contact Bernice Shawver at (831) 454-3137 to make arrangements.
PROJECT: NISSAN OF SANTA CRUZ
APP #: 161443
APN(S): 030-121-27
PROJECT DESCRIPTION: The proposed development consists of the combination of five parcels and
construction of an approximately 12,550 square foot car dealership and an approximately 7,500 square foot
service area. Project includes excavation of approximately 3,500 cubic yards of material. The project requires
a Rezoning from C-2 (Neighborhood Commercial) to C-4 (Service Commercial) and General Plan Amendment
from C-C (Community Commercial) to C-S (Service Commercial), a Commercial Development Permit, a
Grading Permit and Sign Exception to exceed 50 square feet of signage.
PROJECT LOCATION: The proposed project is located on the west side of 41st Avenue within the community
of Live Oak in the unincorporated County of Santa Cruz. Santa Cruz County is bounded on the north by San
Mateo County, on the south by Monterey and San Benito counties, on the east by Santa Clara County, and on
the south and west by the Monterey Bay and the Pacific Ocean.
EXISTING ZONE DISTRICT: C-2
APPLICANT: Kimley Horn, Attn: Bill Wiseman
OWNER: Joseph and Karen Calcagno
PROJECT PLANNER: Nathan Macbeth, 454-3118
EMAIL: Nathan.Macbeth@santacruzcounty.us
ACTION: Negative Declaration with Mitigations
REVIEW PERIOD: April 12, 2017 through May 1, 2017

This project will be considered at a public hearing by the Board of Supervisors. The time, date and location
have not been set. When scheduling does occur, these items will be included in all public hearing notices for
the project.
                                 COUNTY OF SANTA CRUZ
                                                 PLANNING DEPARTMENT
                                        701 OCEAN STREET, 4TH FLOOR, SANTA CRUZ, CA 95060
                                     (831) 454-2580 FAX: (831) 454-2131 TDD: (831) 454-2123
                                      KATHLEEN MOLLOY PREVISICH, PLANNING DIRECTOR
                                                  http://www.sccoplanning.com/
                              MITIGATED NEGATIVE DECLARATION
Project: Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                      APN(S): 030-121-27
Project Description: The proposed development consists of the combination of five parcels and
construction of an approximately 12,550 square foot car dealership and an approximately 7,500 square
foot service area. Project includes excavation of approximately 3,500 cubic yards of material. The project
requires a Rezoning from C-2 (Neighborhood Commercial) to C-4 (Service Commercial) and General Plan
Amendment from C-C (Community Commercial) to C-S (Service Commercial), a Commercial Development
Permit, a Grading Permit and Sign Exception to exceed 50 square feet of signage.
Project Location: The proposed project is located on the west side of 41st Avenue within the community
of Live Oak in the unincorporated County of Santa Cruz. Santa Cruz County is bounded on the north by
San Mateo County, on the south by Monterey and San Benito counties, on the east by Santa Clara
County, and on the south and west by the Monterey Bay and the Pacific Ocean.
Owner: Joseph and Karen Calcagno
Applicant: Kimley Horn, Attn: Bill Wiseman
Staff Planner: Nathan Macbeth, (831) 454-3118
Email: Nathan.Macbeth@santacruzcounty.us
This project will be considered at a public hearing by the Board of Supervisors. The time, date and
location have not been set. When scheduling does occur, these items will be included in all public hearing
notices for the project.

California Environmental Quality Act Mitigated Negative Declaration Findings:
Find, that this Mitigated Negative Declaration reflects the decision-making body’s independent judgment
and analysis, and; that the decision-making body has reviewed and considered the information contained
in this Mitigated Negative Declaration and the comments received during the public review period; and,
that revisions in the project plans or proposals made by or agreed to by the project applicant would avoid
the effects or mitigate the effects to a point where clearly no significant effects would occur; and, on the
basis of the whole record before the decision-making body (including this Mitigated Negative Declaration)
that there is no substantial evidence that the project as revised will have a significant effect on the
environment. The expected environmental impacts of the project are documented in the attached Initial
Study on file with the County of Santa Cruz Clerk of the Board located at 701 Ocean Street, 5th Floor,
Santa Cruz, California.
Review Period Ends: May 1, 2017
                                                    Date:


                                                    TODD SEXAUER, Environmental Coordinator
                                                    (831) 454-3511
                                County of Santa Cruz
                                           PLANNING DEPARTMENT
                                   701 OCEAN STREET, 4TH FLOOR, SANTA CRUZ, CA 95060
                                (831) 454-2580 FAX: (831) 454-2131 TDD: (831) 454-2123
                                  KATHLEEN MOLLOY PREVISICH, PLANNING DIRECTOR
                                                 www.sccoplanning.com

      CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA)
               INITIAL STUDY/ENVIRONMENTAL CHECKLIST

                                                Application
 Date: April 6, 2017                                                      161443
                                                Number:
 Project Name:     Nissan of Santa Cruz         Staff Planner: Nathan MacBeth
I. OVERVIEW AND ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINATION
 APPLICANT: Bill Wiseman                         APN(s):     030-121-27, 08, 12, 13, 53
                                                                                     First
 OWNER:          Calcagno                        SUPERVISORAL DISTRICT:
                                                                                     District
PROJECT LOCATION: The proposed project is located on the west side of 41st Avenue
within the community of Live Oak in the unincorporated County of Santa Cruz. The County
of Santa Cruz is bounded on the north by San Mateo County, on the south by Monterey and
San Benito counties, on the east by Santa Clara County, and on the south and west by the
Monterey Bay and the Pacific Ocean.
SUMMARY PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The proposed development consists of the combination of five parcels and construct an
approximately 12,550 square foot car dealership and an approximately 7,500 square foot
service area. Project includes excavation of approximately 3,500 cubic yards of material. The
project requires a rezoning from C-2 (Neighborhood Commercial) to C-4 (Service Commercial)
and General Plan Amendment from C-C (Community Commercial) to C-S (Service
Commercial), Commercial Development Permit, Grading Permit and Sign Exception to exceed
50 square feet of signage.

 ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS POTENTIALLY AFFECTED: All of the following potential
 environmental impacts are evaluated in this Initial Study. Categories that are marked have
 been analyzed in greater detail based on project specific information.
      Aesthetics and Visual Resources                   Mineral Resources
     Agriculture and Forestry Resources                Noise
     Air Quality                                       Population and Housing
     Biological Resources                              Public Services
     Cultural Resources                                Recreation
     Geology and Soils                                 Transportation/Traffic
     Greenhouse Gas Emissions                          Utilities and Service Systems
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist
 Page 2

 ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS POTENTIALLY AFFECTED: All of the following potential
 environmental impacts are evaluated in this Initial Study. Categories that are marked have
 been analyzed in greater detail based on project specific information.
      Hazards and Hazardous Materials                   Tribal Cultural Resources
      Hydrology/Water Supply/Water Quality            Mandatory Findings of Significance
      Land Use and Planning

 DISCRETIONARY APPROVAL(S) BEING CONSIDERED:
       General Plan Amendment                         Coastal Development Permit
       Land Division                                  Grading Permit
       Rezoning                                       Riparian Exception
       Development Permit                             LAFCO Annexation
       Sewer Connection Permit                        Sign Exception

 OTHER PUBLIC AGENCIES WHOSE APPROVAL IS REQUIRED (e.g., permits,
 financing approval, or participation agreement):
 Permit Type/Action                              Agency
 None                                            N/A

 DETERMINATION:

On the basis of this initial evaluation:
      I find that the proposed project COULD NOT have a significant effect on the
      environment, and a NEGATIVE DECLARATION will be prepared.
      I find that although the proposed project could have a significant effect on the
      environment, there will not be a significant effect in this case because revisions in
      the project have been made or agreed to by the project proponent. A MITIGATED
      NEGATIVE DECLARATION will be prepared.
      I find that the proposed project MAY have a significant effect on the environment,
      and an ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT is required.
      I find that the proposed project MAY have a “potentially significant impact” or
      “potentially significant unless mitigated” impact on the environment, but at least one
      effect 1) has been adequately analyzed in an earlier document pursuant to
      applicable legal standards, and 2) has been addressed by mitigation measures
      based on the earlier analysis as described on attached sheets.                      An
      ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT is required, but it must analyze only the
      effects that remain to be addressed.
      I find that although the proposed project could have a significant effect on the
      environment, because all potentially significant effects (a) have been analyzed
      adequately in an earlier EIR or NEGATIVE DECLARATION pursuant to applicable
      standards, and (b) have been avoided or mitigated pursuant to that earlier EIR or


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                               Application Number: 161443
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist
 Page 3

      NEGATIVE DECLARATION, including revisions or mitigation measures that are
      imposed upon the proposed project, nothing further is required.


TODD SEXAUER, Environmental Coordinator          Date




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                      Application Number: 161443
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist
 Page 4




                                                
                                    This page intentially left blank.




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                    Application Number: 161443
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist
 Page 5



                                                        PROJECT LOCATION MAP
                                                    SANTA CRUZ COUNTY, CALIFORNIA




                                               PROJECT LOCATION




                                                                             Figure 1


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                    Application Number: 161443
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist
 Page 6




                                                           
                                               This page intentially left blank.




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                               Application Number: 161443
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist
 Page 7




                                               Project Site Plan               Figure 2
Nissan of Santa Cruz                                               Application Number: 161443
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist
 Page 8




                                                           
                                               This page intentially left blank.




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                               Application Number: 161443
    California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
    Initial Study/Environmental Checklist
    Page 9
\


II. BACKGROUND INFORMATION
EXISTING SITE CONDITIONS:
    Parcel Size (acres):     Approximately 1.3 acres (total)
    Existing Land Use:       Residential/commercial
                             The site contains a mix of existing vegetation including several
    Vegetation:
                             mature trees in excess of 20 inches.
    Slope in area affected by project:    0 - 30%      31 – 100%       N/A
    Nearby Watercourse:      Rodeo Gulch
    Distance To:             Approximately 1,500 feet

ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES AND CONSTRAINTS:
    Water Supply Watershed:                  Not mapped      Fault Zone:                      Not Mapped
    Groundwater Recharge:                    Not Mapped      Scenic Corridor:                 Outside
                                                                                              Highway 1
                                                                                              corridor
    Timber or Mineral:                       Not Mapped      Historic:                        Not
                                                                                              significant
    Agricultural Resource:                   Not Mapped      Archaeology:                     No resources
                                                                                              identified
    Biologically Sensitive Habitat:          No resources    Noise Constraint:                No
                                             identified
    Fire Hazard:                             Not Mapped      Electric Power Lines:            Yes
    Floodplain:                              Not Mapped      Solar Access:                    Adequate
    Erosion:                                 Low             Solar Orientation:               Southeast
                                             potential
    Landslide:                               Not Mapped      Hazardous Materials:             Yes
    Liquefaction:                            Low
                                             Potential
SERVICES:
    Fire Protection:                        Central Fire    Drainage District:              Zone 5
                                            Protection
                                            District
    School District:                        Soquel          Project Access:                 41st Avenue
                                            Elementary                                      and Soquel
                                                                                            Drive
    Sewage Disposal:                        Santa Cruz      Water Supply:                   Santa Cruz
                                            County                                          Water
                                            Sanitation                                      Department
                                            District


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                             Application Number: 161443
    California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
    Initial Study/Environmental Checklist
    Page 10
\


PLANNING POLICIES:
    Zone District: C-2                                     Special Designation: N/A
    (Community Commercial)
    General Plan: C-C
    (Community Commercial)
    Urban Services Line:                          Inside      Outside
    Coastal Zone:                                 Inside      Outside

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING AND SURROUNDING LAND USES:
Natural Environment
Santa Cruz County is uniquely situated along the northern end of Monterey Bay approximately
55 miles south of the City of San Francisco along the Central Coast. The Pacific Ocean and
Monterey Bay to the west and south, the mountains inland, and the prime agricultural lands
along both the northern and southern coast of the county create limitations on the style and
amount of building that can take place. Simultaneously, these natural features create an
environment that attracts both visitors and new residents every year. The natural landscape
provides the basic features that set Santa Cruz apart from the surrounding counties and require
specific accommodations to ensure building is done in a safe, responsible and environmentally
respectful manner.
The California Coastal Zone affects nearly one third of the land in the urbanized area of the
unincorporated County with special restrictions, regulations, and processing procedures
required for development within that area. Steep hillsides require extensive review and
engineering to ensure that slopes remain stable, buildings are safe, and water quality is not
impacted by increased erosion. The farmland in Santa Cruz County is among the best in the
world, and the agriculture industry is a primary economic generator for the County.
Preserving this industry in the face of population growth requires that soils best suited to
commercial agriculture remain active in crop production rather than converting to other land
uses.
PROJECT BACKGROUND:
The subject properties are located within the Soquel Planning Area fronting 41st Avenue and
Soquel drive. The project site is relatively flat with a gradual downward slope to the south.
The project site consists of five individual parcels containing a mix of residential and
commercial development. The surrounding area is developed with commercial development
including, Home Depot, Best Buy, Safeway super market and gas station along with a variety
of retail and commercial services. The project site is adjoined by car washes to the north and
south and an existing auto dealer and auto services/ repair (Honda) located across Soquel Drive.
All of the properties are in common ownership and zoned C-2 (Community Commercial)
which is consistent with the parcels’ General Plan designation of C-C (Community
Commercial). The project site is noted as having a C-C (Community Commercial) Land Use


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
    California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
    Initial Study/Environmental Checklist
    Page 11
\


designation in the SSCC Plan (Sustainable Santa Cruz County Plan). The SSCC Plan indicates
a potential future street could be located immediately to the west of the project site and
highlights other potential circulation improvements along upper 41st Avenue including
additional transit drop off, enhanced bike lanes. As proposed, the project would be consistent
with the range of concept designs intended to support revenue generating commercial uses in
the Upper 41st Avenue area and would construct a number of pedestrian and roadside
improvements further meeting the objectives of the Sustainability Plan.

DETAILED PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The project proposes to demolish four existing single family dwellings and multiple
outbuildings and construct a new 12,550 square foot automobile dealership with 7,500 square
foot automobile service department. The project also proposes installation of new underground
utilities, site drainage improvements, comprehensive landscape plan, and parking lot resulting
in approximately 70,000 square feet of impervious area. Grading volumes would include
approximately 3,500 cubic yards of excavation and 120 cubic yards of fill.
The project requires the combination of five individual parcels with a total site area of
approximately 1.8 acres. The project would be conditioned to require installation or new curb
gutter and sidewalk along portions of Soquel Drive laying to the west of the project site and
41st Avenue laying south for the project site. The project proposes the removal of several
mature trees consisting of a 48 inch dbh (diameter at breast height) redwood tree, six
Podocarpus ranging in diameter of 10 inches to 24 inches in dbh, and one 30 inch dbh walnut
tree.




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                Application Number: 161443
                                                                      Less than
                                                                     Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)          Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 12                                                Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact


III. ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW CHECKLIST
A. AESTHETICS AND VISUAL RESOURCES
Would the project:
 1.    Have a substantial adverse effect on a
       scenic vista?
 Discussion: The project would not directly impact any public scenic resources, as
 designated in the County’s General Plan (1994), or obstruct any public views of these visual
 resources.

 2.     Substantially damage scenic resources,
        including, but not limited to, trees, rock
        outcroppings, and historic buildings
        within a state scenic highway?
 Discussion: The project site is not located along a County designated scenic road, public
 viewshed area, scenic corridor, within a designated scenic resource area, or within a state
 scenic highway. Therefore, no impact is anticipated.

 3.     Substantially degrade the existing visual
        character or quality of the site and its
        surroundings?
 Discussion: The existing visual setting consists of a mix of aging residential homes that are
 in poor condition and uncharacteristic of the surrounding pattern of commercial
 development. A mix of large commercial development consisting of a Home Depot, Best Buy
 and Safeway shopping center is located across 41st Avenue. The shopping center contains a
 variety of commercial retail uses, including gas stations and a large parking lot that fronts 41st
 Avenue. The north side of Soquel Drive is developed with a Honda dealership, self-storage
 facility, and a combination of automobile services, and a mix of commercial retail within the
 Soquel Town Plaza. The north side of the project site is adjoined by a lumber yard and self-
 car wash. A full service carwash is located immediately to the south of the project site.
 The proposed development would be consistent in terms of architectural style and intensity
 with the type of construction (concrete masonry) to that of the structures found in the
 vicinity. Additionally, the proposed parking lot would be landscaped to blend with the
 surrounding pattern of development and enhance the surrounding built environment and
 include new roadside improvements to enhance the pedestrian feel along portions of 41st
 Avenue and Soquel Drive.
 The project includes a sign exception to increase the allowed square footage of signage. The
 proposed sign plan (Attachment I) indicates the location, size and color of all signage. The
 project would be conditioned to ensure that lighting associated with signage and the site

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                        Application Number: 161443
                                                                    Less than
                                                                   Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)        Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist              Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 13                                              Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 would not result in excessive glare leaving the site. A photometric plan (Attachment B)
 indicates that lighting would not leave the project site. However, a condition requiring
 installation of dimmers and shields or relocation fixtures to eliminate glare and or excessive
 light leaving the site would be required. Therefore impacts would be less than significant.


 4.     Create a new source of substantial light
        or glare which would adversely affect day
        or nighttime views in the area?
 Discussion: The project would contribute an incremental amount of night lighting to the
 visual environment. A condition requiring the majority of the site lighting to be turned off
 after close of business and allow only a limited number of interior lighting to remain on for
 security purposes. All sign lighting would be turned off after close of business (8:00pm on
 weekdays, 7:00pm on Saturday and 6:00pm on Sunday). This condition would ensure the
 impact on nighttime views would be less than significant.

B. AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY RESOURCES
In determining whether impacts to agricultural resources are significant environmental effects,
lead agencies may refer to the California Agricultural Land Evaluation and Site Assessment
Model (1997) prepared by the California Department of Conservation as an optional model to
use in assessing impacts on agriculture and farmland. In determining whether impacts to
forest resources, including timberland, are significant environmental effects, lead agencies
may refer to information compiled by the California Department of Forestry and Fire
Protection regarding the state’s inventory of forest land, including the Forest and Range
Assessment Project and the Forest Legacy Assessment Project; and forest carbon
measurement methodology provided in Forest Protocols adopted by the California Air
Resources Board. Would the project:
 1.    Convert Prime Farmland, Unique
       Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide
       Importance (Farmland), as shown on the
       maps prepared pursuant to the Farmland
       Mapping and Monitoring Program of the
       California Resources Agency, to non-
       agricultural use?
 Discussion: The project site does not contain any lands designated as Prime Farmland,
 Unique Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide Importance as shown on the maps prepared
 pursuant to the Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program of the California Resources
 Agency. In addition, the project does not contain Farmland of Local Importance. Therefore,
 no Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, Farmland of Statewide or Farmland of Local
 Importance would be converted to a non-agricultural use. No impact would occur from
 project implementation.



Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                      Application Number: 161443
                                                                     Less than
                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)         Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist               Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 14                                               Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 2.    Conflict with existing zoning for
       agricultural use, or a Williamson Act
       contract?
 Discussion: The project site is currently zoned C-2 (Community Commercial), which is
 not considered to be an agricultural zone. Additionally, the project site’s land is not under a
 Williamson Act Contract. Therefore, the project does not conflict with existing zoning for
 agricultural use, or a Williamson Act Contract. No impact is anticipated.

 3.    Conflict with existing zoning for, or cause
       rezoning of, forest land (as defined in
       Public Resources Code Section
       12220(g)), timberland (as defined by
       Public Resources Code Section 4526), or
       timberland zoned Timberland Production
       (as defined by Government Code Section
       51104(g))?
 Discussion: The project is not located near land designated as Timber Resource. Therefore,
 the project would not affect the resource or access to harvest the resource in the future. The
 timber resource may only be harvested in accordance with California Department of Forestry
 timber harvest rules and regulations.

 4.    Result in the loss of forest land or
       conversion of forest land to non-forest
       use?
 Discussion: No forest land occurs on the project site or in the immediate vicinity. See
 discussion under B-3 above. No impact is anticipated.

 5.    Involve other changes in the existing
       environment which, due to their location
       or nature, could result in conversion of
       Farmland, to non-agricultural use or
       conversion of forest land to non-forest
       use?
 Discussion: The project site and surrounding area within a radius of approximately one
 mile does not contain any lands designated as Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, Farmland
 of Statewide Importance or Farmland of Local Importance as shown on the maps prepared
 pursuant to the Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program of the California Resources
 Agency. Therefore, no Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, Farmland of Statewide, or
 Farmland of Local Importance would be converted to a non-agricultural use. In addition, the
 project site contains no forest land, and no forest land occurs within 1.5 miles of the proposed
 project site. Therefore, no impacts are anticipated.

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
                                                                     Less than
                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)         Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist               Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 15                                               Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

C. AIR QUALITY
The significance criteria established by the Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District
(MBUAPCD) has been relied upon to make the following determinations. Would the project:
 1.    Conflict with or obstruct implementation of
       the applicable air quality plan?
 Discussion: The project would not conflict with or obstruct any long-range air quality plans
 of the Monterey Bay Air Resources District (MBARD). Because general construction activity
 related emissions (i.e., temporary sources) are accounted for in the emission inventories
 included in the plans, impacts to air quality plan objectives are less than significant. See C-2
 below.
 General estimated basin-wide construction-related emissions are included in the MBARD
 emission inventory (which, in part, form the basis for the air quality plans cited below) and
 are not expected to prevent long-term attainment or maintenance of the ozone and
 particulate matter standards within the North Central Coast Air Basin (NCCAB). Therefore,
 temporary construction impacts related to air quality plans for these pollutants from the
 proposed project would be less than significant, and no mitigation would be required, since
 they are presently estimated and accounted for in the District’s emission inventory, as
 described below. No stationary sources would be constructed that would be long-term
 permanent sources of emissions.

 2.    Violate any air quality standard or
       contribute substantially to an existing or
       projected air quality violation?
 Discussion: Santa Cruz County is located within the North Central Coast Air Basin
 (NCCAB). The NCCAB does not meet state standards for ozone (reactive organic gases
 [ROGs] and nitrogen oxides [NOx]) and fine particulate matter (PM10). Therefore, the
 regional pollutants of concern that would be emitted by the project are ozone precursors and
 PM10.
 Ozone is the main pollutant of concern for the NCCAB. The primary sources of ROG within
 the air basin are on- and off-road motor vehicles, petroleum production and marketing,
 solvent evaporation, and prescribed burning. The primary sources of NOx are on- and off-
 road motor vehicles, stationary source fuel combustion, and industrial processes. In 2010,
 daily emissions of ROGs were estimated at 63 tons per day. Of this, area-wide sources
 represented 49 percent, mobile sources represented 36 percent, and stationary sources
 represented 15 percent. Daily emissions of NOx were estimated at 54 tons per day with 69
 percent from mobile sources, 22 percent from stationary sources, and 9 percent from area-
 wide sources. In addition, the region is “NOx sensitive,” meaning that ozone formation due



Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
                                                                                                     Less than
                                                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                                      Potentially           with           Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                                            Significant        Mitigation        Significant
 Page 16                                                                            Impact         Incorporated          Impact          No Impact

 to local emissions is more limited by the availability of NOx as opposed to the availability of
 ROGs (MBARD, 2013b).
 PM10 is the other major pollutant of concern for the NCCAB. In the NCCAB, highest
 particulate levels and most frequent violations occur in the coastal corridor. In this area,
 fugitive dust from various geological and man-made sources combines to exceed the standard.
 Nearly three quarters of all NCCAB exceedances occur at these coastal sites where sea salt is
 often the main factor causing exceedance (MBARD, 2005). In 2005 daily emissions of PM10
 were estimated at 102 tons per day. Of this, entrained road dust represented 35 percent of all
 PM10 emission, windblown dust 20 percent, agricultural tilling operations 15 percent, waste
 burning 17 percent, construction 4 percent, and mobile sources, industrial processes, and
 other sources made up 9 percent (MBAPRD, 2008).
 Given the modest amount of new traffic that would be generated by the project there is no
 indication that new emissions of ROGs or NOx would exceed MBARD thresholds for these
 pollutants; and therefore, there would not be a significant contribution to an existing air
 quality violation.
 Project construction may result in a short term, localized decrease in air quality due to
 generation of PM10. However, standard dust control best management practices, such as
 periodic watering, would be implemented during construction to avoid significant air quality
 impacts from the generation of PM10.
          Table 1: Construction Activity with Potentially Significant Impacts from Pollutant PM 10
  Activity                                                                                Potential Threshold*
  Construction site with minimal earthmoving                                              8.1 acres per day
  Construction site with earthmoving (grading, excavation)                                2.2 acres per day
  *Based on Midwest Research Institute, Improvement of Specific Emission Factors (1995). Assumes 21.75 working weekdays per month and daily
  watering of site.
  Note:   Construction projects below the screening level thresholds shown above are assumed to be below the 82 lb/day threshold of significance,
          while projects with activity levels higher than those above may have a significant impact on air quality. Additional mitigation and analysis
          of the project impact may be necessary for those construction activities.
  Source: Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District, 2008.



 Impacts
 As required by the MBARD, construction activities (e.g., excavation, grading, on-site
 vehicles) which directly generate 82 pounds per day or more of PM10 would have a significant
 impact on local air quality when they are located nearby and upwind of sensitive receptors
 such as the community of Soquel (Table 1). Construction projects below the screening level
 thresholds shown in Table 1 are assumed to be below the 82 lb/day threshold of significance,
 while projects with activity levels higher than those thresholds may have a significant impact
 on air quality. The proposed project would require minimal grading. Although the project



Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                                                          Application Number: 161443
                                                                    Less than
                                                                   Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)        Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist              Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 17                                              Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 would produce PM10, it would be far below the 82 pounds per day threshold. This would
 result in less than significant impacts on air quality from the generation of PM10.
 Construction projects using typical construction equipment such as dump trucks, scrapers,
 bulldozers, compactors and front-end loaders that temporarily emit precursors of ozone [i.e.,
 volatile organic compounds (VOC) or oxides of nitrogen (NOx)], are accommodated in the
 emission inventories of state- and federally-required air plans and would not have a
 significant impact on the attainment and maintenance of ozone AAQS (MBARD 2008).
 Although not a mitigation measure per se (i.e., required by law), California ultralow sulfur
 diesel fuel with a maximum sulfur content of 15 ppm by weight will be used in all diesel-
 powered equipment, which minimizes sulfur dioxide and particulate matter.
 The following Best Management Practices (BMPs) and Best Available Control Technology
 (BACT) will be implemented during all site excavation and grading.

 MBPs and BACT
AQ-1:        Contracted Diesel Control Measures: In addition to the use of Tiered engines and
             California ultralow sulfur diesel fuel, the following requirements will be
             incorporated into contract specifications:
                To minimize potential diesel odor impacts on nearby receptors (pursuant to
                 MBUAPCD Rule 402, Nuisances), construction equipment will be properly
                 tuned. A schedule of tune-ups will be developed and performed for all
                 equipment operating within the project area. A written log of required tune-
                 ups will be maintained and a copy of the log will be submitted to the County
                 of Santa Cruz Department of Public Works (DPW) Planning Director for
                 review every 2,000 service hours.
                Fixed temporary sources of air emissions (such as portable pumps, compressors,
                 generators, etc.) will be electrically powered unless the contractor submits
                 documentation and receives written approval from the County of Santa Cruz
                 DPW that the use of such equipment is not practical, feasible, or available
                 (generally contingent upon power line proximity, capacity, and accessibility).
                 California ultralow sulfur diesel fuel with maximum sulfur content of 15 ppm
                 by weight (ppmw S), or an approved alternative fuel, will be used for on-site
                 fixed equipment not using line power.
                To minimize diesel emission impacts, construction contracts will require off-
                 road compression ignition equipment operators to reduce unnecessary idling
                 with a 2-minute time limit, subject to monitoring and written documentation.
                On-road material hauling vehicles will shut off engines while queuing for
                 loading and unloading for time periods longer than 2 minutes, subject to
                 monitoring and written documentation.

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                      Application Number: 161443
                                                                     Less than
                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)         Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist               Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 18                                               Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

                Off-road diesel equipment will be fitted with verified diesel emission control
                 systems (e.g., diesel oxidation catalysts) to the extent reasonably and
                 economically feasible.
                Utilize alternative fuel equipment (i.e., compressed or liquefied natural gas,
                 biodiesel, electric) to the extent reasonably and economically feasible.
             Feasibility will be determined consistent with Best Available Control Technology
             (BACT) general criteria: 1) achieved in practice; 2) contained in adopted control
             measures; 3) technologically feasible; and 4) cost-effective.
 AQ-2:       Diesel Particulate Matter Emissions Control Measures: In addition, the project will
             implement the following measures to reduce particulate matter emissions from
             diesel exhaust:
                Grid power will be used instead of diesel generators where it is feasible to
                 connect to grid power (generally contingent upon power line proximity,
                 capacity, and accessibility).
                The project specifications will include 13 CCR Sections 2480 and 2485, which
                 limit the idling of all diesel-fueled commercial vehicles (weighing over 10,000
                 pounds, both California- or non-California-based trucks) to 30 seconds at a
                 school or 5 minutes at any location. In addition, the use of diesel auxiliary
                 power systems and main engines will be limited to 5 minutes when within 100
                 feet of homes or schools while the driver is resting.
                The project specifications will include 17 CCR Section 93115, Airborne Toxic
                 Control Measure for Stationary Compression Ignition Engines, which specifies
                 fuel and fuel additive requirements; emission standards for operation of any
                 stationary, diesel-fueled, compression-ignition engines; and operation
                 restrictions within 500 feet of school grounds when school is in session.
                A schedule of low-emissions tune-ups will be developed and such tune-ups will
                 be performed on all equipment, particularly for haul and delivery trucks.
                Low-sulfur (≤ 15 ppmw S) fuels will be used in all stationary and mobile
                 equipment.
 AQ-3:       Dust Control Measures: The following controls will be implemented at the
             construction and staging sites as applicable:
                Water all active construction areas at least twice daily as necessary and
                 indicated by soil and air conditions.
                Cover all trucks hauling soil, sand, and other loose materials or require all
                 trucks to maintain at least 2 feet of freeboard.
                Pave, apply water three times daily, or apply (nontoxic) soil stabilizers on all
                 unpaved access roads, parking areas and staging areas at construction sites.


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
                                                                      Less than
                                                                     Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)          Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 19                                                Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

                Sweep daily (with water sweepers) all paved access roads, parking areas and
                 staging areas at construction sites.
                Sweep streets daily (with water sweepers) if visible soil material is carried onto
                 adjacent public streets.
                All disturbed areas, including storage piles, which are not being actively
                 utilized for construction purposes, will be effectively stabilized of dust
                 emissions using water, chemical stabilizer/suppressant, covered with a tarp or
                 other suitable cover or vegetative ground cover.
                All on-site unpaved roads and off-site unpaved access roads will be effectively
                 stabilized of dust emissions using water or chemical stabilizer/suppressant.
                All land clearing, grubbing, scraping, excavation, land leveling, grading, cut &
                 fill, and demolition activities will be effectively controlled of fugitive dust
                 emissions utilizing application of water or by presoaking.
                When materials are transported off site, all material will be covered, or
                 effectively wetted to limit visible dust emissions, and at least 6 inches of
                 freeboard space from the top of the container will be maintained.
                All operations will limit or expeditiously remove the accumulation of mud or
                 dirt from adjacent public streets at the end of each workday. (The use of dry
                 rotary brushes is expressly prohibited except where preceded or accompanied
                 by sufficient wetting to limit the visible dust emissions. Use of blower devices
                 is expressly forbidden.)
                Following the addition of materials to, or the removal of materials from, the
                 surface of outdoor storage piles, said piles will be effectively stabilized of
                 fugitive dust emissions utilizing sufficient water or chemical
                 stabilizer/suppressant.
                Within urban areas, trackout will be immediately removed when it extends 50
                 or more feet from the site and at the end of each workday.
                Any site with 150 or more vehicle trips per day will prevent carryout and
                 trackout.
                Hydroseed or apply (nontoxic) soil stabilizers to inactive construction areas
                 (previously graded areas inactive for 10 days or more).
                Enclose, cover, water twice daily, or apply (nontoxic) soil binders to exposed
                 stockpiles (dirt, sand, etc.).
                Limit traffic speeds on unpaved roads to 15 miles per hour.
                Install sandbags or other erosion control measures to prevent silt runoff to
                 public roadways from sites with a slope greater than 1 percent.
                Replant vegetation in disturbed areas as quickly as possible.
                Install wheel washers for all exiting trucks, or wash off all trucks and
                 equipment leaving the site.

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                        Application Number: 161443
                                                                      Less than
                                                                     Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)          Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 20                                                Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

                Install wind breaks at windward side(s) of construction areas.
                Suspend excavation and grading activity when winds (instantaneous gusts)
                 exceed 20 miles per hour.
                Limit the area subject to excavation, grading, and other construction activity at
                 any one time.
 Implementation of the above BMPs and BACT would ensure that emissions of diesel
 particulate matter (DPM) and fugitive dust from project excavation and grading would be
 consistent with the MBARD emissions inventories. Impacts would be less than significant.
 3.    Result in a cumulatively considerable net
       increase of any criteria pollutant for which
       the project region is non-attainment under
       an applicable federal or state ambient air
       quality standard (including releasing
       emissions which exceed quantitative
       thresholds for ozone precursors)?
 Discussion: Project construction would have a limited and temporary potential to
 contribute to existing violations of California air quality standards for ozone and PM 10
 primarily through diesel engine exhaust and fugitive dust. However, the Santa Cruz
 monitoring station has not had any recent violations of federal or state air quality standards
 mainly through dispersion of construction-related emission sources. BMPs and BACT
 described above under C-2 would ensure emissions remain below a level of significance.
 Therefore, the proposed project would not result in a cumulatively considerable net increase
 in criteria pollutants. The impact on ambient air quality would be less than significant.

 4.    Expose sensitive receptors to substantial
       pollutant concentrations?
 Discussion: The proposed car dealership and service center project would not generate
 substantial pollutant concentrations. Emissions from construction activities represent
 temporary impacts that are typically short in duration. Impacts to sensitive receptors would
 be less than significant.
 Impacts
 The proposed project is located in the community of Soquel and sensitive receptors would be
 as close as 550 feet from the project area (residential homes). Since construction is anticipated
 to occur over a 26 week period, the sensitive receptors would be affected for a maximum of
 26 weeks, which is less than 0.7 percent of the 70-year maximum exposed individual (MEI)
 criteria used for assessing public health risk due to emissions of certain air pollutants (MBARD
 2008).



Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                        Application Number: 161443
                                                                       Less than
                                                                      Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)           Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                 Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 21                                                 Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 Due to the intermittent and short-term temporary nature of construction activities (i.e., 26
 weeks), emissions of DPM, TACs, or MSATs would not be sufficient to pose a significant risk
 to sensitive receptors from construction equipment operations during the course of the
 project with implementation of the following BMPs and BACT.
 BMPs and BACT
 MBUAPCD control measures for diesel exhaust would be implemented as described in BMPs
 and BACT AQ-1 and AQ-2. The project would not be expected to expose sensitive receptors
 to substantial pollutant concentrations. Impacts would be less than significant.

 5.    Create objectionable odors affecting a
       substantial number of people?
 Discussion: California ultralow sulfur diesel fuel with a maximum sulfur content of 15 ppm
 by weight would be used in all diesel-powered equipment, which minimizes emissions of
 sulfurous gases (sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, carbon disulfide, and carbonyl sulfide).
 Therefore, no objectionable odors are anticipated from construction activities associated with
 the proposed project, and no mitigation measures would be required. The proposed project
 would not create objectionable odors affecting a substantial number of people; therefore,
 impacts are expected to be less than significant.

D. BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Would the project:
 1.    Have a substantial adverse effect, either
       directly or through habitat modifications,
       on any species identified as a candidate,
       sensitive, or special status species in local
       or regional plans, policies, or regulations,
       or by the California Department of Fish
       and Wildlife, or U.S. Fish and Wildlife
       Service?
 Discussion: According to the California Natural Diversity Data Base (CNDDB), maintained
 by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, indicates that there are known special
 status plant or animal species in the site vicinity (white-rayed pentacheata, obscure bumble
 bee, and Zayante band-winged grasshopper). Due to the lack of suitable habitat and the
 disturbed nature of the site, these special status plant and animal species are not expected to
 occur in the project area.
 Migratory Bird Treaty Act
 Migratory birds are protected under the federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) of 1918
 (16 U.S.C. 703-711). The MBTA makes it unlawful to take, possess, buy, sell, purchase, or
 barter any migratory bird listed in 50 CFR Part 10 including feathers or other parts, nests,

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                         Application Number: 161443
                                                                      Less than
                                                                     Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)          Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 22                                                Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 eggs, or products, except as allowed by implementing regulations (50 CFR 21). All migratory
 bird species are protected by the MBTA. Any disturbance that causes direct injury, death,
 nest abandonment, or forced fledging of migratory birds, is restricted under the MBTA. Any
 removal of active nests during the breeding season or any disturbance that results in the
 abandonment of nestlings is considered a ‘take’ of the species under federal law.
 Impacts
 The project area provides potential nesting habitat for birds of prey and birds listed by the
 Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA). Since nests could become established in the vegetation
 to be removed before construction begins, implementation of the following mitigation would
 reduce impacts to below a level of significance.
 Mitigation Measures
BIO-1:       Under the MBTA, nests that contain eggs or unfledged young are not to be
             disturbed during the breeding season. The nesting season for migratory birds and
             birds of prey is generally 1 February through 31 August. Implementation of the
             following measures will avoid potential impacts.
                If construction begins outside the 1 February to 31 August breeding season,
                 there will be no need to conduct a preconstruction survey for active nests.
                If construction is scheduled to begin between 1 February and 31 August then
                 a qualified biologist shall conduct a preconstruction survey for active nests.
                 The survey will include a 250 foot radius from the work area for nesting birds
                 of prey and a 50 foot radius from the work area for other nesting MBTA
                 protected birds. The survey will be conducted from publicly accessible areas
                 within one two weeks prior to construction. If no active nest of a bird of prey
                 or MBTA bird is found, then no further mitigation measures are necessary.
                If an active nest of a bird of prey or MBTA bird is found, then the biologist
                 shall determine a buffer suitable to protect the nest until fledging. The size of
                 suitable buffers depends on the species of bird, the location of the nest relative
                 to the Project, Project activities during the time the nest is active, and other
                 Project specific conditions.
                No construction activity shall be allowed in the buffer until the biologist
                 determines that the nest is no longer active, or unless monitoring determines
                 that a smaller buffer will protect the active nest. The buffer may be reduced if
                 the biologist monitors the construction activities and determines that no
                 disturbance to the active nest is occurring.




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                        Application Number: 161443
                                                                       Less than
                                                                      Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)           Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                 Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 23                                                 Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

                If an active nest is identified in or adjacent to the construction zone after
                 construction has started, the above measures will be implemented to ensure
                 construction is not causing disturbance to the nest.

 2.    Have a substantial adverse effect on any
       riparian habitat or sensitive natural
       community identified in local or regional
       plans, policies, regulations (e.g., wetland,
       native grassland, special forests, intertidal
       zone, etc.) or by the California
       Department of Fish and Wildlife or U.S.
       Fish and Wildlife Service?
 Discussion: There are no mapped or designated sensitive biotic communities on or adjacent
 to the project site.

 3.    Have a substantial adverse effect on
       federally protected wetlands as defined by
       Section 404 of the Clean Water Act
       (including, but not limited to marsh, vernal
       pool, coastal, etc.) through direct removal,
       filling, hydrological interruption, or other
       means?
 Discussion: There are no mapped or designated federally protected wetlands on or adjacent
 to the project site. Therefore, no impacts would occur from project implementation.

 4     Interfere substantially with the movement
       of any native resident or migratory fish or
       wildlife species or migratory wildlife
       corridors, or impede the use of native
       wildlife nursery sites?
 Discussion: The proposed project does not involve any activities that would interfere with
 the movements or migrations of fish or wildlife, or impede use of a known wildlife nursery
 site.

 5.    Conflict with any local policies or
       ordinances protecting biological resources
       (such as the Sensitive Habitat Ordinance,
       Riparian and Wetland Protection
       Ordinance, and the Significant Tree
       Protection Ordinance)?
 Discussion: The project would not conflict with any local policies or ordinances.


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                         Application Number: 161443
                                                                      Less than
                                                                     Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)          Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 24                                                Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact




 6.    Conflict with the provisions of an adopted
       Habitat Conservation Plan, Natural
       Community Conservation Plan, or other
       approved local, regional, or state habitat
       conservation plan?
 Discussion: The proposed project would not conflict with the provisions of any adopted
 Habitat Conservation Plan Natural Community Conservation Plan, or other approved local,
 regional, or state habitat conservation plan. Therefore, no impact would occur.
 7.    Produce nighttime lighting that would
       substantially illuminate wildlife habitats?
 Discussion: The subject property is located in an urbanized area and is surrounded by
 existing commercial development that currently generates nighttime lighting. There are no
 sensitive animal habitats within or adjacent to the project site. No impact would occur.

E. CULTURAL RESOURCES
Would the project:
 1.    Cause a substantial adverse change in
       the significance of a historical resource as
       defined in CEQA Guidelines Section
       15064.5?
 Discussion: The existing structures on the project site are not designated as a historic
 resource on any federal, state or local inventory. Due to the age of the existing structures, an
 evaluation for potential historical significance was prepared by Archives & Architecture,
 LLC. In a Historic Report dated 12/16/16 (Attachment C), it was concluded that the structures
 do not possess historical significance and do not warrant listing in federal, state or local
 inventories. As a result, no impacts to historical resources would occur from project
 implementation.

 2.    Cause a substantial adverse change in
       the significance of an archaeological
       resource pursuant to CEQA Guidelines
       Section 15064.5?
 Discussion: No archeological resources have been identified in the project area. Pursuant
 to County Code Section 16.40.040, if at any time in the preparation for or process of
 excavating or otherwise disturbing the ground, any human remains of any age, or any artifact
 or other evidence of a Native American cultural site which reasonably appears to exceed 100
 years of age are discovered, the responsible persons shall immediately cease and desist from



Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                        Application Number: 161443
                                                                     Less than
                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)         Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist               Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 25                                               Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 all further site excavation and comply with the notification procedures given in County Code
 Chapter 16.40.040.

 3.    Disturb any human remains, including
       those interred outside of dedicated
       cemeteries?
 Discussion: Impacts are expected to be less than significant. However, pursuant to Section
 16.40.040 of the Santa Cruz County Code, if at any time during site preparation, excavation,
 or other ground disturbance associated with this project, human remains are discovered, the
 responsible persons shall immediately cease and desist from all further site excavation and
 notify the sheriff-coroner and the Planning Director. If the coroner determines that the
 remains are not of recent origin, a full archeological report shall be prepared and
 representatives of the local Native California Indian group shall be contacted. Disturbance
 shall not resume until the significance of the archeological resource is determined and
 appropriate mitigations to preserve the resource on the site are established.

 4.    Directly or indirectly destroy a unique
       paleontological resource or site or unique
       geologic feature?
 Discussion: No unique paleontological resources of unique geologic feature are known to
 occur in the vicinity of the proposed project.no impacts are anticipated.

F. GEOLOGY AND SOILS
Would the project:
 1.    Expose people or structures to potential
       substantial adverse effects, including the
       risk of loss, injury, or death involving:
       A.     Rupture of a known earthquake fault,
              as delineated on the most recent
              Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
              Zoning Map issued by the State
              Geologist for the area or based on
              other substantial evidence of a
              known fault? Refer to Division of
              Mines and Geology Special
              Publication 42.


       B.     Strong seismic ground shaking?




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
                                                                       Less than
                                                                      Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)           Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                 Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 26                                                 Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

       C.     Seismic-related ground failure,
              including liquefaction?


       D.     Landslides?

 Discussion (A through D): The project site is located outside of the limits of the State
 Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone (County of Santa Cruz GIS Mapping, California Division
 of Mines and Geology, 2001). However, the project site is located approximately eight miles
 southwest of the San Andreas fault zone, and approximately five miles southwest of the
 Zayante fault zone. While the San Andreas fault is larger and considered more active, each
 fault is capable of generating moderate to severe ground shaking from a major earthquake.
 Consequently, large earthquakes can be expected in the future. The October 17, 1989 Loma
 Prieta earthquake (magnitude 7.1) was the second largest earthquake in central California
 history.
 All of Santa Cruz County is subject to some hazard from earthquakes. However, the project
 site is not located within or adjacent to a county or state mapped fault zone. A geotechnical
 investigation for the proposed project was performed by Butano Geotechnical Engineering,
 Inc. dated June 2016 (Attachment D). The report concluded that a low probability exists for
 potential for fault surface rupture and that seismic shaking can be managed by constructing
 conventional foundation systems and by following the recommendations in the geotechnical
 report referenced above. Impacts would be less than significant.

 2.    Be located on a geologic unit or soil that is
       unstable, or that would become unstable
       as a result of the project, and potentially
       result in on- or off-site landslide, lateral
       spreading, subsidence, liquefaction, or
       collapse?
 Discussion: The geotechnical report cited above (see Discussion under F-1) did not identify
 a significant potential for damage caused by any of these hazards.

 3.    Develop land with a slope exceeding
       30%?
 Discussion: The project site does not contain slopes that exceed 30%. No impact is
 expected.

 4.    Result in substantial soil erosion or the
       loss of topsoil?



Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                         Application Number: 161443
                                                                      Less than
                                                                     Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)          Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 27                                                Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact


 Discussion: Some potential for erosion exists during the construction phase of the project,
 however, this potential is minimal because the project site is relatively flat in topography and
 standard erosion controls are a required condition of the project. Prior to approval of a
 grading or building permit, the project must have an approved Erosion Control Plan (Section
 16.22.060 of the County Code), which would specify detailed erosion and sedimentation
 control measures. The plan would include provisions for disturbed areas to be planted with
 ground cover and to be maintained to minimize surface erosion. Impacts from soil erosion or
 loss of topsoil would be considered less than significant.

 5.    Be located on expansive soil, as defined
       in Section 1802.3.2 of the California
       Building Code (2007), creating substantial
       risks to life or property?
 Discussion: The geotechnical report for the project did not identify any elevated risk
 associated with expansive soils. Therefore, no impact is anticipated.

 6.    Have soils incapable of adequately
       supporting the use of septic tanks, leach
       fields, or alternative waste water disposal
       systems where sewers are not available
       for the disposal of waste water?
 Discussion: No septic systems are proposed. The project would connect to the Santa Cruz
 County Sanitation District, and the applicant would be required to pay standard sewer
 connection and service fees that fund sanitation improvements within the district as a
 Condition of Approval for the project. A will-serve letter from the Santa Cruz County
 Sanitation District has been provided (Attachment E).

 7.    Result in coastal cliff erosion?

 Discussion: The proposed project is not located in the vicinity of a coastal cliff or bluff;
 and therefore, would not contribute to coastal cliff erosion. No impact is anticipated.

G. GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
Would the project:
 1.    Generate greenhouse gas emissions,
       either directly or indirectly, that may have
       a significant impact on the environment?
 Discussion: Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions for transportation projects can be divided
 into those produced during construction and those produced during operations. Construction
 GHG emissions include emissions produced as a result of material processing, emissions


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                        Application Number: 161443
                                                                   Less than
                                                                  Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)       Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist             Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 28                                             Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 produced by onsite construction equipment, and emissions arising from traffic delays due to
 construction. These emissions would be produced at different levels throughout the
 construction phase; their frequency and occurrence can be reduced through innovations in
 plans and specifications and by implementing better traffic management during construction
 phases.
 The project would result in a small temporary increase in greenhouse gas emissions during
 construction. Permanent operational project emissions are also expected to be minimal. A
 California Emissions Estimator Model (CalEEMod) report that was prepared on April 7, 2017
 (Attachment G) determined annual operational emissions to be 474 metric tons of CO2e and
 expected 116 metric tons of CO2e during construction. However, in the absence of further
 regulatory or scientific information related to greenhouse gas emissions and California
 Environmental Quality Act significance, it is too speculative to make a determination on the
 project’s direct impact and its contribution on the cumulative scale to climate change.
 Nonetheless, the County has strategies to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions and energy
 consumption. These measures included in the County of Santa Cruz Climate Action Strategy
 (County of Santa Cruz, 2013) are outlined below.
 Strategies for the Reduction of Greenhouse Gases from Transportation
        Reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT) through County and regional long range
         planning efforts.
        Increase bicycle ridership and walking through incentive programs and investment in
         bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure and safety programs.
        Provide infrastructure to support zero and low emissions vehicles (plug in, hybrid
         plug-in vehicles).
        Increase employee use of alternative commute modes: bus transit, walking, bicycling,
         carpooling, etc.
        Reduce County fleet emissions.
 Strategies for the Reduction of Greenhouse Gases from Energy Use
        Develop a Community Choice Aggregation (CCA) Program, if feasible.
        Increase energy efficiency in new and existing buildings and facilities.
        Enhance and expand the Green Business Program.
        Increase local renewable energy generation.
        Public education about climate change and impacts of individual actions.
        Continue to improve the Green Building Program by exceeding the minimum
         standards of the state green building code (Cal Green).




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                     Application Number: 161443
                                                                         Less than
                                                                        Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)             Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                   Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 29                                                   Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

          Form partnerships and cooperative agreements among local governments, educational
           institutions, nongovernmental organizations, and private businesses as a cost-effective
           way to facilitate mitigation and adaptation.
          Reduce energy use for water supply through water conservation strategies.
 Impacts are expected to be less than significant.

 2.       Conflict with an applicable plan, policy or
          regulation adopted for the purpose of
          reducing the emissions of greenhouse
          gases?
 Discussion: See the discussion under G-1 above. No significant impacts are anticipated.

H. HAZARDS AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Would the project:
 1.       Create a significant hazard to the public or
          the environment as a result of the routine
          transport, use or disposal of hazardous
          materials?
 Discussion: The proposed project would not create a significant hazard to the public or the
 environment. Though the project would involve the storage of some hazardous materials
 onsite, no routine transport or disposal of hazardous materials is proposed. During
 construction, fuel would be used at the project site. In addition, fueling may occur within
 the limits of the staging area. Best management practices would be used to ensure that no
 impacts would occur. Impacts are expected to be less than significant.

 2.       Create a significant hazard to the public or
          the environment through reasonably
          foreseeable upset and accident conditions
          involving the release of hazardous
          materials into the environment?
 Discussion: The proposed project would result in the demolition of four residential homes
 and associated structures at the project site, which may contain asbestos and/or lead. Property
 records obtained from the County of Santa Cruz Assessors Office stated that structures within
 the planning area were constructed between 1915 and 1948. The Phase I Environmental Site
 Assessment prepared by Sierra Delta Consultants LLC on April 21, 2016 (Attachment J)
 excluded ACMs (asbestos-contained materials) and LBPs (lead based paints) from the
 evaluation. Therefore it is assumed that ACMs and LBPs are associated with these structures.
 Potential release of ACMs and LBPs during demolition activities is considered a potentially
 significant impact. Implementation of the following mitigation measures ensures that this
 impact is reduced to a less than significant impact.

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                           Application Number: 161443
                                                                     Less than
                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)         Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist               Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 30                                               Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 Mitigation Measures
HAZ-1:       Pursuant to Cal OSHA regulations, project applicants shall have each structure
             within the planning area within Assessor Parcel numbers 030-121-08, 030-121-12,
             and 030-121-13 inspected by a qualified environmental specialist for the presence
             of ACMs and LBPs prior to obtaining a demolition permit from the County of Santa
             Cruz Planning Department. If ACMs and LBPs are found during the investigations,
             project applicants with the planning area shall develop a remediation program to
             ensure that these materials are removed and disposed of by a licensed contractor
             in accordance with all federal a, state and local laws and regulation, subject to
             approval by the MBARD, and the Santa Cruz County Environmental Health
             Department, as applicable. Any hazardous materials that are removed from the
             structures shall be disposed of at an approved landfill facility in accordance with
             federal, state and local laws and regulations.
HAZ-2:       Project applicants within the planning area shall have the interior of all on-site
             structures within Assessor Parcel Numbers: 030-121-08, 030-121-12, and 030-121-
             13 visually inspected by a qualified environmental specialist to determine the
             presence of hazardous materials prior to obtaining a demolition permit from the
             County of Santa Cruz Planning Department. Should any hazardous materials be
             encountered with any of the structures, the materials shall be tested and properly
             disposed of in accordance with federal, state and local regulatory requirements.
             Any stained soils or surfaces underneath the removed materials shall be sampled.
             Subsequent testing shall indicate the appropriate level of remediation necessary
             and a work plan shall be prepared in order to remediate the soil in accordance with
             all applicable federal, state and local regulations prior to issuance of a grading
             permit.
 Implementation of the mitigation measures HAZ-1 and HAZ-2 would ensure that each
 residential home and associated structures are inspected by a qualified environmental
 specialist to determine the presence of ACMs and LBPs and hazardous materials prior to
 demolition. Should any hazardous materials be encountered with any on-site structures, the
 materials shall be tested and properly disposed of in accordance with State, and Federal
 regulatory requirements. Implementation of these mitigation measures would reduce this
 impact to less than significant.

 3.    Emit hazardous emissions or handle
       hazardous or acutely hazardous
       materials, substances, or waste within
       one-quarter mile of an existing or
       proposed school?



Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
                                                                        Less than
                                                                       Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)            Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                  Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 31                                                  Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact


 Discussion: Soquel High School is located at 405 Soquel San Jose Road, approximately 1,700
 feet to the northeast of the project site. Although fueling of equipment is likely to occur
 within the staging area, best management practices would be implemented. No impacts are
 anticipated.

 4.    Be located on a site which is included on
       a list of hazardous materials sites
       compiled pursuant to Government Code
       Section 65962.5 and, as a result, would it
       create a significant hazard to the public or
       the environment?
 Discussion: The project site is not included on the 12/19/2016 list of hazardous sites in
 Santa Cruz County compiled pursuant to Government Code Section 65962.5. Additionally, a
 Phase 1 Environmental Site Assessment, prepared April 21, 2016 (Attachment J) which found
 no evidence of existing hazardous environmental conditions or risks. No impacts are
 anticipated from project implementation.

 5.    For a project located within an airport land
       use plan or, where such a plan has not
       been adopted, within two miles of a public
       airport or public use airport, would the
       project result in a safety hazard for people
       residing or working in the project area?
 Discussion: The proposed project is not located within two miles of a public airport or
 public use airport. No impact is anticipated.

 6.    For a project within the vicinity of a private
       airstrip, would the project result in a safety
       hazard for people residing or working in
       the project area?
 Discussion: The proposed project is not located in the vicinity of a private airstrip. No
 impact is anticipated.

 7.    Impair implementation of or physically
       interfere with an adopted emergency
       response plan or emergency evacuation
       plan?
 Discussion: The proposed project would not conflict with implementation of the County
 of Santa Cruz Local Hazard Mitigation Plan 2015-2020 (County of Santa Cruz, 2020).



Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                          Application Number: 161443
                                                                     Less than
                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)         Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist               Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 32                                               Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 Therefore, no impacts to an adopted emergency response plan or evacuation Plan would
 occur from project implementation.
 8.    Expose people or structures to a
       significant risk of loss, injury or death
       involving wildland fires, including where
       wildlands are adjacent to urbanized areas
       or where residences are intermixed with
       wildlands?
 Discussion: The proposed project is not located in a Fire Hazard Area. However, the
 project design incorporates all applicable fire safety code requirements and includes fire
 protection devices as required by the local fire agency. Impacts would be less than significant.

I. HYDROLOGY, WATER SUPPLY, AND WATER QUALITY
Would the project:
 1.    Violate any water quality standards or
       waste discharge requirements?
 Discussion: The project would not discharge runoff either directly or indirectly into a
 public or private water supply. Commercial and industrial activities involving the storage of
 hazardous materials would comply with the requirements of the County of Santa Cruz
 Department of Environmental Health Services and stored in accordance with an approved
 Hazardous Materials Plan. The parking and driveway associated with the project would
 incrementally contribute urban pollutants to the environment; however, the contribution
 would be minimal given runoff would pass through bioswales prior to leaving the site.
 Potential siltation from the proposed project would be addressed through implementation of
 erosion control best management practices (BMPs). No water quality standards or waste
 discharge requirements would be violated. Impacts would be less than significant.

 2.    Substantially deplete groundwater
       supplies or interfere substantially with
       groundwater recharge such that there
       would be a net deficit in aquifer volume or
       a lowering of the local groundwater table
       level (e.g., the production rate of pre-
       existing nearby wells would drop to a level
       which would not support existing land
       uses or planned uses for which permits
       have been granted)?
 Discussion: The project would obtain water from the City of Santa Cruz and would not
 rely on private well water. Although the project would incrementally increase water




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
                                                                        Less than
                                                                       Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)            Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                  Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 33                                                  Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 demand, the City of Santa Cruz has indicated that adequate supplies are available to serve the
 project (Attachment F). The project is not located in a mapped groundwater recharge area.

 3.    Substantially alter the existing drainage
       pattern of the site or area, including
       through the alteration of the course of a
       stream or river, in a manner which would
       result in substantial erosion or siltation on-
       or off-site?
 Discussion: The proposed project is not located near any watercourses, and would not alter
 the existing overall drainage pattern of the site. Department of Public Works Drainage
 Section staff has reviewed and approved the proposed drainage plan. No impact would occur
 from project implementation.

 4.    Substantially alter the existing drainage
       pattern of the site or area, including
       through the alteration of the course of a
       stream or river, or substantially increase
       the rate or amount of surface runoff in a
       manner which would result in flooding, on-
       or off-site?
 Discussion: The proposed project is not located near any watercourses, and would not alter
 the existing overall drainage pattern of the site. Department of Public Works Drainage
 Section staff has reviewed and approved the proposed drainage plan. Impacts from project
 construction would be less than significant.

 5.    Create or contribute runoff water which
       would exceed the capacity of existing or
       planned storm water drainage systems, or
       provide substantial additional sources of
       polluted runoff?
 Discussion: Drainage Calculations prepared by Bowman & Williams, dated February 22,
 2017 (Attachment H), have been reviewed for potential drainage impacts and accepted by the
 Department of Public Works (DPW) Drainage Section staff. The calculations show that the
 project has been designed to reduce the estimated peak flow to below predevelopment flow
 levels. The runoff rate from the property would be controlled by constructing hardscapes
 with permeable asphalt and maintaining landscaping areas around the perimeter of the site
 where feasible. Landscape areas would serve as biofiltration prior to discharging into
 neighboring drainage inlets.
 Detention reservoirs within the permeable pavement would reduce increase runoff by
 providing sufficient storage to allow minimal infiltration back into the native soil. DPW staff

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                          Application Number: 161443
                                                                     Less than
                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)         Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist               Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 34                                               Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 have determined that existing storm water facilities are adequate to handle the increase in
 drainage associated with the project. Refer to response I-1 for discussion of urban
 contaminants and/or other polluting runoff. Impacts would be considered less than
 significant.

 6.    Otherwise substantially degrade water
       quality?
 Discussion: Please see discussion under I-1 above. Impacts would be considered less than
 significant with the implementation of BMPs.

 7.    Place housing within a 100-year flood
       hazard area as mapped on a federal
       Flood Hazard Boundary or Flood
       Insurance Rate Map or other flood hazard
       delineation map?
 Discussion: According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) National
 Flood Insurance Rate Map, dated May 16, 2012, no housing or any other development lies
 within a 100-year flood hazard area. Impacts from project implementation are expected to
 be less than significant.

 8.    Place within a 100-year flood hazard area
       structures which would impede or redirect
       flood flows?
 Discussion: According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) National
 Flood Insurance Rate Map, dated May 16, 2012, no portion of the project site lies within a
 100-year flood hazard area. Therefore, the proposed project would not impede or redirect
 flood flows. No impact would occur.

 9.    Expose people or structures to a
       significant risk of loss, injury or death
       involving flooding, including flooding as a
       result of the failure of a levee or dam?
 Discussion: The proposed project would not increase the risk of flooding and would not
 lead to the failure of a levee or dam. No impact would occur.

 10.   Inundation by seiche, tsunami, or
       mudflow?
 Discussion: There are two primary types of tsunami vulnerability in Santa Cruz County.
 The first is a teletsunami or distant source tsunami from elsewhere in the Pacific Ocean. This
 type of tsunami is capable of causing significant destruction in Santa Cruz County. However,

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
                                                                       Less than
                                                                      Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)           Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                 Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 35                                                 Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 this type of tsunami would usually allow time for the Tsunami Warning System for the Pacific
 Ocean to warn threatened coastal areas in time for evacuation (County of Santa Cruz 2010).
 The more vulnerable risk to the County of Santa Cruz is a tsunami generated as the result of
 an earthquake along one of the many earthquake faults in the region. Even a moderate
 earthquake could cause a local source tsunami from submarine landsliding in Monterey Bay.
 A local source tsunami generated by an earthquake on any of the faults affecting Santa Cruz
 County would arrive just minutes after the initial shock. The lack of warning time from such
 a nearby event would result in higher causalities than if it were a distant tsunami (County of
 Santa Cruz 2010).
 The project site is located approximately 1.3 miles inland, approximately 0.5 to 1.0 miles
 beyond the effects of a tsunami. In addition, no impact from a seiche or mudflow is
 anticipated. No impact would occur.

J. LAND USE AND PLANNING
Would the project:
 1.    Physically divide an established
       community?
 Discussion: The proposed project does not include any element that would physically
 divide an established community. No impact would occur.

 2.    Conflict with any applicable land use plan,
       policy, or regulation of an agency with
       jurisdiction over the project (including, but
       not limited to the general plan, specific
       plan, local coastal program, or zoning
       ordinance) adopted for the purpose of
       avoiding or mitigating an environmental
       effect?
 Discussion: The proposed project does not conflict with any regulations or policies adopted
 for the purpose of avoiding or mitigating an environmental effect. No impacts are anticipated.
 The currently land use designation of C-C (Community Commercial) and C-2 (Community
 Commercial) zoning prohibit the proposed use of the site as an automobile dealership and
 automobile service facility. However, the proposed land use designation of C-S (Service
 Commercial) and implementing zone district of C-4 (Service Commercial) would be an
 appropriate combination of land use designation and zoning for the proposed use. The
 surrounding area is developed with a number of existing service commercial uses including
 automobile oriented uses. As indicated, use of the current site has included outdoor storage
 of lumber materials, and construction materials, and automobiles associated with adjacent
 uses.


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                         Application Number: 161443
                                                                       Less than
                                                                      Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)           Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                 Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 36                                                 Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 The project site is noted as having a C-C (Community Commercial) Land Use designation in
 the SSCC Plan (Sustainable Santa Cruz County Plan). The SSCC Plan indicates a potential
 future street could be located immediately to the west of the project site and highlights other
 potential circulation improvements along upper 41st Avenue including additional transit drop
 off, enhanced bike lanes. As proposed, the project would be consistent with the range of
 concept designs intended to support revenue generating commercial uses in the Upper 41 st
 Avenue area and would construct a number of pedestrian and roadside improvements further
 meeting the objectives of the Sustainability Plan.

 3.    Conflict with any applicable habitat
       conservation plan or natural community
       conservation plan?
 Discussion: The proposed project would not conflict with any applicable habitat
 conservation plan or natural community conservation plan. No impact would occur.

K. MINERAL RESOURCES
Would the project:
 1.    Result in the loss of availability of a known
       mineral resource that would be of value to
       the region and the residents of the state?
 Discussion: The site does not contain any known mineral resources that would be of value
 to the region and the residents of the state. Therefore, no impact is anticipated from project
 implementation.

 2.    Result in the loss of availability of a
       locally-important mineral resource
       recovery site delineated on a local general
       plan, specific plan or other land use plan?
 Discussion: The project site is currently zoned C-2 (Community Commercial, which is not
 considered to be an Extractive Use Zone (M-3) nor does it have a Land Use Designation with
 a Quarry Designation Overlay (Q) (County of Santa Cruz 1994). Therefore, no potentially
 significant loss of availability of a known mineral resource of locally important mineral
 resource recovery (extraction) site delineated on a local general plan, specific plan or other
 land use plan would occur as a result of this project.

L. NOISE
Would the project result in:
 1.    Exposure of persons to or generation of
       noise levels in excess of standards
       established in the local general plan or


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                         Application Number: 161443
                                                                                                       Less than
                                                                                                      Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                                       Potentially            with          Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                                             Significant         Mitigation       Significant
 Page 37                                                                             Impact          Incorporated         Impact         No Impact

            noise ordinance, or applicable standards
            of other agencies?
 Discussion:
 The project proposes to construct a 12,550 square foot car dealership and a 7,500 square foot
 service area. The existing project area is highly urbanized with both a commercial zone and
 General Plan designation. Per County policy, average hourly noise levels shall not exceed
 the General Plan threshold of 50 Leq during the day and 45 Leq during the nighttime (see
 Table 2). Impulsive noise levels shall not exceed 65 dB during the day or 60 dB at night.
 However, allowable shall be raised to the ambient noise levels where the ambient levels
 exceed the allowable levels. In addition, allowable levels shall be reduced 5 dB if the ambient
 hourly Leq is at least 10 dB lower than the allowable level (County of Santa Cruz, 1994). Prior
 studies in the project area have concluded that the existing ambient noise level is
 approximately 68 dB hourly Leq at 50 feet from the centerline of Soquel Drive (County of
 Santa Cruz 1994).
 County of Santa Cruz General Plan
 The Santa Cruz County General Plan (County of Santa Cruz 1994) contains the following
 table, which specifies the maximum allowable noise exposure for stationary noise sources
 (Table 2). The County of Santa Cruz has not adopted noise thresholds for construction noise.

 The following applicable noise related policy is found in the Public Safety and Noise Element
 of the Santa Cruz County General Plan (Santa Cruz County 1994).
       Policy 6.9.4 Commercial and Industrial Development. For all new commercial and
        industrial developments which would increase noise levels above the maximum allowable
        standards of the Land Use Compatibility Guidelines in Figure 6-1, or Figure 6-2, the best
        available control technologies will be used to minimize noise levels. In no case shall the
        noise levels exceed the standards of Figure 6-2.
       Policy 6.9.7 Construction Noise. Require mitigation of construction noise as a condition
        of future project approvals.

                   Table 2: Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure for Stationary Noise Sources1
                                                                 Daytime5                                     Nighttime2, 5
                                                                 (7:00 am to 10:00 pm)                        (10:00 pm to 7:00 am)
     Hourly Leq average hourly noise level, dB3                  50                                           45
     Maximum Level,       dB3                                    70                                           65
     Maximum Level, dB – Impulsive Noise4                        65                                           60
     Notes:
      1 As determined at the property line of the receiving land use. When determining the effectiveness of noise mitigation measures, the
          standards may be applied to the receptor side of noise barriers or other property line noise mitigation measures.
      2 Applies only where the receiving land use operates or is occupied during nighttime hours
      3 Sound level measurements shall be made with “slow” meter response.
      4 Sound level measurements shall be made with “fast” meter response
      5 Allowable levels shall be raised to the ambient noise levels where the ambient levels exceed the allowable levels. Allowable levels shall be
          reduced to 5 dB if the ambient hourly Leq is at least 10 dB lower than the allowable level.


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                                                           Application Number: 161443
                                                                          Less than
                                                                         Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)            Potentially          with          Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                  Significant       Mitigation       Significant
 Page 38                                                  Impact        Incorporated         Impact           No Impact

   Source: County of Santa Cruz 1994


 County of Santa Cruz Code

 There are no County of Santa Cruz ordinances that specifically regulate construction noise
 levels. However, Section 8.30.010 (Curfew—Offensive noise) of the Santa Cruz County Code
 contains the following language regarding noise impacts:

 A. No persons shall, between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m., make, cause, suffer, or
    permit to be made any offensive noise:

     1. Which is made within one hundred feet of any building or place regularly used for
        sleeping purposes; or

     2. Which disturbs any person of ordinary sensitivities within his or her place of
        residence.

B. “Offensive noise” means any noise which is loud, boisterous, irritating, penetrating, or
   unusual, or that is unreasonably distracting in any other manner such that it is likely to
   disturb people of ordinary sensitivities in the vicinity of such noise, and includes, but is
   not limited to, noise made by an individual alone or by a group of people engaged in any
   business, meeting, gathering, gam, dance, or amusement, or appliance, contrivance,
   device, structure, construction, ride, machine,
                                                       Table 3: Typical Noise Levels for Common
   implement, instrument or vehicle (Ord. 4001 §           Construction Equipment (at 50 feet)
   1 (part), 1989)                                    Equipment                     Lmax (dBA)
                                                            Air Compressor                               81
 Sensitive Receptors                                        Backhoe                                      80
                                                            Cement Mixer Truck                           85
                                                            Cement Pump Truck                            82
 Some land uses are generally regarded as being             Chain Saw                                    85
 more sensitive to noise than others due to the type        Compactor                                    82
                                                            Crane                                        83
 of population groups or activities involved.               Concrete Saw                                 90
                                                            Dozer                                        85
 Sensitive population groups generally include              Excavator                                    85
 children and the elderly. Noise sensitive land uses        Dump Truck                                   84
                                                            Flat Bed Truck                               84
 typically include all residential uses (single- and        Front End Loader                             80
 multi-family, mobile homes, dormitories, and               Fork Lift                                    75
                                                            Generator                                    81
 similar uses), hospitals, nursing homes, schools,          Grader                                       85
                                                            Hoe-rams                                     90
 and parks.                                                 jackhammers                                  88
                                                            Paver                                        85
 The use of construction equipment to accomplish            Pick-up Truck                                55
                                                            Pneumatic Tools                              85
 the proposed project would result in noise in the          Rollers                                      74
 project area, i.e., construction zone. Table 3 shows       Tree Chipper                                 87
                                                            Source: Federal Transit Authority, 2006.
 typical noise levels for common construction

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                              Application Number: 161443
                                                                     Less than
                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)         Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist               Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 39                                               Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 equipment. The sources of noise that are normally measured at 50 feet, are used to determine
 the noise levels at nearby sensitive receptors by attenuating 6 dB for each doubling of distance
 for point sources of noise such as operating construction equipment. Noise levels at the
 nearest sensitive receptors for each site were analyzed on a worst-case basis, using the
 equipment with the highest noise level expected to be used.
 The nearest sensitive receptor (Alimur Mobile Home Park) is located approximately 550 feet
 to the east of the project construction area behind Safeway and Beverly’s. An additional
 sensitive receptor (Rodeo Mobile Estates) is located approximately 800 feet to the northwest
 of the project construction area.
 Impacts
 Although construction activities would likely occur during daytime hours, noise may be
 audible to nearby residents. However, periods of noise exposure would be temporary. Noise
 from construction activity may vary substantially on a day-to-day basis. Operational impacts
 would occur following construction during daily operations of the proposed dealership.
 Potential Temporary Construction Noise Impacts
 Project construction is anticipated to last approximately 6 months. Construction activity
 would be expected to use equipment listed in Table 3. Based on the activities proposed for
 the proposed project, the equipment with the loudest operating noise level that would be
 used often during activity would be a concrete saw, which would produce noise levels of 90
 dBA at a distance of 50 feet. The nearest sensitive receptor is located approximately 550 feet
 from the construction site. At that distance, the decibel level is reduced by approximately 21
 to 69 decibels. In addition, the location of the Safeway and Beverly’s would effectively block
 out any noise that could reach these receptors at that distance. The other sensitive receptor
 is located approximately 800 feet from the construction site. At that distance, the decibel
 level is reduced by approximately 24 to 66 decibels. However, these impacts would also be
 temporary.
 The County of Santa Cruz has not adopted significance thresholds for construction noise.
 However, •Policy 6.9.7 of the General Plan requires mitigation of construction noise as a
 condition of future project approvals.
 The following mitigation measures will be required to assist in the reduction of temporary
 construction noise impacts. With the implementation of those measures, no adverse noise
 impacts are expected occur during construction activities.
 Mitigation Measures
 NOI-1:      Limit construction activity to between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday
             through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Saturday in order to avoid noise during more
             sensitive nighttime hours. Prohibit construction activity on Sundays.

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
                                                                      Less than
                                                                     Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)          Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 40                                                Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

NOI-2:       Require that all construction and maintenance equipment powered by gasoline or
             diesel engines have sound-control devices that are at least as effective as those
             originally provided by the manufacturer and that all equipment be operated and
             maintained to minimize noise generation.
NOI-3:       Prohibit gasoline or diesel engines from having unmuffled exhaust.
NOI-4:       Use noise-reducing enclosures around stationary noise-generating equipment
             capable of 6 dB attenuation.
 Potential Operational Noise Impacts
Operation of the dealership would involve six operating service bays with the use of
pneumatic tools and impact wrenches. These are expected to produce a maximum level of 85
decibels at 50 feet. This would be reduced to approximately 80 decibels at the eastern
property line with the self-serve car wash. It should be noted that this is a maximum level.
The overall hourly Leq would be much lower. The use of pneumatic tools would occur in
irregular intervals. If it is assumed that pneumatic tools would be used 20 percent of the time,
the hourly Leq at the property line would be approximately 70 dB. The threshold according
to the General Plan at the property line is 68 decibels due to the high ambient noise level in
the area. This is a 2 decibel increase above the allowed threshold. However, the project
proposes to construct a six-foot tall masonry block wall that is expected to reduce the noise
level at the property line by approximately 5 dB to approximately 65 decibels, which is below
the threshold of 68 dB. Therefore, impacts would be less than significant. No mitigation
measures would be required for the operation phase.

 2.    Exposure of persons to or generation of
       excessive groundborne vibration or
       groundborne noise levels?
 Discussion: The use of construction equipment would potentially generate vibration in the
 project area. The nearest residential property is located at approximately 550 feet to the east
 of the project site on Robertson Street. Due to this distance, none of the area residences would
 experience significant groundborne vibration or groundborne noise levels during
 construction activities associated with the proposed project. Therefore, no impact is
 anticipated.

 3.    A substantial permanent increase in
       ambient noise levels in the project vicinity
       above levels existing without the project?
 Discussion: The proposed project would not result in a permanent increase in the ambient
 noise level. The main source of ambient noise in the project area is traffic noise along Soquel
 Drive and Highway 1. The project proposes to construct a six-foot tall masonry wall at the

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                        Application Number: 161443
                                                                        Less than
                                                                       Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)            Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                  Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 41                                                  Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 eastern property line adjacent to the self-serve car wash that would reduce noise generated
 by the six service bays. In addition, no significant increase in noise would occur from the
 small increase in traffic trips as a result of the proposed project. Impacts are expected to be
 less than significant.

 4.    A substantial temporary or periodic
       increase in ambient noise levels in the
       project vicinity above levels existing
       without the project?
 Discussion: See discussion under L-1 above. Noise generated during project construction
 would increase the ambient noise levels in adjacent areas. Construction would be temporary,
 however, and given the limited duration of this impact it is considered to be less than
 significant with the incorporation of mitigation measures.
 5.    For a project located within an airport land
       use plan or, where such a plan has not
       been adopted, within two miles of a public
       airport or public use airport, would the
       project expose people residing or working
       in the project area to excessive noise
       levels?
 Discussion: The proposed project is not within two miles of a public airport. Therefore,
 the proposed project would not expose people residing or working in the project area. No
 impact is anticipated.

 6.    For a project within the vicinity of a private
       airstrip, would the project expose people
       residing or working in the project area to
       excessive noise levels?
 Discussion: The proposed project is not within two miles of a private airstrip. Therefore,
 the proposed project would not expose people residing or working in the project area. No
 impact is anticipated.

M. POPULATION AND HOUSING
Would the project:
 1.    Induce substantial population growth in an
       area, either directly (for example, by
       proposing new homes and businesses) or
       indirectly (for example, through extension
       of roads or other infrastructure)?
 Discussion: The proposed project would not induce substantial population growth in an
 area because the project does not propose any physical or regulatory change that would

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                          Application Number: 161443
                                                                     Less than
                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)         Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist               Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 42                                               Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact

 remove a restriction to or encourage population growth in an area including, but limited to
 the following: new or extended infrastructure or public facilities; new commercial or
 industrial facilities; large-scale residential development; accelerated conversion of homes to
 commercial or multi-family use; or regulatory changes including General Plan amendments,
 specific plan amendments, zone reclassifications, sewer or water annexations; or LAFCO
 annexation actions. No impact would occur.

 2.    Displace substantial numbers of existing
       housing, necessitating the construction of
       replacement housing elsewhere?
 Discussion: The proposed project would result in the loss of four single family dwellings
 currently located on the project site. The homes are considered non-conforming uses in that
 the property has a commercial land use designation. Single family homes are uncharacteristic
 of the area and the homes are in relatively poor condition. Due to the conditions and status
 as a non-conforming use, it is unclear as to the longevity of the homes. The demolition of
 these homes is therefore considered a less than significant impact.

 3.    Displace substantial numbers of people,
       necessitating the construction of
       replacement housing elsewhere?
 Discussion: The proposed project would not displace a substantial number of people since
 the homes that are to be demolished are in common ownership and the site is designated for
 commercial uses. Though the project does not intend to construct new housing units, a
 condition or approval would require the payment of affordable housing impact fees to help
 offset the loss of housing.

N. PUBLIC SERVICES
Would the project:
 1.    Would the project result in substantial
       adverse physical impacts associated with
       the provision of new or physically altered
       governmental facilities, need for new or
       physically altered governmental facilities,
       the construction of which could cause
       significant environmental impacts, in order
       to maintain acceptable service ratios,
       response times, or other performance
       objectives for any of the public services:
       a.   Fire protection?

       b.   Police protection?


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
                                                                     Less than
                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)         Potentially        with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist               Significant     Mitigation   Significant
 Page 43                                               Impact      Incorporated     Impact      No Impact


       c.   Schools?

       d.   Parks?

       e.   Other public facilities; including the
            maintenance of roads?
 Discussion (a through e): While the project represents an incremental contribution to
 the need for services, the increase would be minimal. Moreover, the project meets all of the
 standards and requirements identified by the local fire agency or California Department of
 Forestry, as applicable, and school, park, and transportation fees to be paid by the applicant
 would be used to offset the incremental increase in demand for school and recreational
 facilities and public roads. Impacts would be considered less than significant.

O. RECREATION
Would the project:
 1.    Would the project increase the use of
       existing neighborhood and regional parks
       or other recreational facilities such that
       substantial physical deterioration of the
       facility would occur or be accelerated?
 Discussion: The proposed project would not substantially increase the use of existing
 neighborhood and regional parks or other recreational facilities. Impacts would be
 considered less than significant.

 2.    Does the project include recreational
       facilities or require the construction or
       expansion of recreational facilities which
       might have an adverse physical effect on
       the environment?
 Discussion: The proposed project does not propose the expansion or construction of
 additional recreational facilities. No impact would occur.

P. TRANSPORTATION/TRAFFIC
Would the project:
 1.    Conflict with an applicable plan, ordinance
       or policy establishing measures of
       effectiveness for the performance of the
       circulation system, taking into account all
       modes of transportation including mass
       transit and non-motorized travel and
       relevant components of the circulation
       system, including but not limited to

Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                       Application Number: 161443
                                                                                           Less than
                                                                                          Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                             Potentially          with      Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                                   Significant       Mitigation   Significant
 Page 44                                                                   Impact        Incorporated     Impact        No Impact

        intersections, streets, highways and
        freeways, pedestrian and bicycle paths,
        and mass transit?
 Discussion: Traffic operations were evaluated at the study intersection shown in Table 4.
 The results of the evaluation show that the intersection of Soquel Drive and Robertson Street
 currently operate at an unacceptable LOS E in the AM peak hour and an unacceptable F
 during the PM peak hour. In addition, the intersection of Soquel Drive and Porter Street
 operates at an unacceptable LOS E in both the AM and PM peak hours.

                         Table 4: Existing Conditions Intersection Level of Service
                                                                                       Existing Conditions
                                                                     AM Peak Hour                        PM Peak Hour
                                                 Control
  #                 Intersection                  Type       Movement          Delay      LOS      Movement     Delay     LOS
  1    Soquel Dr / Rodeo Gulch Rd1                Signal       Overall          8.2         A       Overall       8.2      A
  2    Soquel Dr / Project Driveway 11                                            Does Not Exist
  3    Soquel Dr / 41st Ave1                      Signal       Overall         32.7         C       Overall      37.8      D
  4    Soquel Dr / Robertson St1                  AWSC         Overall         43.2         E       Overall      74.8      F
                                    1
  5    Soquel Dr / Daubenbiss Ave                 Signal       Overall         11.2         B       Overall       4.9      A
  6    Soquel Dr / Porter St1                     Signal       Overall         57.1         E       Overall      77.9      E
           st                          1
  7    41 Ave / Project Driveway 2                                                Does Not Exist
  8    41st Ave / Redwood Shopping Center1        Signal       Overall         12.7         B       Overall      15.8      B
  9    41st Ave / Hwy 1 NB Ramps1                 Signal       Overall         15.8         B       Overall      14.3      B
           st                      2
  10   41 Ave / Hwy 1 SB Ramps                    Signal       Overall         23.2         C       Overall       7.4      A
  Notes:
  1. Analysis performed using HCM 2010 methodologies.
  2. Intersection #10 controller manages operations for two signalized intersections, therefore, analysis performed using HCM
  2000 methodologies.
  3. Delay indicated in seconds/vehicle.
  4. SCC level of service (LOS) standard is D. Caltrans LOS standard is C.
  5. Intersections that operate below maintaining agency’s LOS standard are highlighted and shown in bold.
  Source: Kimley Horn and Associates, 2017.


 The proposed project is anticipated to generate 650 average daily trips, 39 AM peak hour trips
 (29 in/10 out), and 53 PM peak hour trips (21 in/32 out). The existing homes generate 38
 daily trips, 3 AM peak hour trips (1 in/2 out), and 4 PM peak hour trips (3 in/1 out), which
 was taken as a trip credit. Therefore, the net new trip generation for the proposed project is
 612 daily trips, 36 AM peak hour trips (28 in/8 out), and 49 PM peak hour trips (18 in/31 out).
 Table 5 presents the trip generation for the project.




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                                              Application Number: 161443
                                                                                     Less than
                                                                                    Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                         Potentially        with       Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                               Significant     Mitigation    Significant
 Page 45                                                               Impact      Incorporated      Impact        No Impact

                                          Table 5: Project Trip Generation
                                                                       AM Peak      AM Peak                       PM Peak
                                                Daily Trip   Daily                                PM Peak
   Land Use                     Size    Units                           Hour       Hour Trips                    Hour Trips
                                                  Rate       Trips                                Hour Rate
                                                                        Rate        (IN/OUT)                      (IN/OUT)
   Project
   Automobile Sales (LU
                               20,111    SF       32.30      650         1.92      39 (29/10)       2.62         53 (21/32)
   841)
   Existing Conditions (Trip Credit)
   Single-Family Detached
                                  4      DU       -9.52       -38        -0.75      -3 (-1/-2)      -1.00         -4 (-3/-1)
   Housing (LU 210)


   Net Trip Generation            -       -         -        612           -        36 (28/8)         -          49 (18/31)
   Source: Kimley Horn and Associates, 2017.


 The County of Santa Cruz General Plan Policy 3.12.1 (Level of Service Policy) considers LOS
 C the objective. However, LOS D would be acceptable where costs, right-of-way acquisitions,
 or environmental impacts of maintaining operational standards under its LOS policy are
 excessive and the capacity enhancements infeasible. Proposed developments that would
 cause LOS at an intersection or on an uninterrupted highway segment to fall below D during
 the weekday peak hour would be considered to violate County policies and would require
 mitigation.
 The volume/capacity ratio 1% threshold for intersections already operating at LOS E or F,
 which is contained in General Plan Policy 3.12.1 is no longer enforced due to past case law
 nullifying the approach to determination of significance for cumulative impacts. Kings
 County Farm Bureau v. City of Hanford (5th District 1990); Los Angeles Unified School
 District v. City of Los Angeles (2nd District 1997); Communities for a Better Environment v.
 California Resources Agency (3rd District 2002). These court rulings invalidated the use of a
 “ratio theory” or “comparative approach” criterion because they improperly measure a
 proposed project’s incremental impact relative to the existing cumulative effect rather than
 focus on the combined effects of the project and other relevant past, present, and future
 projects. Therefore, this threshold will not be applied in this analysis.
 Traffic operations for the Existing Plus Project Conditions were evaluated at the study
 intersection shown in Table 6. The results of the evaluation show that the intersection of
 Soquel Drive and Robertson Street would operate at an unacceptable LOS E in the AM peak
 hour and an unacceptable F during the PM peak hour. In addition, the intersection of Soquel
 Drive and Porter Street would operate at an unacceptable LOS E in both the AM and PM
 peak hours. Although vehicle delay is slightly higher, no change in the Level of service would
 occur. However, due to the intersections both operating at LOS E and F, the addition of
 vehicle trips is considered significant requiring mitigation. The following mitigation
 measures would be required to reduce impacts to a less than significant level.



Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                                         Application Number: 161443
                                                                                    Less than
                                                                                   Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                    Potentially            with        Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                          Significant         Mitigation     Significant
 Page 46                                                          Impact          Incorporated       Impact      No Impact

 Mitigation Measures

TRA-1:        Soquel Drive/Robertson Street (Intersection #4)(Existing & Near Term Conditions)
                Install traffic signal control and construct one eastbound left-turn and westbound left-
                 turn pockets on Soquel Drive.
               The project will pay a proportional fair share for improvements at Soquel
                 Drive/Robertson Street of 2.66% based on estimated project AM and PM peak hour
                 trips traveling through the intersection. The nexus for the fair share is based on all
                 future growth in traffic, estimated at the intersection (from Existing to Cumulative
                 conditions). The unfunded planned improvement cost is $500,000 per the County
                 RTP. The project will pay a fair share fee of $13,300.
TRA-2:        Soquel Drive/Porter Street (Intersection #6)(PM Peak) (Existing, Near Term, and
              Cumulative Conditions)

                   Construct one additional southbound left-turn pocket and optimized cycle length,
                    phasing, and splits.
                   The Project will pay a proportional fair share for improvements at Soquel Drive/Porter
                    Street of 1.75% based on estimated Project AM and PM peak hour trips traveling
                    through the intersection. The nexus for the fair share is based on all future growth in
                    traffic, estimated at the intersection (from Existing to Cumulative conditions). The
                    unfunded planned improvement cost is estimated to be in excess of $1,000,000 and
                    right-of-way would be required. The Project will pay a fair share fee of $17,500 based
                    on a $1,000,000 improvement cost.
 Impacts would be reduced to a less than significant level for Existing Plus Project conditions
 with the incorporation of the above mitigation measures.

                  Table 6: Existing Plus Project Conditions Intersection Level of Service
                                                                 Existing Plus Project Conditions
                                                          AM Peak Hour                            PM Peak Hour
                                        Control
  #    Intersection                      Type     Movement     Delay      LOS         Movement         Delay      LOS
  1    Soquel Dr / Rodeo Gulch Rd1       Signal    Overall      8.2           A         Overall          8.2        A
       Soquel Dr / Project Driveway                Overall      0.1           A         Overall          0.3        A
  2                                     SSSC
       11                                           NB          16.9          C           NB            25.3        D
  3    Soquel Dr / 41st Ave1            Signal     Overall      34.0          C         Overall         39.7        D
  4    Soquel Dr / Robertson St1        AWSC       Overall      43.9          E         Overall         76.0        F
                                    1
  5    Soquel Dr / Daubenbiss Ave       Signal     Overall      11.4          B         Overall          4.9        A
  6    Soquel Dr / Porter St1           Signal     Overall      57.7          E         Overall         78.4        E
                                                   Overall      0.1           A         Overall          0.1        A
  7    41st Ave / Project Driveway 21   SSSC
                                                     EB         10.1          B           EB            10.5        B
       41st Ave / Redwood Shopping
  8                                     Signal     Overall      12.7          B         Overall         15.8        B
       Center1
  9    41st Ave / Hwy 1 NB Ramps1       Signal     Overall      16.5          B         Overall         14.4        B
  10   41st Ave / Hwy 1 SB Ramps2       Signal     Overall      24.4          C         Overall          7.5        A
  Notes:


Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                                      Application Number: 161443
                                                                                             Less than
                                                                                            Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                              Potentially           with           Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                                    Significant        Mitigation        Significant
 Page 47                                                                    Impact         Incorporated          Impact          No Impact

  1. Analysis performed using HCM 2010 methodologies.
  2. Intersection #10 controller manages operations for two signalized intersections, therefore, analysis performed using HCM
  2000 methodologies.
  3. Delay indicated in seconds/vehicle.
  4. SCC level of service (LOS) standard is D. Caltrans LOS standard is C.
  5. Intersections that operate below maintaining agency’s LOS standard are highlighted and shown in bold.
  Source: Kimley Horn and Associates, 2016.

 With the implementation of the above improvements outlined in Mitigation Measures TRA-
 1 and TRA-2, the Soquel Drive at Robertson Street intersection would improve to LOS B in
 the AM and LOS C in the PM peak hours with project. Soquel Drive at Porter Street would
 improve to LOS C in both the AM and PM peak hours with project.

            Table 7: Mitigated Existing Plus Project Conditions Intersection Level of Service
                                                                             Mitigated Existing Plus Project Conditions
                                                                            AM Peak Hour                           PM Peak Hour
                                                   Maintaining
    #    Intersection                               Agency          Movement         Delay         LOS     Movement      Delay     LOS
    4    Soquel Dr / Robertson St1                    SCC             Overall           12.0        B       Overall       21.4         C
                                 1
    6    Soquel Dr / Porter St                            SCC         Overall           28.1       C        Overall       30.8         C
   Notes:
   1. Analysis performed using HCM 2010 methodologies.
   2. Delay indicated in seconds/vehicle.
   3. SCC level of service (LOS) standard is D. Caltrans LOS standard is C.
   4. Intersections that operate below maintaining agency’s LOS standard are highlighted and shown in bold.
   Source: Kimley Horn and Associates, 2017.


 The following Near Term Conditions describes the conditions for the year 2018 when the
 project would open its doors to the public. Traffic operations for the Near Term Project
 Conditions were evaluated at the study intersection shown in Table 8. The results of the
 evaluation show that the intersection of Soquel Drive and Robertson Street would operate at
 an unacceptable LOS E in the AM peak hour and an unacceptable F during the PM peak hour.
 In addition, the intersection of Soquel Drive and Porter Street would operate at an
 unacceptable LOS E during the AM peak hour and F during the PM peak hour.

                        Table 8: Near Term Conditions Intersection Level of Service
                                                                                     Near Term Conditions
                                                                     AM Peak Hour                             PM Peak Hour
                                                 Control
    #               Intersection                  Type      Movement         Delay        LOS           Movement      Delay       LOS
    1    Soquel Dr / Rodeo Gulch Rd1              Signal        Overall        8.3             A         Overall       8.3         A
                                             1
    2    Soquel Dr / Project Driveway 1                                           Does Not Exist
    3    Soquel Dr / 41st Ave1                   Signal         Overall       33.6             C         Overall       40.2        D
                                     1
    4    Soquel Dr / Robertson St                AWSC           Overall       46.5             E         Overall       80.3        F
    5    Soquel Dr / Daubenbiss Ave1             Signal         Overall       11.6             B         Overall       4.9         A
    6    Soquel Dr / Porter St1                  Signal         Overall       60.3             E         Overall       80.9        F
            st                           1
    7    41 Ave / Project Driveway 2                                              Does Not Exist



Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                                                     Application Number: 161443
                                                                                        Less than
                                                                                       Significant
 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                            Potentially        with         Less than
 Initial Study/Environmental Checklist                                  Significant     Mitigation      Significant
 Page 48                                                                  Impact      Incorporated        Impact         No Impact

           41st Ave / Redwood Shopping
      8                                          Signal       Overall        12.7      B          Overall         15.9        B
           Center1
      9    41st Ave / Hwy 1 NB Ramps1            Signal       Overall        16.3      B          Overall         14.5        B
   10      41st Ave / Hwy 1 SB Ramps2            Signal       Overall        24.6      C          Overall         7.4         A
   Notes:
   1. Analysis performed using HCM 2010 methodologies.
   2. Intersection #10 controller manages operations for two signalized intersections, therefore, analysis performed using
   HCM 2000 methodologies.
   3. Delay indicated in seconds/vehicle.
   4. SCC level of service (LOS) standard is D. Caltrans LOS standard is C.
   5. Intersections that operate below maintaining agency’s LOS standard are highlighted and shown in bold.
   Source: Kimley Horn and Associates, 2017.


 Traffic operations for the Near Term Plus Project Conditions were evaluated at the study
 intersection shown in Table 9. The results of the evaluation show that the intersection of
 Soquel Drive and Robertson Street would operate at an unacceptable LOS E in the AM peak
 hour and an unacceptable F during the PM peak hour. In addition, the intersection of Soquel
 Drive and Porter Street would operate at an unacceptable LOS E in both the AM and PM
 peak hours. Although vehicle delay is slightly higher, no change in the Level of service would
 occur from the Near Term Conditions without project.

                 Table 9: Near Term Plus Project Conditions Intersection Level of Service
                                                                     Near Term Plus Project Conditions
                                                          AM Peak Hour                             PM Peak Hour
  #       Intersection                        Movement        Delay          LOS      Movement          Delay            LOS
  1       Soquel Dr / Rodeo Gulch Rd1           Overall        8.3            A         Overall             8.3           A
                                                Overall        0.1            A         Overall             0.3           A
  2       Soquel Dr / Project Driveway 11
                                                  NB           17.1           C            NB           26.0             D
  3       Soquel Dr / 41st Ave1                 Overall        35.1           D         Overall         42.1             D
  4       Soquel Dr / Robertson St1             Overall        47.3           E         Overall         81.3              F
                                       1
  5       Soquel Dr / Daubenbiss Ave            Overall        11.8           B         Overall             4.9           A
  6       Soquel Dr / Porter St1                Overall        61.2           E         Overall         81.4              F
                                                Overall        0.1            A         Overall             0.1           A
  7       41st Ave / Project Driveway 21
                                                  EB           10.2           B            EB           10.6              B
          41st Ave / Redwood Shopping
  8                                             Overall        12.7           B         Overall         15.9              B
          Center1
  9       41st Ave / Hwy 1 NB Ramps1            Overall        17.0           B         Overall         14.5              B
            st                        2
  10      41 Ave / Hwy 1 SB Ramps               Overall        25.6           C         Overall             7.6           A
  Notes:
  1. Analysis performed using HCM 2010 methodologies.
  2. Intersection #10 controller manages operations for two signalized intersections, therefore, analysis performed using HCM
  2000 methodologies.
  3. Delay indicated in seconds/vehicle.
  4. SCC level of service (LOS) standard is D. Caltrans LOS standard is C.
  5. Intersections that operate below maintaining agency’s LOS standard are highlighted and shown in bold.
  Source: Kimley Horn and Associates, 2016.




Nissan of Santa Cruz                                                                            Application Number: 161443
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N Rodeo Gulch Rd -- Soquel Dr                                                                                   QC JOB #: 13932401
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    137          67                          Peak-Hour: 7:35 AM -- 8:35 AM                                  2.9        9.0

                     73    1     63
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 7:50 AM -- 8:05 AM
                                                                                                                            1.4 0.0 4.8


       994   18                        47   937
                                                                                                               3.5   5.6                      10.6      3.4
             619          0.87        872
                                                                                                                     3.9                       3.0
       669   32                        18   706
                                                                                                               4.2   9.4                       5.6      4.1

                     49    2     24
                                                                                                                            16.3 0.0 8.3

                     51          75
                                                                                                                            7.8        13.3



                           4                                                                                                 1    0     0



                                                                                                                     0                           0

             2                          3                                                                            8                          21

                                                                                                                     0                           0

                           7                                                                                                 1    0     0




                          NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                       NA                                                                             NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count          N Rodeo Gulch Rd                N Rodeo Gulch Rd                  Soquel Dr                Soquel Dr                    Total      Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM        4     0      0     0            3      0      4     0        1      16      3      0     0   29      1    1                62
     7:05 AM        3     0      0     0            5      0      3     0        0      20      5      0     2   15      3    0                56
     7:10 AM        3     0      0     0            4      0      3     0        0      22      2      0     1   34      0    0                69
     7:15 AM        1     0      0     0            6      0      4     0        1      25      1      0     2   30      3    0                73
     7:20 AM        1     0      1     0            3      0      3     0        0      21      0      0     0   34      2    0                65
     7:25 AM        2     0      1     0            3      0      3     0        0      42      3      0     0   42      0    0                96
     7:30 AM        3     0      0     0            5      0      3     0        0      33      1      0     2   50      0    0                97
     7:35 AM        3     0      2     0            8      0      2     0        1      45      3      0     2   71      5    0               142
     7:40 AM        3     0      0     0           12      0      9     0        1      34      6      0     1   66      2    0               134
     7:45 AM        4     0      1     0            4      0      6     0        1      48      1      0     0   83      3    0               151
     7:50 AM        2     1      0     0            3      0      8     0        1      61      3      0     3   91      3    0               176
     7:55 AM        8     0      4     0            9      0      3     0        2      49      4      0     2   95      4    0               180            1301
     8:00 AM        1     0      6     0            6      0      8     0        0      69      0      0     3   68      4    0               165            1404
     8:05 AM        8     1      1     0            8      0      8     0        0      69      3      0     1   60      4    0               163            1511
     8:10 AM        5     0      0     0            2      0      8     0        1      65      1      0     1   76      4    0               163            1605
     8:15 AM        4     0      2     0            3      0      4     0        3      55      4      0     1   48      3    0               127            1659
     8:20 AM        3     0      3     0            2      0      5     0        2      47      3      0     1   71      3    0               140            1734
     8:25 AM        5     0      1     0            3      0      5     0        2      31      2      0     1   78      7    0               135            1773
     8:30 AM        3     0      4     0            3      1      7     0        4      46      2      0     2   65      5    0               142            1818
     8:35 AM        6     0      3     0            1      0      3     0        2      54      1      0     3   63      6    0               142            1818
     8:40 AM        5     0      1     0            5      1      1     0        2      44      0      0     0   67      3    0               129            1813
     8:45 AM        6     0      3     0            7      0      5     0        3      48      1      0     1   72      3    0               149            1811
     8:50 AM        2     1      2     0            5      0      6     0        2      44      0      0     1   59      7    0               129            1764
     8:55 AM        3     0      2     0            3      0      3     0        1      49      1      0     0   62      6    0               130            1714
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                       Southbound                    Eastbound                Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right      U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles     44     4     40     0           72      0     76     0        12    716    28       0    32 1016    44     0                      2084
 Heavy Trucks       8     0      4                  4      0      0               0     32      0            4   20      8                            80
  Pedestrians            12                                0                             8                        0                                   20
    Bicycles        0     0      0                  0      0      0              0       1      0            0    8      0                             9
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N Rodeo Gulch Rd -- Soquel Dr                                                                                        QC JOB #: 13932402
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                     106          127                          Peak-Hour: 4:55 PM -- 5:55 PM                                     0.9        0.0

                      47    3     56
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:40 PM -- 5:55 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 1.8


       650    51                         75    605
                                                                                                                    1.7   0.0                      0.0      1.3
              1143         0.93         520
                                                                                                                          0.9                      1.5
       1235   41                         10   1214
                                                                                                                    0.9   2.4                      0.0      0.9

                      83    1     15
                                                                                                                                 3.6 0.0 0.0

                      54          99
                                                                                                                                 1.9        3.0



                            6                                                                                                     2    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          1

              5                           1                                                                               26                         6

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                            9                                                                                                     3    1    0




                           NA                                                                                                          NA




              NA                        NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count           N Rodeo Gulch Rd                  N Rodeo Gulch Rd                Soquel Dr                    Soquel Dr                   Total      Hourly
     Period              (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At      Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right      U        Left Thru Right      U    Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM          4     0      3     0              3      0      0     0         2   99      4      0     2       43      6    0              166
    4:05 PM          8     0      7     0              6      0      3     0         4   85      0      0     0       52    10     0              175
    4:10 PM          4     0      3     0              5      0      2     0         5   83      5      0     1       48     11    0              167
    4:15 PM          6     0      2     0              0      0      4     0         2   68      1      0     1       49     11    0              144
    4:20 PM          2     0      1     0              5      0      6     0         0   81      4      0     0       49      3    0              151
    4:25 PM          3     0      1     0              1      0      2     0         4   70      3      0     2       48      5    0              139
    4:30 PM          5     0      2     0              6      0      1     0         2   88      3      0     2       54      9    0              172
    4:35 PM          4     0      2     0              3      0      5     0         3   60      0      0     0       42      5    0              124
    4:40 PM          8     1      1     0              4      0      1     0         3   65      6      0     1       44      4    0              138
    4:45 PM          0     1      2     0              4      0      2     0         5   65      1      0     1       43      2    0              126
    4:50 PM         14     1      3     0              3      0      4     0         4   75      4      0     3       51      5    0              167
    4:55 PM          6     0      1     0              3      0      3     0         4   94      5      0     0       51      7    0              174            1843
    5:00 PM          9     0      1     0              2      0      2     0         6   83      2      0     1       30      6    0              142            1819
    5:05 PM          8     0      3     0              2      1      2     0         2   95      3      0     0       48      3    0              167            1811
    5:10 PM          7     0      2     0              2      0      4     0         8   88      3      0     1       52      6    0              173            1817
    5:15 PM         11     0      1     0              8      0      7     0         0   98      1      0     0       39      5    0              170            1843
    5:20 PM          5     0      0     0              4      0      5     0         4  103      1      0     0       50      9    0              181            1873
    5:25 PM          9     0      3     0              7      0      1     0         5   92      1      0     2       30      2    0              152            1886
    5:30 PM         13     0      0     0              5      1      0     0         5   88      5      0     2       54      6    0              179            1893
    5:35 PM          5     0      2     0              7      0      4     0         4   94      4      0     2       26      9    0              157            1926
    5:40 PM          2     0      0     0              3      1      7     0         6  125      7      0     2       48      4    0              205            1993
    5:45 PM          4     0      2     0              6      0      5     0         3   65      3      0     0       46      9    0              143            2010
    5:50 PM          4     1      0     0              7      0      7     0         4  118      6      0     0       46      9    0              202            2045
    5:55 PM          4     0      0     0              2      0      5     0         3   64      1      0     0       40      2    0              121            1992
 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                         Southbound                  Eastbound                    Westbound
   Flowrates       Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right      U        Left Thru Right      U    Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles      40     4      8     0             64      4     76     0        52 1232    64       0     8      560    88     0                     2200
 Heavy Trucks        4     0      0                    4      0      0               0    4      0            0        8      0                           20
  Pedestrians              4                                  0                           4                            4                                  12
    Bicycles         1     0      0                    0      0      0               0    4      0            0        3      1                            9
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 41st Ave -- Soquel Dr                                                                                                QC JOB #: 13932403
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    12           11                            Peak-Hour: 7:35 AM -- 8:35 AM                                     33.3        9.1

                      3    9      0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:55 AM -- 8:10 AM
                                                                                                                                 66.7 22.2 0.0


       1142   1                          5   683
                                                                                                                    3.1   0.0                      20.0      4.2
              339         0.90         543
                                                                                                                          3.5                       3.7
       712    372                      135   425
                                                                                                                    5.3   7.0                       5.9      3.5

                    608    5     86
                                                                                                                                 2.1 0.0 3.5

                    528          699
                                                                                                                                 6.8         2.3



                           3                                                                                                      0     0    0



                                                                                                                          0                           1

              0                         10                                                                                2                          17

                                                                                                                          0                           0

                           10                                                                                                     3     0    0




                          NA                                                                                                            NA




              NA                       NA                                                                                 NA                        NA




                          NA                                                                                                            NA



 5-Min Count                41st Ave                        41st Ave                      Soquel Dr                   Soquel Dr                    Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Totals
 Beginning At Left         Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM    34           0      1     0         0        0      0     0        0       8     15      0     6      12      0    0                76
     7:05 AM    25           1      1     1         0        0      0     0        0       7     14      0     3      12      0    0                64
     7:10 AM    25           3      8     0         0        0      0     0        0      16     11      0     3      21      0    0                87
     7:15 AM    22           1      3     1         0        1      1     0        0      16      8      0     7      24      0    0                84
     7:20 AM    30           1      9     1         0        2      0     0        2      14     15      0     3      19      0    0                96
     7:25 AM    31           1      3     0         0        0      0     0        0      19     13      0    11      31      0    0               109
     7:30 AM    40           2      7     2         1        0      0     0        0      25     11      0     7      33      1    0               129
     7:35 AM    50           0      6     1         0        0      0     0        0      17     33      0     7      43      0    0               157
     7:40 AM    55           1      5     1         0        2      1     0        0      25     28      0     9      32      0    0               159
     7:45 AM    60           0      5     1         0        0      0     0        0      25     28      0    12      44      0    0               175
     7:50 AM    48           1     11     0         0        0      0     0        0      36     30      0     9      59      0    0               194
     7:55 AM    82           0     10     2         0        1      0     0        1      22     25      0    10      50      2    0               205            1535
     8:00 AM    27           2     14     0         0        0      0     0        0      43     39      0    10      51      0    0               186            1645
     8:05 AM    46           0      9     3         0        1      0     0        0      40     43      0     9      45      0    0               196            1777
     8:10 AM    54           0      6     0         0        0      1     0        0      35     42      0     6      37      0    0               181            1871
     8:15 AM    28           0      9     0         0        1      1     0        0      26     31      0    15      33      0    0               144            1931
     8:20 AM    54           0      3     2         0        1      0     0        0      15     28      0    22      55      0    0               180            2015
     8:25 AM    57           0      5     1         0        3      0     0        0      26     24      0    10      46      0    0               172            2078
     8:30 AM    35           1      3     1         0        0      0     0        0      29     21      0    16      48      3    0               157            2106
     8:35 AM    42           1      5     1         1        0      0     0        0      14     42      0     7      42      2    0               157            2106
     8:40 AM    37           1     12     0         0        2      0     0        0      22     27      0     9      44      0    0               154            2101
     8:45 AM    39           0      6     1         0        0      0     0        1      39     32      0     5      44      0    0               167            2093
     8:50 AM    46           2      3     1         0        0      0     0        1      33     18      0     9      32      0    0               145            2044
     8:55 AM    44           3      2     2         1        1      1     0        0      14     26      0    10      39      1    0               144            1983
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                      Total
  All Vehicles 620           8    132   20          0        8      0     0        4     420    428      0   116     584      8    0                      2348
 Heavy Trucks    4           0      0               0        0      0              0      20     40            4      28      0                            96
  Pedestrians                0                               0                             0                           4                                    4
    Bicycles     1           0      0               0        0      0              0       0      0            0       2      0                             3
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 41st Ave -- Soquel Dr                                                                                                QC JOB #: 13932404
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    25           27                           Peak-Hour: 4:55 PM -- 5:55 PM                                      0.0        3.7

                      5    17     3
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


       600    4                          5   320
                                                                                                                    2.0   0.0                     20.0      2.5
              740         0.93         234
                                                                                                                          0.9                      1.3
       1248   504                       81   896
                                                                                                                    0.9   0.8                      4.9      1.2

                    366 18 153
                                                                                                                                 2.5 0.0 2.6

                    607          537
                                                                                                                                 1.3        2.4



                           0                                                                                                      0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          1

              0                         19                                                                                21                        10

                                                                                                                          2                          0

                           8                                                                                                      2    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                           NA




              NA                       NA                                                                                 NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                           NA



 5-Min Count                 41st Ave                        41st Ave                     Soquel Dr                   Soquel Dr                   Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left         Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM     34           0     13     0         3        2      2     0        2      38     25      0     8      21      1    0              149
    4:05 PM     35           1     11     0         1        4      0     0        1      77     31      0     6      27      0    0              194
    4:10 PM     37           0      8     1         0        0      2     0        0      54     42      0     4      20      0    0              168
    4:15 PM     36           0     14     1         0        0      0     0        0      73     33      0     9      33      0    0              199
    4:20 PM     44           0     10     3         0        1      1     0        0      57     30      0     9      18      0    0              173
    4:25 PM     44           4     11     1         0        0      1     0        0      67     31      0    11      29      0    0              199
    4:30 PM     33           0      6     1         0        0      1     0        0      64     55      0     6      26      0    0              192
    4:35 PM     36           1     11     2         0        3      0     0        1      31     28      0     7      19      1    0              140
    4:40 PM     21           1     14     0         1        1      1     0        2      65     39      0     8      28      0    0              181
    4:45 PM     40           1     15     1         1        1      1     0        0      48     28      0     7      23      1    0              167
    4:50 PM     28           0     15     1         1        0      0     0        1      53     35      0     2      32      0    0              168
    4:55 PM     40           4     12     1         0        0      0     0        1      42     28      0     5       8      0    0              141            2071
    5:00 PM     18           3     13     0         0        1      2     0        0      68     55      0     2      16      1    0              179            2101
    5:05 PM     31           1     15     0         2        6      0     0        0      60     37      0     7      19      0    0              178            2085
    5:10 PM     32           1     12     1         0        2      2     0        1      59     44      0    10      29      1    0              194            2111
    5:15 PM     25           2     20     0         0        2      0     0        0      41     47      0    12      24      0    0              173            2085
    5:20 PM     26           2      9     1         0        0      0     0        1      60     47      0     5      32      0    0              183            2095
    5:25 PM     29           1     19     0         0        2      0     0        0      65     32      0     3       9      0    0              160            2056
    5:30 PM     37           3     10     1         0        1      0     0        0      66     27      0    12      23      0    0              180            2044
    5:35 PM     30           0     10     1         0        0      0     0        1      81     57      0     3      15      0    0              198            2102
    5:40 PM     27           1     15     0         1        2      1     0        0      69     51      0     5      19      1    0              192            2113
    5:45 PM     32           0      7     0         0        1      0     0        0      59     31      0    10      22      1    0              163            2109
    5:50 PM     34           0     11     0         0        0      0     0        0      70     48      0     7      18      1    0              189            2130
    5:55 PM     26           4     12     0         0        3      1     0        0      41     22      0     7      19      1    0              136            2125
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles 376          16    140     8         4       12      4     0        4     864    540      0    80     228      4    0                     2280
 Heavy Trucks    8           0      8               0        0      0              0       4      0            4       4      0                           28
  Pedestrians                0                               0                             0                          12                                  12
    Bicycles     0           0      0               0        0      0              0       5      0           0        4      0                            9
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Robertson St -- Soquel Dr                                                                                            QC JOB #: 13932405
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                      0           1                            Peak-Hour: 7:50 AM -- 8:50 AM                                     0.0        0.0

                      0    0      0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 7:55 AM -- 8:10 AM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0


       757   1                           0   808
                                                                                                                    3.3   0.0                      0.0      3.3
             390          0.89         641
                                                                                                                          5.1                      3.7
       458   67                        167   570
                                                                                                                    5.2   6.0                      1.8      4.2

                   116     0     180
                                                                                                                                 0.9 0.0 2.2

                   234           296
                                                                                                                                 3.0        1.7



                           15                                                                                                     0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             0                          13                                                                                5                         11

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                           7                                                                                                      1    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                           NA




             NA                        NA                                                                                 NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                           NA



 5-Min Count              Robertson St                    Robertson St                    Soquel Dr                   Soquel Dr                   Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left         Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM     6           0      2     0         0        0      0     0        0      13      2      0     3      24      0    0               50
     7:05 AM     1           0      9     0         0        0      0     0        0       9      3      0     2      14      0    0               38
     7:10 AM     2           0     14     0         0        0      0     0        0      14      1      0     3      22      0    0               56
     7:15 AM     3           0     14     0         0        0      0     0        0      21      4      0     9      33      0    0               84
     7:20 AM     6           0     19     0         0        0      0     0        0      18      4      0    11      25      0    0               83
     7:25 AM     7           0     18     0         0        0      0     0        0      18      2      0    11      39      0    0               95
     7:30 AM     6           0     13     0         0        0      0     0        0      22      5      0    19      41      0    0              106
     7:35 AM     8           0      9     0         0        0      0     0        0      19      7      0     6      47      0    0               96
     7:40 AM     6           0     16     0         0        0      0     0        0      28      9      0     5      47      0    0              111
     7:45 AM    16           0     10     0         0        0      0     0        0      25      6      0     6      39      0    0              102
     7:50 AM    15           0     11     0         0        0      0     0        0      35      3      0     7      61      0    0              132
     7:55 AM    10           0     23     0         0        0      0     0        0      45      3      0    10      63      0    0              154            1107
     8:00 AM    10           0     18     0         0        0      0     0        0      47      7      0     8      50      0    0              140            1197
     8:05 AM    12           0     27     0         0        0      0     0        0      38      7      0    14      49      0    0              147            1306
     8:10 AM     4           0     23     0         0        0      0     0        0      44      4      0    15      43      0    0              133            1383
     8:15 AM     7           0     27     0         0        0      0     0        1      27      9      0    22      39      0    0              132            1431
     8:20 AM    12           0     12     0         0        0      0     0        0      21      6      0    15      61      0    0              127            1475
     8:25 AM    10           0     13     0         0        0      0     0        0      24      7      0    22      57      0    0              133            1513
     8:30 AM    13           0      7     0         0        0      0     0        0      24      3      0    17      58      0    0              122            1529
     8:35 AM    12           0      5     0         0        0      0     0        0      22      4      0    11      49      0    0              103            1536
     8:40 AM     4           0      9     0         0        0      0     0        0      36      4      0    11      61      0    0              125            1550
     8:45 AM     7           0      5     0         0        0      0     0        0      27    10       0    15      50      0    0              114            1562
     8:50 AM     8           0     14     0         0        0      0     0        0      35    12       0    10      38      0    0              117            1547
     8:55 AM     7           0     11     0         0        0      1     0        0      22      5      0     7      50      0    0              103            1496
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles 128           0    272     0         0        0      0     0        0     520    68       0   128     648      0    0                     1764
 Heavy Trucks    0           0      8               0        0      0              0      16      4            0      32      0                           60
  Pedestrians               16                              32                             0                          24                                  72
    Bicycles     0           0      0               0        0      0              0       1      0            0       2      0                            3
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Robertson St -- Soquel Dr                                                                                             QC JOB #: 13932406
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                          DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                      3           1                            Peak-Hour: 4:00 PM -- 5:00 PM                                      0.0        0.0

                      3    0      0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 4:15 PM -- 4:30 PM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.0 0.0


       460   1                           0    594
                                                                                                                     1.5   0.0                      0.0      1.0
             786          0.94         385
                                                                                                                           0.8                      1.3
       905   118                       209   1090
                                                                                                                     0.7   0.0                      0.5      0.7

                   72      0     304
                                                                                                                                  2.8 0.0 0.7

                   327           376
                                                                                                                                  0.3        1.1



                           12                                                                                                      0    0    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

             0                           7                                                                                 13                         5

                                                                                                                           0                          1

                           0                                                                                                       0    0    0




                          NA                                                                                                            NA




             NA                        NA                                                                                  NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                            NA



 5-Min Count              Robertson St                     Robertson St                    Soquel Dr                   Soquel Dr                   Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left         Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM      4           0     20     0          0        0      0     0        0      64      7      0    18      37      0    0              150
    4:05 PM      3           0     25     0          0        0      1     0        0      68     14      0    17      27      0    0              155
    4:10 PM      7           0     21     0          0        0      0     0        0      57     10      0    24      33      0    0              152
    4:15 PM     11           0     20     0          0        0      0     0        1      68     13      0    22      36      0    0              171
    4:20 PM      3           0     33     0          0        0      1     0        0      70     12      0    18      32      0    0              169
    4:25 PM     13           0     20     0          0        0      1     0        0      67      9      0    21      26      0    0              157
    4:30 PM      6           0     25     0          0        0      0     0        0      69     12      0    19      31      0    0              162
    4:35 PM      5           0     28     0          0        0      0     0        0      51      9      0    12      30      0    0              135
    4:40 PM      4           0     34     0          0        0      0     0        0      68      3      0    18      51      0    0              178
    4:45 PM      5           0     35     0          0        0      0     0        0      58     11      0    15      25      0    0              149
    4:50 PM      7           0     16     0          0        0      0     0        0      75      8      0     8      28      0    0              142
    4:55 PM      4           0     27     0          0        0      0     0        0      71     10      0    17      29      0    0              158            1878
    5:00 PM      2           0     25     0          0        0      0     0        0      53      8      0    17      25      0    0              130            1858
    5:05 PM      6           0     36     0          0        0      0     0        0      65      7      0    19      32      0    0              165            1868
    5:10 PM      2           0     24     0          0        0      0     0        0      49      7      0    18      46      1    0              147            1863
    5:15 PM     10           0     23     0          0        0      0     0        0      54      8      0    11      26      0    0              132            1824
    5:20 PM      7           0     19     0          0        0      0     0        0      76      7      0    14      33      0    0              156            1811
    5:25 PM      5           0     17     0          0        0      0     0        0      86      6      0    19      18      0    0              151            1805
    5:30 PM      3           0     32     0          0        0      0     0        0      67     10      0    18      35      0    0              165            1808
    5:35 PM      2           0     19     0          0        0      0     0        0      86      4      0    13      24      0    0              148            1821
    5:40 PM      6           0     26     0          0        0      0     0        0      58      6      0    16      32      0    0              144            1787
    5:45 PM      8           0     27     0          0        0      0     0        0      58      4      0    13      34      0    0              144            1782
    5:50 PM      4           0     22     0          0        0      0     0        0      71      2      0    13      26      0    0              138            1778
    5:55 PM      5           0     21     0          0        0      0     0        0      43      1      0    19      40      0    0              129            1749
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                       Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates   Left        Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles 108           0    292     0          0        0      8     0        4     820    136      0   244     376      0    0                     1988
 Heavy Trucks    8           0      4                0        0      0              0       8      0            0       4      0                           24
  Pedestrians                0                               24                             0                          16                                  40
    Bicycles     0           0      0                0        0      0              0       3      0            0       1      0                            4
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Daubenbiss Ave -- Soquel Dr                                                                                      QC JOB #: 13932407
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    39          48                         Peak-Hour: 7:45 AM -- 8:45 AM                                     0.0        0.0

                    31    2     6
                                                          Peak 15-Min: 7:55 AM -- 8:10 AM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0


       794   28                        9   749
                                                                                                                4.0   0.0                      0.0      4.1
             491         0.91        728
                                                                                                                      4.3                      4.3
       575   56                       12   527
                                                                                                                3.8   1.8                      0.0      4.0

                    35    11    30
                                                                                                                             2.9 0.0 0.0

                    70          76
                                                                                                                             1.4        1.3



                          9                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                      4                          0

             39                       62                                                                              5                         14

                                                                                                                      0                          0

                          3                                                                                                   0    6    1




                         NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                      NA                                                                               NA                       NA




                         NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count          Daubenbiss Ave                 Daubenbiss Ave                   Soquel Dr                   Soquel Dr                   Total      Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right     U          Left Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM        0    0      1     0           0      0      0     0        0      14      0      0    1       28      0    0               44
     7:05 AM        1    0      0     0           0      0      0     0        0      17      1      0    0       19      0    0               38
     7:10 AM        1    0      1     0           1      0      0     0        0      25      1      0    1       32      0    0               62
     7:15 AM        0    1      2     0           2      0      1     0        1      35      0      0    2       37      3    0               84
     7:20 AM        1    0      1     0           0      0      0     0        2      34      0      0    1       37      0    0               76
     7:25 AM        2    2      2     0           2      0      7     0        5      32      1      0    1       38      2    0               94
     7:30 AM        2    1      2     0           1      0      3     0        4      31      0      0    0       56      2    0              102
     7:35 AM        1    0      0     0           3      0      3     0        3      22      2      0    0       41      0    0               75
     7:40 AM        0    0      1     0           0      0      0     0        0      42      2      0    0       55      1    0              101
     7:45 AM        0    0      1     0           1      0      1     0        2      33      2      0    2       58      1    0              101
     7:50 AM        2    1      4     0           0      1      0     0        0      44      3      0    0       50      1    0              106
     7:55 AM        2    0      3     0           0      0      3     0        4      53      3      0    0       70      0    0              138            1021
     8:00 AM        2    1      2     0           0      0      6     0        3      56      6      0    0       51      1    0              128            1105
     8:05 AM        3    3      1     0           0      0      3     0        5      54      7      0    0       52      0    0              128            1195
     8:10 AM        1    0      3     0           0      0      3     0        2      40    10       0    5       57      2    0              123            1256
     8:15 AM        5    2      4     0           1      0      8     0        5      28    12       0    0       58      1    0              124            1296
     8:20 AM       14    3      7     0           2      1      2     0        0      33      8      0    1       58      2    0              131            1351
     8:25 AM        1    1      1     0           2      0      2     0        3      45      2      0    0       77      1    0              135            1392
     8:30 AM        2    0      3     0           0      0      1     0        1      34      0      0    1       80      0    0              122            1412
     8:35 AM        1    0      1     0           0      0      1     0        2      27      1      0    1       57      0    0               91            1428
     8:40 AM        2    0      0     0           0      0      1     0        1      44      2      0    2       60      0    0              112            1439
     8:45 AM        1    0      1     0           0      0      0     0        0      35      0      0    0       64      0    0              101            1439
     8:50 AM        0    0      0     0           0      0      0     0        1      45      0      0    0       45      0    0               91            1424
     8:55 AM        1    0      3     0           0      0      0     0        1      29      3      0    0       56      0    0               93            1379
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right     U          Left Thru Right     U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles     28   16     24     0           0      0     48     0        48    652    64       0    0      692      4    0                     1576
 Heavy Trucks       4    0      0                 0      0      0               0     20      4           0       28      0                            56
  Pedestrians           12                               4                            32                          72                                  120
    Bicycles        0    0      0                 0      0      0              3       1      0           0        3      0                             7
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Daubenbiss Ave -- Soquel Dr                                                                                        QC JOB #: 13932408
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                       DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                     13          8                           Peak-Hour: 4:35 PM -- 5:35 PM                                     0.0        12.5

                      3    2     8
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:20 PM -- 5:35 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       569    7                         1   578
                                                                                                                 2.5   14.3                       0.0      2.4
              1107        0.93        562
                                                                                                                       2.0                        2.5
       1156   42                       15   1129
                                                                                                                 2.0   0.0                        0.0      1.9

                      4    0     14
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                     59          18
                                                                                                                               0.0        0.0



                           13                                                                                                   1    0     0



                                                                                                                       0                            0

              2                        10                                                                              18                           8

                                                                                                                       1                            0

                           5                                                                                                    0    0     0




                          NA                                                                                                         NA




              NA                      NA                                                                               NA                         NA




                          NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count           Daubenbiss Ave                  Daubenbiss Ave                 Soquel Dr                    Soquel Dr                     Total      Hourly
     Period             (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At      Left Thru Right     U           Left Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right      U    Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM         0     1      3     0            0      0      1     0        0    98      3      0     1       58      1    0                166
    4:05 PM         1     0      2     0            0      0      2     0        2    76      6      0     0       43      2    0                134
    4:10 PM         2     0      1     0            1      1      4     0        2    79      5      0     1       59      1    0                156
    4:15 PM         3     0      3     0            0      0      0     0        1    85      4      0     0       52      1    0                149
    4:20 PM         2     0      0     0            0      0      3     0        3    88      5      0     1       38      0    0                140
    4:25 PM         2     0      0     0            1      0      2     0        3    98      1      0     0       46      0    0                153
    4:30 PM         2     0      0     0            2      1      1     0        0    71      8      0     2       43      0    0                130
    4:35 PM         1     0      2     0            1      0      0     0        1   102      2      0     1       49      0    0                159
    4:40 PM         0     0      0     0            0      0      0     0        0    81      3      0     2       57      0    0                143
    4:45 PM         0     0      3     0            0      1      0     0        0    99      2      0     1       40      0    0                146
    4:50 PM         0     0      2     0            2      0      0     0        1    98      3      0     0       49      0    0                155
    4:55 PM         0     0      1     0            0      0      1     0        1    80      2      0     2       36      0    0                123            1754
    5:00 PM         0     0      2     0            1      1      0     0        0   101    12       0     0       49      0    0                166            1754
    5:05 PM         0     0      2     0            2      0      0     0        2    59      3      0     4       52      0    0                124            1744
    5:10 PM         0     0      2     0            1      0      0     0        1    87      3      0     0       56      0    0                150            1738
    5:15 PM         1     0      0     0            0      0      1     0        0    82      2      0     2       37      0    0                125            1714
    5:20 PM         0     0      0     0            1      0      1     0        1   116      5      0     0       46      0    0                170            1744
    5:25 PM         2     0      0     0            0      0      0     0        0    98      2      0     2       42      0    0                146            1737
    5:30 PM         0     0      0     0            0      0      0     0        0   104      3      0     1       49      1    0                158            1765
    5:35 PM         0     0      0     0            0      0      0     0        0    83      2      0     0       31      1    0                117            1723
    5:40 PM         1     0      1     0            0      0      0     0        0    84      2      0     0       53      0    0                141            1721
    5:45 PM         0     0      1     0            1      0      0     0        1    79      4      0     2       45      0    0                133            1708
    5:50 PM         1     0      0     0            0      0      1     0        0    81      5      0     1       39      0    0                128            1681
    5:55 PM         2     0      2     0            0      0      0     0        2    96      3      0     0       57      0    0                162            1720
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                       Southbound                  Eastbound                    Westbound
   Flowrates       Left Thru Right     U           Left Thru Right     U        Left Thru Right      U    Left    Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles      8     0      0     0            4      0      4     0        4 1272     40       0     12     548      4    0                       1896
 Heavy Trucks       0     0      0                  0      0      0              0    24      0             0      16      0                             40
  Pedestrians             4                               12                           0                            8                                    24
    Bicycles        0     0      0                  0      0      0              0     3      0            0        5      0                              8
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Porter St -- Soquel Dr                                                                                               QC JOB #: 13932409
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    750          743                           Peak-Hour: 7:45 AM -- 8:45 AM                                     2.9        2.8

                    317 286 147
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 8:00 AM -- 8:15 AM
                                                                                                                                 2.8 3.8 1.4


       731   210                       261   760
                                                                                                                    3.1   2.4                      2.3      2.8
             255          0.93         378
                                                                                                                          3.9                      2.9
       518   53                        121   431
                                                                                                                    2.9   0.0                      3.3      3.2

                       36 272 29
                                                                                                                                 8.3 3.7 6.9

                    460          337
                                                                                                                                 3.3        4.5



                           3                                                                                                      0    0    0



                                                                                                                          1                          0

             2                           5                                                                                5                         10

                                                                                                                          1                          1

                           6                                                                                                      1    3    1




                          NA                                                                                                           NA




             NA                        NA                                                                                 NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                           NA



 5-Min Count                 Porter St                       Porter St                    Soquel Dr                   Soquel Dr                   Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM        1       28       0    0          1      11       6    0        10      6      1      0     0      21    10     0               95
     7:05 AM        1       26       2    0          1      17       5    0         9      7      1      0     2      14      8    0               93
     7:10 AM        3       29       0    0          3      15       9    0        13      9      5      0     0      20      7    0              113
     7:15 AM        4       39       3    0          4      20      15    0        21      7      3      0     3      23    20     0              162
     7:20 AM        0       35       2    0          6      23      21    0        30      5      5      0     4      17    38     0              186
     7:25 AM        3       38       3    0         12      28      20    0        24     12      3      0     1      19    13     0              176
     7:30 AM        6       25       2    0         17      33      26    0        11      5      5      0     6      28    20     0              184
     7:35 AM        4       28       1    0         13      22      11    0        13     11      8      0     2      27    17     0              157
     7:40 AM        1       16       0    0          9      27      23    0        18     20      5      0     5      31     11    0              166
     7:45 AM        1       26       2    0         12      25      15    0        17     14      7      0     9      39      4    0              171
     7:50 AM        3       27       3    0         13      28      27    0        15     25      4      0     3      24    27     0              199
     7:55 AM        4       21       1    0         11      23      31    0        15     27      6      0     8      36    26     0              209            1911
     8:00 AM        1       22       1    0          9       9      16    0        29     27      3      0    11      36    31     0              195            2011
     8:05 AM        0       32       3    0         15      33      31    0        27     20      2      0     9      14    21     0              207            2125
     8:10 AM        1       22       1    0         18      33      34    0        15     27      6      0     2      33    44     0              236            2248
     8:15 AM        1       15       3    0         10      24      33    0        14     14      4      0    10      28    23     0              179            2265
     8:20 AM        4       33       5    0         19      21      35    0        14     19      5      0     9      21    26     0              211            2290
     8:25 AM        3       20       1    0          8      16      26    0        21     25      4      0    13      43    22     0              202            2316
     8:30 AM       10       28       2    0         11      26      31    0        28     16      8      0    23      29    12     0              224            2356
     8:35 AM        3       15       4    0          6      28      20    0         8     15      2      0    13      37    13     0              164            2363
     8:40 AM        5       11       3    0         15      20      18    0         7     26      2      0    11      38    12     0              168            2365
     8:45 AM        4       15       4    0          5      21      18    0        14     19      5      0     6      40      7    0              158            2352
     8:50 AM        3       17       4    0          6       7      15    0        13     14      2      0     3      30    10     0              124            2277
     8:55 AM        7        9       5    0          9      10      10    0        14     25      6      0    16      39    13     0              163            2231
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates      Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U       Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles     8      304       20    0        168     300    324     0      284     296    44       0    88     332   384     0                     2552
 Heavy Trucks      0         8       0               4       8       8             0      12      0            8      16      8                           72
  Pedestrians                0                               4                             4                           4                                  12
    Bicycles       1         2       0               0       0       0             0       0      0           0        2      0                            5
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Porter St -- Soquel Dr                                                                                                 QC JOB #: 13932410
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                           DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                     985          498                           Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                                      1.8        1.0

                     247 436 302
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                                   1.2 3.0 0.7


       553    204                       124    465
                                                                                                                      2.2   1.0                      1.6      2.4
              802          0.95         272
                                                                                                                            1.5                      2.9
       1101   95                         69   1245
                                                                                                                      1.5   2.1                      1.4      1.2

                        34 170 141
                                                                                                                                   2.9 0.6 0.7

                     600          345
                                                                                                                                   2.7        0.9



                            1                                                                                                       1    5    1



                                                                                                                            2                          5

              6                           4                                                                                 20                         8

                                                                                                                            0                          2

                            13                                                                                                      0    0    1




                           NA                                                                                                            NA




              NA                        NA                                                                                  NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                            NA



 5-Min Count                  Porter St                        Porter St                    Soquel Dr                   Soquel Dr                   Total      Hourly
     Period                (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                   (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At      Left     Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U        Left   Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM         5         7       7    0          22      20      13    0        23     86      7      0    10      41      5    0              246
    4:05 PM         2        26       9    0          13      45      23    0        23     40      3      0    11      15    10     0              220
    4:10 PM         3        10       3    0          36      31      25    0        16     72      5      0     4      36    14     0              255
    4:15 PM         6        31      10    0          18      45      24    0        26     44      6      0    11      22      8    0              251
    4:20 PM         5        17      10    0          33      32      19    0        19     65    14       0     4      18      7    0              243
    4:25 PM         2        17      14    0          15      36      16    0        18     84    10       0     5      33      7    0              257
    4:30 PM         5        17      14    0          33      40      19    0         8     41      9      0     6      17      6    0              215
    4:35 PM         2        11      16    0          16      29      13    0        20     80     11      0     2      32      6    1              239
    4:40 PM         5        18      10    0          32      38      28    0        14     51      7      0     2      26    14     0              245
    4:45 PM         1         3      10    0          35      41      20    0        24     78      4      0     5      22      7    0              250
    4:50 PM         3        16      19    0           6      25      18    0        19     68      9      0    14      19      6    0              222
    4:55 PM         2        16      15    0          25      41      17    0        12     63    12       0     4      24    12     0              243            2886
    5:00 PM         2        12      12    0          12      28      21    0        20     70    10       0     6      27    10     0              230            2870
    5:05 PM         3        14      12    0          34      40      31    0        11     43      8      0     2      20      7    0              225            2875
    5:10 PM         4        20       7    0           8      21      26    0        25     73    14       0    10      26     11    0              245            2865
    5:15 PM         3        21      19    0          40      37      18    0         7     51      5      0     2      16    13     0              232            2846
    5:20 PM         2        10       9    0          27      33      17    0        24     98      9      0     7      26    17     0              279            2882
    5:25 PM         2        11      10    0          31      46      18    0        12     78      6      0     2      29      7    0              252            2877
    5:30 PM         3        14       9    0          17      36      19    0        21     62      3      0     6      25    14     0              229            2891
    5:35 PM         4        15       9    0          35      50      14    0        15     67      8      0     9      12      6    0              244            2896
    5:40 PM         2        12      11    0          21      24      18    0        13     73      5      0     7      36    14     0              236            2887
    5:45 PM         4        22      11    0          38      40      15    0        13     46      5      0     6      21      3    0              224            2861
    5:50 PM         1        12       7    0          38      36      22    0        23     62      4      0     4      21    13     0              243            2882
    5:55 PM         3        16      10    0          15      27      28    0        11     88      3      0     3      26     11    0              241            2880
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                       Southbound                    Eastbound                   Westbound
   Flowrates       Left     Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U       Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right    U                     Total
  All Vehicles      28     168     152     0         392     464    212     0      172     908    80       0    44     284   148     0                     3052
 Heavy Trucks        0        4       0                0       0       4             0      16      0            4       8      4                           40
  Pedestrians                 8                                0                             4                           0                                  12
    Bicycles        0         0       0                1       2       0             1       7      0           0        3      1                           15
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 41st Ave -- Redwood Shopping Center                                                                                   QC JOB #: 13932411
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                          DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    509             686                           Peak-Hour: 7:45 AM -- 8:45 AM                                   7.3        4.5

                         1   490 18
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 7:50 AM -- 8:05 AM
                                                                                                                                  0.0 7.1 11.1


       9     1                             15   210
                                                                                                                   11.1   100.0                     6.7      7.6
             1               0.94           3
                                                                                                                          100.0                     0.0
       6     4                            192   100
                                                                                                                   50.0   25.0                      7.8     13.0

                         5   670 81
                                                                                                                                  20.0 4.3 12.3

                    686             756
                                                                                                                                  7.4        5.3



                              9                                                                                                    0    2    0



                                                                                                                          0                           0

             10                             2                                                                             0                           0

                                                                                                                          0                           0

                              0                                                                                                    0    3    2




                             NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                           NA                                                                              NA                        NA




                             NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                    41st Ave                        41st Ave             Redwood Shopping Center Redwood Shopping Center               Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)             (Westbound)                                  Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       0           34      7     0         0       24      0     0        0     0      0    0      6    2     1     0                   74
     7:05 AM       1           24      5     0         2       17      0     0        0     0      0    0      6    1     0     0                   56
     7:10 AM       0           39      7     0         0       16      0     0        0     0      1    0      9    0     0     0                   72
     7:15 AM       0           31     10     0         0       12      0     0        0     0      0    0     12    0     0     0                   65
     7:20 AM       1           35      2     0         1       21      0     0        0     0      0    0     14    0     1     0                   75
     7:25 AM       0           35      7     0         0       20      0     0        0     0      2    0     20    0     0     0                   84
     7:30 AM       0           56      8     0         0       18      0     0        1     0      0    0     16    0     1     0                  100
     7:35 AM       0           49     12     0         1       40      0     0        2     0      1    0     10    0     1     0                  116
     7:40 AM       2           59      6     0         0       45      0     0        0     0      1    0     14    0     0     0                  127
     7:45 AM       0           59      4     0         1       38      0     0        0     0      0    0     15    0     2     0                  119
     7:50 AM       0           74      8     0         2       42      0     0        0     0      0    0     17    2     2     0                  147
     7:55 AM       0           63      4     0         2       31      0     0        0     0      0    0     10    0     2     0                  112            1147
     8:00 AM       1           57      7     0         2       46      1     0        0     0      0    0     19    1     1     0                  135            1208
     8:05 AM       0           57      6     0         1       47      0     0        0     0      0    0      8    0     2     0                  121            1273
     8:10 AM       0           53     13     0         1       46      0     0        0     0      0    0      8    0     1     0                  122            1323
     8:15 AM       0           53      5     0         2       49      0     0        0     0      1    0     22    0     0     0                  132            1390
     8:20 AM       1           48     12     0         0       39      0     0        0     0      0    0     18    0     0     0                  118            1433
     8:25 AM       0           57      4     0         1       38      0     0        0     0      1    0     16    0     1     0                  118            1467
     8:30 AM       0           41      9     0         2       31      0     0        0     0      1    0     22    0     1     0                  107            1474
     8:35 AM       2           47      3     0         0       46      0     0        1     1      0    0     21    0     1     0                  122            1480
     8:40 AM       1           61      6     0         4       37      0     0        0     0      1    0     16    0     2     0                  128            1481
     8:45 AM       0           41      5     0         1       29      0     0        0     1      0    0     14    0     1     0                   92            1454
     8:50 AM       1           57      7     0         1       29      0     0        0     0      0    0     15    0     3     0                  113            1420
     8:55 AM       0           36     14     0         1       40      1     0        0     0      1    0     19    0     1     0                  113            1421
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                      Southbound                  Eastbound               Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U                         Total
  All Vehicles     4         776      76     0         24     476      4     0        0     0      0    0    184   12    20     0                         1576
 Heavy Trucks      0           20     12                4      32      0              0     0      0           4    0     0                                72
  Pedestrians                   0                              12                          12                       4                                      28
    Bicycles       0            2      1               0        0      0              0     0      0           0    0     0                                 3
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 41st Ave -- Redwood Shopping Center                                                                              QC JOB #: 13932412
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    609          526                          Peak-Hour: 4:55 PM -- 5:55 PM                                  1.6        2.3

                       11 577 21
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 1.7 0.0


       27    9                          14   295
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      7.1      1.4
             2            0.92           2
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       28    17                        279   169
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      1.1      0.0

                       14 503 146
                                                                                                                             0.0 2.2 0.0

                    873          663
                                                                                                                             1.5        1.7



                           13                                                                                                 0    2    0



                                                                                                                      0                          0

             8                          10                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          2

                           0                                                                                                  0    2    1




                          NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                        NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                 41st Ave                        41st Ave             Redwood Shopping Center Redwood Shopping Center             Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)             (Westbound)                               Totals
 Beginning At     Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        3        45      5     0         4       41      2     0         1    0      1    0     21    0     1     0                124
    4:05 PM        1        44     18     0         0       51      0     0         0    0      2    0     32    0     1     0                149
    4:10 PM        1        36     10     0         2       48      0     0         0    0      0    0     28    0     1     0                126
    4:15 PM        2        44      9     0         1       47      0     0         0    0      4    0     24    0     6     0                137
    4:20 PM        1        57      9     0         4       37      1     0         0    0      0    0     26    0     1     0                136
    4:25 PM        3        40     14     0         0       34      2     0         2    1      4    0     30    0     2     0                132
    4:30 PM        0        51      8     0         4       64      1     0         0    0      1    0     17    0     0     0                146
    4:35 PM        0        35     14     0         1       40      0     0         1    1      2    0     23    1     3     0                121
    4:40 PM        0        39      7     0         0       55      0     0         0    0      0    0     15    1     4     0                121
    4:45 PM        0        47     14     0         2       38      3     0         0    0      2    0     24    0     1     0                131
    4:50 PM        0        44     15     0         0       37      0     0         0    0      1    0     24    0     0     0                121
    4:55 PM        1        47     12     0         2       42      1     0         0    0      2    0     21    0     1     0                129            1573
    5:00 PM        0        37     15     0         2       60      1     0         0    1      1    0     11    1     3     0                132            1581
    5:05 PM        2        51      7     0         2       34      0     0         2    0      3    0     26    0     2     0                129            1561
    5:10 PM        3        48     10     0         0       71      1     0         1    1      1    0     20    0     1     0                157            1592
    5:15 PM        2        33     12     0         0       43      0     0         2    0      2    0     31    0     0     0                125            1580
    5:20 PM        2        44     14     0         4       62      1     0         1    0      0    0     21    0     1     0                150            1594
    5:25 PM        0        39     12     0         1       36      0     0         1    0      2    0     23    0     0     0                114            1576
    5:30 PM        0        46      9     0         1       36      0     0         0    0      0    0     15    0     0     0                107            1537
    5:35 PM        1        33     13     0         4       47      0     0         2    0      2    0     35    0     3     0                140            1556
    5:40 PM        2        43     13     0         2       64      2     0         0    0      2    0     22    1     1     0                152            1587
    5:45 PM        1        31     18     0         2       30      0     0         0    0      2    0     38    0     1     0                123            1579
    5:50 PM        0        51     11     0         1       52      5     0         0    0      0    0     16    0     1     0                137            1595
    5:55 PM        1        39      7     0         0       27      0     0         0    0      4    0     27    0     2     0                107            1573
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                  Eastbound               Westbound
   Flowrates      Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right    U    Left Thru Right    U                       Total
  All Vehicles     28     500     144     0         16     704      8     0        16    4    12     0    288    0     8     0                       1728
 Heavy Trucks       0        4      0                0      24      0               0    0      0           4    0     0                              32
  Pedestrians                0                              12                           4                      24                                    40
    Bicycles       0         0      0               0        0      0               0    0      0           0    0     0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 41st Ave -- Hwy 1 NB Ramps                                                                                           QC JOB #: 13932413
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                         DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    742             970                            Peak-Hour: 7:45 AM -- 8:45 AM                                 5.0        2.9

                    166 576          0
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 8:30 AM -- 8:45 AM
                                                                                                                                 3.0 5.6 0.0


       171   0                            428   1050
                                                                                                                    2.9   0.0                      1.6      2.6
             0               0.97           5
                                                                                                                          0.0                      0.0
       0     0                            617    374
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                      3.2      2.7

                         0   542 374
                                                                                                                                 0.0 3.9 2.7

                    1194            917
                                                                                                                                 4.4        3.4



                              0                                                                                                   0    0    0



                                                                                                                          0                          0

             4                              4                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0

                              0                                                                                                   0    7    0




                             NA                                                                                                        NA




             NA                           NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count                    41st Ave                         41st Ave                 Hwy 1 NB Ramps            Hwy 1 NB Ramps                Total      Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                     (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
     7:00 AM       0           16     13     0          0       26      4     0        0      0      0      0    42     0    28     0             129
     7:05 AM       0           29     29     0          0       19      7     0        0      0      0      0    46     0    18     0             148
     7:10 AM       0           30     42     0          0       18     10     0        0      0      0      0    45     0    28     0             173
     7:15 AM       0           28     31     0          0       19      7     0        0      0      0      0    48     0    31     0             164
     7:20 AM       0           22     19     0          0       27      9     0        0      0      0      0    58     0    25     0             160
     7:25 AM       0           20     23     0          0       26     15     0        0      0      0      0    50     0    37     0             171
     7:30 AM       0           46     31     0          0       21     14     0        0      0      0      0    48     0    31     0             191
     7:35 AM       0           36     41     0          0       39     19     0        0      0      0      0    40     0    44     0             219
     7:40 AM       0           42     32     0          0       48     12     0        0      0      0      0    45     1    35     0             215
     7:45 AM       0           39     40     0          0       45      9     0        0      0      0      0    55     0    39     0             227
     7:50 AM       0           62     27     0          0       40     18     0        0      0      0      0    45     0    48     0             240
     7:55 AM       0           50     29     0          0       37     14     0        0      0      0      0    48     1    31     0             210            2247
     8:00 AM       0           38     32     0          0       52     13     0        0      0      0      0    60     0    38     0             233            2351
     8:05 AM       0           43     30     0          0       53      7     0        0      0      0      0    41     1    35     0             210            2413
     8:10 AM       0           52     24     0          0       52     12     0        0      0      0      0    46     1    34     0             221            2461
     8:15 AM       0           47     33     0          0       56     16     0        0      0      0      0    28     0    34     0             214            2511
     8:20 AM       0           52     31     0          0       50     12     0        0      0      0      0    51     0    28     0             224            2575
     8:25 AM       0           41     26     0          0       41     18     0        0      0      0      0    67     0    42     0             235            2639
     8:30 AM       0           29     32     0          0       46     10     0        0      0      0      0    62     0    34     0             213            2661
     8:35 AM       0           37     33     0          0       59     21     0        0      0      0      0    56     2    26     0             234            2676
     8:40 AM       0           53     37     0          0       45     16     0        0      0      0      0    58     0    39     0             248            2709
     8:45 AM       0           33     36     0          0       41     17     0        0      0      0      0    48     0    29     0             204            2686
     8:50 AM       0           51     36     0          0       31     11     0        0      0      0      0    53     1    27     0             210            2656
     8:55 AM       0           44     32     0          0       42     13     0        0      0      0      0    61     0    30     0             222            2668
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                       Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles     0         477     408     0          0      600    188     0        0      0      0      0   704     8   396     0                    2780
 Heavy Trucks      0           32     12                0       24      8              0      0      0           36     0    12                           124
  Pedestrians                   0                                0                            4                         8                                  12
    Bicycles       0            1      0                0        0      0              0      0      0            0     0     0                             1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                            SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 41st Ave -- Hwy 1 NB Ramps                                                                                            QC JOB #: 13932414
 CITY/STATE: Soquel, CA                                                                                                          DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    893             775                            Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                                  1.9        3.2

                    143 750          0
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                                  1.4 2.0 0.0


       143   0                             253   1059
                                                                                                                     1.4   0.0                      5.1      2.0
             0               0.91            0
                                                                                                                           0.0                      0.0
       0     0                             806    488
                                                                                                                     0.0   0.0                      1.0      0.2

                         0   522 488
                                                                                                                                  0.0 2.3 0.2

                    1556            1010
                                                                                                                                  1.5        1.3



                              0                                                                                                    0    1    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

             11                              9                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                              0                                                                                                    0    5    0




                             NA                                                                                                         NA




             NA                            NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                    41st Ave                          41st Ave                 Hwy 1 NB Ramps            Hwy 1 NB Ramps                Total      Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM        0           44     35     0           0       71      8     0        0      0      0      0    67     1    14     0             240
    4:05 PM        0           41     39     0           0       66      9     0        0      0      0      0    73     1    33     0             262
    4:10 PM        0           42     37     0           0       66     16     0        0      0      0      0    55     0    23     0             239
    4:15 PM        0           34     46     0           0       55     10     0        0      0      0      0    76     0    19     0             240
    4:20 PM        0           55     28     0           0       57     22     0        0      0      0      0    53     0    24     0             239
    4:25 PM        0           48     35     0           0       41     17     0        0      0      0      0    54     0    25     0             220
    4:30 PM        0           35     20     0           0       63     20     0        0      0      0      0    64     0    18     0             220
    4:35 PM        0           26     32     0           0       65     13     0        0      0      0      0    47     2    10     0             195
    4:40 PM        0           51     43     0           0       55     14     0        0      0      0      0    80     0    25     0             268
    4:45 PM        0           51     44     0           0       60     12     0        0      0      0      0    79     0    25     0             271
    4:50 PM        0           38     45     0           0       46     19     0        0      0      0      0    70     0    20     0             238
    4:55 PM        0           43     32     0           0       57      8     0        0      0      0      0    58     0    25     0             223            2855
    5:00 PM        0           37     35     0           0       60     11     0        0      0      0      0    57     0    14     0             214            2829
    5:05 PM        0           51     36     0           0       79      6     0        0      0      0      0    57     0    17     0             246            2813
    5:10 PM        0           48     63     0           0       74     16     0        0      0      0      0    70     0    24     0             295            2869
    5:15 PM        0           51     46     0           0       68     12     0        0      0      0      0    64     0    21     0             262            2891
    5:20 PM        0           39     44     0           0       65     18     0        0      0      0      0    76     0    19     0             261            2913
    5:25 PM        0           40     25     0           0       65      6     0        0      0      0      0    71     0    18     0             225            2918
    5:30 PM        0           31     33     0           0       57     12     0        0      0      0      0    52     0    28     0             213            2911
    5:35 PM        0           42     42     0           0       64      9     0        0      0      0      0    72     0    17     0             246            2962
    5:40 PM        0           47     36     0           0       84     17     0        0      0      0      0    50     0    22     0             256            2950
    5:45 PM        0           41     28     0           0       53     12     0        0      0      0      0    69     0    17     0             220            2899
    5:50 PM        0           46     33     0           0       74      8     0        0      0      0      0    44     0    18     0             223            2884
    5:55 PM        0           41     32     0           0       41      6     0        0      0      0      0    57     0    16     0             193            2854
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                        Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles     0         552     612     0           0      828    184     0        0      0      0      0   840     0   256     0                    3272
 Heavy Trucks      0            8      0                 0       28      4              0      0      0            8     0     0                           48
  Pedestrians                   0                                 0                            8                       16                                  24
    Bicycles       0            0      0                 0        0      0              0      0      0            0     0     0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                             SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 41st Ave -- Hwy 1 SB Ramps                                                                                                QC JOB #: 13932415
 CITY/STATE: Capitola, CA                                                                                                            DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    1174            909                           Peak-Hour: 7:55 AM -- 8:55 AM                                       4.2        3.1

                    240 934          0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 8:40 AM -- 8:55 AM
                                                                                                                                      7.9 3.2 0.0


       240   218                            0     0
                                                                                                                         7.9   2.8                      0.0      0.0
             0               0.96           0
                                                                                                                               0.0                      0.0
       734   516                            0   562
                                                                                                                         3.0   3.1                      0.0      2.8

                         0   691 562
                                                                                                                                      0.0 3.2 2.8

                    1450            1253
                                                                                                                                      3.2        3.0



                              5                                                                                                        0    1    0



                                                                                                                               0                          0

             6                              0                                                                                  0                          0

                                                                                                                               0                          0

                              0                                                                                                        0    6    1




                             NA                                                                                                             NA




             NA                            NA                                                                                  NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                             NA



 5-Min Count                    41st Ave                        41st Ave                    Hwy 1 SB Ramps               Hwy 1 SB Ramps                Total      Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                    (Southbound)                     (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U        Left     Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right    U
     7:00 AM       0           22     27     0         0       52     15     0         6        0     14      0    0         0     0     0             136
     7:05 AM       0           47     40     0         0       54      8     0        13        0      9      0    0         0     0     0             171
     7:10 AM       0           58     44     0         0       61     11     0        13        0     14      0    0         0     0     0             201
     7:15 AM       0           46     31     0         0       56     10     0        13        0     21      0    0         0     0     0             177
     7:20 AM       0           31     41     0         0       66     11     0        11        0     13      0    0         0     0     0             173
     7:25 AM       0           35     39     0         0       56     13     0        11        0     25      0    0         0     0     0             179
     7:30 AM       0           65     50     0         0       58      8     0         6        0     27      0    0         0     0     0             214
     7:35 AM       0           63     32     0         0       66     21     0        15        0     17      0    0         0     0     0             214
     7:40 AM       0           60     59     0         0       72     25     0        16        0     20      0    0         0     0     0             252
     7:45 AM       0           70     54     0         0       74     27     0         8        0     18      0    0         0     0     0             251
     7:50 AM       0           77     50     0         0       65     14     0        18        0     31      0    0         0     0     0             255
     7:55 AM       0           65     60     0         0       69     20     0        16        0     36      0    0         0     0     0             266            2489
     8:00 AM       0           62     47     0         0       72     23     0        13        0     36      0    0         0     0     0             253            2606
     8:05 AM       0           54     53     0         0       72     24     0        18        0     35      0    0         0     0     0             256            2691
     8:10 AM       0           58     54     0         0       76     25     0        24        0     30      0    0         0     0     0             267            2757
     8:15 AM       0           59     50     0         0       63     21     0        18        0     45      0    0         0     0     0             256            2836
     8:20 AM       0           63     38     0         0       90     19     0        22        0     47      0    0         0     0     0             279            2942
     8:25 AM       0           43     37     0         0       80     10     0        18        0     49      0    0         0     0     0             237            3000
     8:30 AM       0           45     44     0         0      101     16     0        20        0     47      0    0         0     0     0             273            3059
     8:35 AM       0           53     40     0         0       71     26     0        20        0     39      0    0         0     0     0             249            3094
     8:40 AM       0           70     49     0         0      100     21     0        12        0     45      0    0         0     0     0             297            3139
     8:45 AM       0           51     49     0         0       68     23     0        21        0     51      0    0         0     0     0             263            3151
     8:50 AM       0           68     41     0         0       72     12     0        16        0     56      0    0         0     0     0             265            3161
     8:55 AM       0           61     38     0         0       74      9     0        16        0     49      0    0         0     0     0             247            3142
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                      Southbound                      Eastbound                    Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U       Left      Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right    U                    Total
  All Vehicles     0         756     556     0         0      960    224     0      196         0    608      0    0         0     0     0                    3300
 Heavy Trucks      0           32     20               0       24     20              4         0     24           0         0     0                           124
  Pedestrians                   0                               8                              12                            0                                  20
    Bicycles       0            1      1               0        1      0              0         0      0           0         0     0                             3
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 41st Ave -- Hwy 1 SB Ramps                                                                                            QC JOB #: 13932416
 CITY/STATE: Capitola, CA                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Oct 18 2016
                    1564          1000                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                       1.1        1.2

                    370 1194 0
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:10 PM -- 5:25 PM
                                                                                                                                  0.8 1.2 0.0


       370   35                           0     0
                                                                                                                     0.8   5.7                      0.0      0.0
             46            0.94           0
                                                                                                                           0.0                      0.0
       141   60                           0   981
                                                                                                                     2.1   1.7                      0.0      1.3

                     0     965 935
                                                                                                                                  0.0 1.0 1.4

                    1254          1900
                                                                                                                                  1.2        1.2



                            13                                                                                                     0    9    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

             11                           1                                                                                0                          0

                                                                                                                           1                          0

                            0                                                                                                      0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                           NA




             NA                          NA                                                                                NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                           NA



 5-Min Count              41st Ave                          41st Ave                    Hwy 1 SB Ramps               Hwy 1 SB Ramps                Total      Hourly
     Period            (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                     (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right     U        Left     Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right    U
    4:00 PM        0     75     71     0             0    109     25     1         4        2     11      0    0         0     0     0             298
    4:05 PM        0     72     79     0             0     91     25     0        11        0      7      0    0         0     0     0             285
    4:10 PM        0     70     86     0             0    104     32     0         3        1      3      0    0         0     0     0             299
    4:15 PM        0     82     81     0             0    106     26     0         3        5      8      0    0         0     0     0             311
    4:20 PM        0     76     78     0             0     91     27     0         4        0      6      0    0         0     0     0             282
    4:25 PM        0     79     89     0             0     80     16     0         8        4    12       0    0         0     0     0             288
    4:30 PM        0     59     87     0             0     95     24     0         2        3      4      0    0         0     0     0             274
    4:35 PM        0     76     69     0             0     85     29     0         4        3      7      0    0         0     0     0             273
    4:40 PM        0     69     52     0             0    104     25     0         2        7      5      0    0         0     0     0             264
    4:45 PM        0     85     85     0             0    100     24     0         5        3      7      0    0         0     0     0             309
    4:50 PM        0     82     87     0             0    115     31     0         2        2      8      0    0         0     0     0             327
    4:55 PM        0     67     78     0             0     95     25     0         4        3      5      0    0         0     0     0             277            3487
    5:00 PM        0     74     81     0             0     89     24     0         3        3      3      0    0         0     0     0             277            3466
    5:05 PM        0     85     73     0             0     89     39     0         4        5      6      0    0         0     0     0             301            3482
    5:10 PM        0    111     70     0             0    107     26     0         2        3      3      0    0         0     0     0             322            3505
    5:15 PM        0     88     78     0             0    100     38     0         3        5      4      0    0         0     0     0             316            3510
    5:20 PM        0     83     85     0             0    104     30     0         2        6      9      0    0         0     0     0             319            3547
    5:25 PM        0     60     69     0             0    106     45     0         5        5      3      0    0         0     0     0             293            3552
    5:30 PM        0     66     84     0             0     94     23     0         2        4      6      0    0         0     0     0             279            3557
    5:35 PM        0     83     69     0             0     88     28     0         1        2      4      0    0         0     0     0             275            3559
    5:40 PM        0     81     76     0             0    107     37     0         2        5      2      0    0         0     0     0             310            3605
    5:45 PM        0     77     84     0             0     94     24     0         2        7      7      0    0         0     0     0             295            3591
    5:50 PM        0     78     77     0             0    100     27     0         2        8      4      0    0         0     0     0             296            3560
    5:55 PM        0     76     76     0             0     89     17     0         4        5      6      0    0         0     0     0             273            3556
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                        Southbound                      Eastbound                    Westbound
   Flowrates      Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right     U        Left     Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right    U                    Total
  All Vehicles     0 1128      932     0             0 1244      376     0        28       56    64       0    0         0     0     0                    3828
 Heavy Trucks      0      4      8                   0     28      4               0        0      0           0         0     0                           44
  Pedestrians             0                                12                               8                            0                                 20
    Bicycles       0      0      0                   0      1      0              0         0      0           0         0     0                            1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 10/25/2016 2:14 PM                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
