                                 Fact Sheet

Action Sponsor and Lead Agency                City of Kirkland
                                              Department       of Planning    and
                                              Community Development

Proposed Action                               Legislative adoption of amendments
                                              to the Zoning Map, Zoning Code and
                                              Municipal Code to allow Transit-
                                              Oriented-Development (TOD) at the
                                              South Kirkland Park and Ride
                                              pursuant to Chapter 160 KZC
                                              (Process IV).


Responsible Official                          _____________________________
                                              Eric R. Shields, AICP
                                              Planning Director

Contact Person                                Dorian Collins, Senior Planner, City
                                              of Kirkland (425) 587-3249.

Required Approvals                            Adoption by Kirkland City Council
                                              Approval by Houghton Community
                                              Council.

Location of Background Data                   File ZON10-00014
                                              City of Kirkland
                                              Department       of Planning    and
                                              Community Development
                                              123 Fifth Avenue
                                              Kirkland, WA 98033

Date of Issuance                              ______________________




                                     1
                                    City of Kirkland

Process IV: Amendments to the Zoning Map, Zoning Code and Municipal Code
                  for the South Kirkland Park and Ride

                       EIS Addendum dated March 22, 2011

                                File No. ZON10-00014

I.     Background

The City of Kirkland proposes to adopt amendments to the Zoning Map, Zoning Code
and Municipal Code to allow Transit-Oriented-Development (TOD) at the South Kirkland
Park & Ride. The zoning and municipal code amendments implement changes to the
Comprehensive Plan that were adopted in 2008 by the Kirkland City Council and
received final approval of the Houghton Community Council in January 2009. The
Comprehensive Plan amendments included new text which provides policy direction for
code and map changes to allow transit oriented development (TOD) on the Park & Ride
site.

The proposed code amendments (see Attachments 1-3) include changes to the Zoning
Map, Zoning Code and Municipal Code related to the South Kirkland Park and Ride site.
The proposed Zoning Map amendments will rezone tax parcel 202505-9230 from PO
(Professional Office) to a new YBD 1 zone (Yarrow Bay District 1). The proposed Zoning
Code amendments will create a new zone in the Yarrow Bay Business District (YBD 1)
which will retain all uses and development standards currently allowed within the PO
zone, and add additional uses and standards to support transit-oriented-development.

Proposed changes include allowing Attached or Stacked Dwelling Units, with additional
uses such as commercial, school, government facility, entertainment, cultural and/or
recreational uses and other miscellaneous uses to be allowed on the ground floor of
residential development.        Proposed amendments also include requirements for
affordability in residential development, regulations to establish building height, setback
and other development standards. Proposed changes also include the use of design
review for the review of development proposals in the YBD 1 zone. The proposed
changes to the Municipal Code include the addition of new design guidelines for
development in the YBD 1 zone.

The amendments will be reviewed using the Chapter 160 KZC, Process IV with adoption
by City Council and final approval by the Houghton Community Council as the
amendments are within their jurisdiction.

This Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) Addendum is intended to fulfill the
environmental requirements pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) for
the proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment.




                                            2
II.    EIS Addendum

According to the SEPA Rules, an EIS addendum provides additional analysis and/or
information about a proposal or alternatives where their significant environmental
impacts have been disclosed and identified in a previous environmental document (WAC
197-11-600(2). An addendum is appropriate when the impacts of the new proposal are
the same general types as those identified in the prior document, and when the new
analysis does not substantially change the analysis of significant impacts and
alternatives in the prior environmental document (WAC 197-11-600(4)(c), -625 and ­
706).

The City published the City of Kirkland 2004 Draft and Final Comprehensive Plan 10-year
Update. This EIS addressed the 2004 Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code and Zoning
Map updates required by the Washington State Growth Management Act (GMA).
Elements of the environment addressed in this EIS include population and employment
growth, earth resources, air quality, water resources, plants and animals, energy,
environmental health (noise, hazardous materials), land use, socioeconomics, aesthetics,
parks/recreation, transportation, and public services/utilities.

This addendum to the City of Kirkland 2004 Draft and Final Comprehensive Plan 10-year
Update is being issued pursuant to WAC 197-11-625 to meet the City's SEPA
responsibilities. The EIS evaluated plan alternatives and impacts that encompass the
same general development regulations and environmental impacts that are expected to
be associated with the proposed amendments for transit-oriented-development
discussed herein. While the specific location, precise magnitude, or timing of some
impacts may vary from those estimated in the City of Kirkland 2004 Draft and Final
Comprehensive Plan 10-year Update, they are still within the range of what was
evaluated and disclosed there. No new significant impacts have been identified.

III.   Non-Project Action

Decisions on the adoption or amendment of zoning ordinances are referred to in the
SEPA rules as "non-project actions" (WAC 197-11-704(2)(b)). The purpose of an EIS in
analyzing a non-project action is to help the public and decision-makers identify and
evaluate the environmental effects of alternative policies, implementation approaches,
and similar choices related to future growth. While plans and regulations do not directly
result in alteration of the physical environment, they do provide a framework within
which future growth and development ­ and resulting environmental impacts ­ will
occur. Both the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan evaluated in the City of Kirkland
2004 Draft and Final Comprehensive Plan 10-year Update and eventual action on the
amendments to the Zoning Map, Zoning Code and Municipal Code for the South Kirkland
Park and Ride are "non-project actions".

IV.    Environmental Analysis

The City of Kirkland 2004 Draft and Final Comprehensive Plan 10-year Update evaluated
the environmental impacts associated with adoption of proposed policies and land use
designations. The plan's policies are intended to accomplish responsibilities mandated
by the Washington State Growth Management Act (GMA), and to mitigate the impacts of


                                           3
future growth. In general, environmental impacts associated with the proposed Map
and Code amendments are similar in magnitude to the potential impacts disclosed in the
City of Kirkland 2004 Draft and Final Comprehensive Plan 10-year Update. As this
proposal is consistent with the Lakeview Neighborhood Chapter of the Comprehensive
Plan and the environmental impacts disclosed in the City of Kirkland 2004 Draft and
Final Comprehensive Plan 10-year Update, no new significant impacts beyond those
identified in the EIS for the Comprehensive Plan are anticipated

In considering possible impacts that might result from future development consistent
with proposed changes to the Zoning Code, Zoning Map and Municipal Code, potential
trip generation, changes to parking and aesthetics were evaluated.

       Traffic and Parking Impacts

Attachment 4 contains the South Kirkland Park-and-Ride Transit Oriented Development
Traffic and Parking Assessment, prepared by the Transpo Group, dated February 8,
2011. The study notes that while this assessment is approached in a conservative
manner consistent with SEPA traffic studies, the actual project-level SEPA review would
occur at a later stage in the process, when a development proposal for the site is
submitted. The final residential unit count and mix of uses to be evaluated would be
determined through King County's Request for Proposal (RFP) process.

               Study Assumptions and Conclusions

The traffic and parking study was based on assumptions for a TOD project on the
approximately 3.5 acre portion of the South Kirkland Park and Ride site that lies within
the City of Kirkland. The project concept, as defined by King County would include up
to 250 multi-family units, 12,500 square-feet of commercial use, and 250 additional park
and-ride stalls for a total of 853 park-and-ride stalls. Only a portion of the additional
park and ride stalls will be on the site that is located in the City of Kirkland.

For the purpose of the assessment it was assumed that approximately 20 to 50 percent
of the multi-family units are anticipated to be affordable housing. Parking for the
multifamily units and commercial use would be provided by additional stalls dedicated to
the TOD project as well as through shared parking with the park-and-ride facility. Access
to the site is assumed to continue via the two existing full access driveways along 38th
Place NE and 108th Avenue NE.

The conclusions of the traffic and parking study are provided on page 11 of Attachment
4. They are repeated here:

A review of the potential local traffic impacts showed that relative to forecasted
conditions without the project, no significant change to off-site intersection operations
would occur with development of the TOD and park-and-ride expansion. For those
intersections where forecasted operations are projected to be LOS E/LOS F, mitigation
would not likely be triggered based on current City of Kirkland and City of Bellevue
standards.




                                             4
Improvements are recommended at the 108th Avenue NE/NE 38 Place intersection and
the 108th Avenue NE site access. These improvements include a combination of
providing additional capacity such as signalization at the 108th Avenue NE/NE 38th Place
intersection and implementation of turn restrictions at the 108th Avenue NE access.

Several options exist for capacity improvements and turn restrictions, and it is
recommended that this be revisited when a defined site plan is available such that any
changes to the on-site circulation patterns can be considered in the final
recommendation. The effect of these recommendations would be to reduce potential
congestion along 108th Avenue NE near the access as well as a shift in traffic to NE 38th
Place, and accommodating increased side street demand by improving the 108th
Avenue NE/NE 38th Place intersection.

An analysis of the parking demand was conducted for the TOD component and park-
and-ride. Due to the nature of TOD projects, it is desirable to have shared parking
between the uses. Any overflow from the TOD would be accommodated in the vacant
stalls in the park-and-ride lot that exist during non-peak times. The analysis showed that
even with an average peak parking demand of 1.08 vehicles per unit for the residential
uses, a peak demand for shared parking would not exceed 20 spaces. This can easily be
met by the available parking at the park-and-ride lot.

When defining the required parking supply for the regulations to be considered for TOD
at the site, the Transpo Group recommended a baseline assumption of 1.08 stalls per
unit, consistent with the Redmond data, with provisions to adjust the required parking
supply to account for reductions due to affordable (and possibly senior) housing
components, as well as the ability to share parking with the park-and-ride facility. If
overflow from the TOD is anticipated, the current utilization of the Park-and-Ride facility
should be observed and the ability for shared parking confirmed.

The draft proposed regulations follow the recommendations of the traffic and parking
study, with a requirement of 1.1 parking stalls required per unit. Additional parking is
required for guest parking and other uses included in transit-oriented development.
Provisions to consider modifications to the parking requirements according to the
specific mix of uses and housing affordability are included.

       Aesthetics

An analysis of the potential view impacts of development on the South Kirkland Park and
Ride site was prepared by Mithun Architects (see Attachment 5). The analysis indicates
that building height up to 70 feet would be below the highest point of the site to the
east. Residences east of the property in the City of Bellevue are at elevations above the
site's highest point, so buildings up to 70 feet would be even further below the sight line
of these residences. The draft regulations (see Attachment 2) propose a building height
of 53 feet above average building elevation for the Attached or Stacked Dwelling Units
use listing in the YBD 1 zone.

The proposed amendments to the Municipal Code include new design guidelines for
transit-oriented development at the site. The guidelines would be used to evaluate
future development proposals for TOD, and address the quality of building design and


                                             5
the design of any parking structure, building scale and massing, pedestrian features and
amenities, streetscape elements, the gateway at this location, public amenities and open
space and sustainable development.

V.     Public Involvement

       Public Meeting and Outreach History

In January 2010, the City began work on the Lakeview Neighborhood Plan. A Lakeview
Advisory Group was formed to provide comments and recommendations on the
neighborhood plan update. On March 30 2010, staff presented an overview and
description of the TOD concept to a joint meeting of the Central and Lakeview
Neighborhood Advisory Groups. On June 2, a special meeting of the Lakeview Advisory
Group was held for the purpose of describing the adopted plan policies and code
amendment process for the TOD. The meeting was an opportunity to ask questions and
make comments on the adopted policy and King County's feasibility study exploring the
TOD concept for the Kirkland portion of the site On July 13 2010, the Lakeview
Advisory Group met on the South Kirkland Park and Ride property with a facilitated
round table discussion. Each member expressed their concerns or comments related to
the proposal and the comments were recorded on flip charts.

On August 23rd the preliminary recommendation and comments from the Lakeview
Advisory Group for the Lakeview Neighborhood Plan were presented to a joint meeting
of the Houghton Community Council and Planning Commission. Discussion comments
"not in support" and "in support" of the TOD proposal were part of that discussion. The
consensus of the Advisory Group was not to support housing especially affordable
housing at the park and ride site.

On September 21, 2010 the City Council confirmed that the Comprehensive Plan policy
direction was appropriate to guide the preparation of future regulations for the TOD. At
that meeting the Council directed staff to initiate the preparation of the regulations.

Coordination with the City of Bellevue has been a key issue and the City's policy calls for
that coordination to occur. This issue was also raised during the Lakeview
Neighborhood Plan discussions. Staff from Kirkland, Bellevue and King County
developed a set of "Principles of Agreement". These principles outline the mutual
objectives for the proposal as it pertains to the zoning, site development, permitting,
timing, public outreach and feasibility. The draft principles were approved by the
Kirkland City Council on November 16, 2010 and transmitted to the City of Bellevue.
The Bellevue City Council reviewed the principles as approved by Kirkland at a
December study session and approved them with revisions on January 4, 2011. The
Kirkland City Council approved the revised version on January 16, 2011.

On December 13 2010, staff presented the plan for public outreach and schedule for the
code amendments to a joint meeting of the Planning Commission and Houghton
Community Council (HCC). The schedule laid out a series of public workshops and study
sessions before the Commission and Community Council with a public hearing to be held
in the spring and action by the Planning Commission, HCC and City Council in May or
June of 2011. At the meeting, staff also outlined the approach to the zoning and design


                                             6
standards that would be brought to the HCC and Planning Commission following the
public workshops.

              Public Workshops

Public Workshops were held on January 20th at Northwest University and on January 25th
at City Hall. Both workshops had the same format. Approximately 25 people signed in
attending the first workshop and 36 people signed in for the second workshop. Several
City Council, Houghton Community Council and Planning Commission members attended
one or both workshops to observe. Staff representatives from the City, King County and
ARCH described the project background and concept. Staff from the City of Bellevue
was also in attendance and responded to questions. Following the presentation, the
participants (excluding Council and Commission members) met in small groups at tables
to discuss a central question regarding the park and ride:

              Outreach and Information Materials

Along with the workshops, study sessions and public meetings there have been a variety
of outreach efforts and activities to raise awareness of the proposal and engage the
public as noted below.

   9 Postcard notices have been mailed to 433 residents and property owners within
     600 feet of the site. The postcards provided dates of workshops, study sessions
     and the public hearing for the amendments. Public notice signs have been
     posted on the property.

   9 The City has a web page with detailed information explaining the proposal that
     includes background material, the schedule for meetings, links to other resources
     and how to provide input.

   9 The City has issued press releases regarding the workshops and e-mail notices
     have been sent to a variety of city list servs. The 4th Quarter, 2010 City Update
     Newsletter released in December included an in-depth article on the proposed
     TOD regulations for the Park and Ride site.

   9 At public meetings before the City Council, HCC and Planning Commission, under
     Items from the audience, people have provided comments on the proposal.

   9 Information on the workshops and the proposal were posted as a "rider alert" at
     the transit station at the Park and Ride lot.

   9 Staff has presented the concept to interested parties including the Market
     Neighborhood Association, the Kirkland Business Roundtable and Eastside
     Preparatory School.

   9 The Kirkland Reporter ran an editorial on the proposal in the November 26, 2010
     edition and the King County Daily Journal of Commerce published an article on
     the project on January 14, 2011. In addition there have been various articles
     and letters to the editor in the Reporter.


                                          7
      9 Kirkland Views and Kirkland Patch have posted comments on their respective
        blogs.

      9 E-mail comments and letters have been submitted to the City.

Additional public meetings on this topic that have followed the workshops include joint
study sessions of the Houghton Community Council and the Planning Commission, held
on February 10, 2011 and February 22, 2011. A public hearing on the proposed
amendments is scheduled for March 24, 2011. Study sessions of the bodies are planned
to follow the public hearing in April, with a study of the topic by the Kirkland City Council
anticipated for May or June. Action by the City Council and final action by the Houghton
Community Council are expected to occur shortly thereafter.

Public notice of these study sessions has been provided as described above for the
earlier meetings and workshops.

VI.        Conclusion

This EIS Addendum fulfills the environmental review requirements for the proposed
amendments to the Zoning Map, Zoning Code and Municipal Code to allow transit-
oriented development at the South Kirkland Park and Ride site. The impacts of the
proposal are within the range of impacts disclosed and evaluated in the City of Kirkland
2004 Draft and Final Comprehensive Plan 10-year Update; no new significant impacts
have been identified. Therefore, issuance of this EIS Addendum is the appropriate
course of action.

Attachments:

      1. Draft proposed changes to the Zoning Map
      2. Draft proposed changes to the Zoning Code
      3. Draft proposed design guidelines (changes to the Municipal Code).
      4. South Kirkland Park-and-Ride Transit Oriented Development Traffic and Parking
         Assessment, prepared by the Transpo Group, dated February 8, 2011
      5. Topography and View Analysis, prepared by Mithun Architects




                                             8
 3-2-2011
                                                                                                                                                                                  Atttachment 1




                                                   Proposed PO to YBD 1 Rezone




                                                                                                                                               105th Ave NE




                                                                                                                                                                                                    10 7th P
                                                                                                                                                                                                        l NE
                                                                                                                                                                                       NE
                                                                                                                                                                                            42
                                                                                                                                                                                              nd
                                                                           t                                                                                                                       Pl
                                                                        dS




                                                                                                                                                                                                               10 8th
                                                               4   3r
                                                            NE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Av e N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                       6t
                                                                                                                                                                          h
                                                                                                                                                                        Pl
                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                             La
                                                                ke
                                                                Wa
                                                                   s
                                                                   hin
                                                                       gto




                                                       PLA 3A                                                                       PR 8.5
                                                                           n
                                                                          B lv
                                                                               dN
                                                                               E




                                                            PLA 3A
                                                                                                                 NE
                                                                                                                 38
                                                                                                                   th
                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                       l




                                                                                                                                                              PO
                                                                                       Lake Washington Blvd NE




                                                                                                                                                                             PUD
                                                                                                                      NE 37th Cir




                                                                                                                                                                        Yarrow Bay
                                                                                                                                                                       Office Complex
                                                        PLA 3A

NE 37th Ct                                                                                                                           PUD Linbrook


                                                                                                                                              FC III                                  PO to
                                                                                                                                                                      NE
                                                                                                                                                                         38




                                                                                                                                                                                     YBD 1
                                                                                                                                                                           th
                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                              l




                                                                                                                                                                                   Park & Ride                                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        h
                                                                                                                                    NE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                     o in




                                                                                                                                                                   NE 37th Cir
                                                                                                                                         ts
                                                                                                                                       Dr




            Kirkland City Limits                               PO to YBD 1                                            Tax Parcels
Produced by the City of Kirkland. © 2011, the City of Kirkland, all rights reserved.
No warranties of any sort, including but not limited
to accuracy, fitness or merchantability, accompany this product.
DRAFT
March 17, 2011
     Chart for Residential (Mixed Use) Development and Independent Parking Structure Uses
                              (Otherwise use PO charts as modified)
                     Yarrow Bay Business District 1 (YBD 1) USE ZONE CHART


56.05         User Guide. The charts in KZC _56.10____ contain the basic zoning regulations that apply in the YBD 1
zone of the City. Use these charts by reading down the left hand column entitled Use. Once you locate the use in which
you are interested, read across to find the regulations that apply to that use.

Section _56.08_____ - GENERAL REGULATIONS
The following regulations apply to all uses in this zone unless otherwise noted:

1.      Refer to Chapter 1 KZC to determine what other provisions of this code may apply to the subject property.
2.      In addition to the height exceptions established by KZC 115.60, the following exceptions to height regulations in
        the YBD 1 zone are established:
        a.     Decorative parapets may exceed the height limit by a maximum of four feet; provided that the average
               height of the parapet around the perimeter of the structure shall not exceed two feet.
        b.     For structures with a peaked roof, the peak may extend eight feet above the height limit if the slope of the
               roof is equal to or greater than four feet vertical to 12 feet horizontal.

USE ZONE CHART

Section _56.010______

1) Use: Attached or Stacked Dwelling Units:

        See Special Regulations.

Required Review Process: DR, Chapter 142 KZC.
DRAFT
March 17, 2011
Minimums:

       Lot Size: None
       Required Yards:
              Front: 5' (see Special Regulation 2)
              Side: 0'
              Rear: 0'

Maximums:

       Lot Coverage: 100%.
       Height of Structures: 53' above average building elevation.

Landscape Category: C

Sign Category: E. See Special Regulation 9.

Required Parking (See KZC 105.103):
   · Residential use:    1.1 per unit. See KZC 105.25.
   ·   Restaurant/tavern:    1 per 125 square feet of gross floor area
   ·   Retail:               1 per 350 square feet of gross floor area
   ·   Office:               1 per350 square feet of gross floor area
   ·   Entertainment, Cultural, Recreational:      Chapter 105.25


Special Regulations:
1.    The required minimum front yard for any portion of the structure containing parking facilities shall be 10'.
2.    The front setback may be reduced to 0' where retail uses or other ground floor space is designed to provide direct
      pedestrian access to the street are located adjacent to a pedestrian oriented street, major pedestrian pathway or
      adjacent to a transit facility.
3.    May include one or more of the other uses allowed in this zone.
DRAFT
March 17, 2011
4    The following uses are prohibited:
     a.     Any retail establishment exceeding 7,50015,000 square feet.
     b.     Drive-through facilities.
     c.     The outdoor storage, sale, service and/or rental of motor vehicles, sailboats, motor boats, and recreational
            trailers.
5.   At least 50% of the linear frontage of the ground floor along NE 38th Place must include one or more of the
     following uses: Retail uses selling goods or providing services, including restaurants or taverns; Banking and
     Related Financial Services; School, Day-Care or Mini School or Mini Day-Care Center; Government Facility;
     Community Facility; and retail establishments providing entertainment, cultural and/or recreational activities. The
     required uses shall have a minimum depth of 20 feet and an average depth of at least 30 feet (as measured from
     the face of the building on the abutting right-of-way). The Design Review Board (or Planning Director if not subject
     to D.R.) may approve a minor reduction in the depth requirements if the applicant demonstrates that the
     requirement is not feasible given the configuration of existing or proposed improvements and that the design of
     the retail frontage will maximize visual interest. Lobbies for residential are allowed within this space subject to
     applicable design guidelines. The minimum ground floor story height for these uses shall be 13 feet.

6.   Gross floor area constructed above the firstsecond floor must be dedicated to residential use.

7.   Development of residential uses within the zoning district shall result in a minimum of 20 percent of total
     residential units being affordable with affordability levels as follows:

     a.    For rental housing:
           o A minimum of 20 percent of the total residential units shall be affordable at 50% and 70% of median
              income, with a minimum of 10 percent of total residential units affordable at 50% of median income.
              Affordable rent levels will be determined using the same methodology used in the definition of
              Affordable Housing Unit in Chapter 5 KZC.
     b.    For ownership housing:
           o A minimum of 20 percent of total residential units shall be affordable housing units as defined in Chapter
              5 KZC.

8.   The following additional regulations apply to affordable housing units included in development:
DRAFT
March 17, 2011
    a.   Alternative Affordability Levels ­ Subject to Director approval, an applicant may propose affordability levels
         different from those defined in this Chapter. In approving any different affordability levels, the Director
         shall use ratios similar to those in Chapter KZC 112.20.3.b.
    b.   Affordable housing provided pursuant to this section shall also comply with the following sections of Chapter
         112KZC: 112.15.4 (Rounding); 112.35.2 (Affordability Agreement)
    c.   The following provisions of Chapter 112KZC do not apply to this zoning district: 112.15.5 (Alternative
         Compliance); 112.20 (Basic Affordable Housing Incentives); 112.25 (Additional Affordable Housing
         Incentives); 112.30 (Alternative Compliance).
    d.   Other provisions for the affordable housing units and moderate income units include:

         o The type of ownership of the affordable housing units shall be the same as the type of ownership for the
             rest of the housing units in the development.
         o The affordable housing units shall consist of a range in number of bedrooms that are comparable to
             units in the overall development.
         o The size of the affordable housing units, if smaller than the other units with the same number of
             bedrooms in the development, must be approved by the Planning Director. In no case shall the
             affordable housing units be more than 10 percent smaller than the comparable dwelling units in the
             development, based on number of bedrooms, or less than 500 square feet for a one-bedroom unit, 700
             square feet for a two-bedroom unit, or 900 square feet for a three-bedroom unit, whichever is less.
         o The affordable housing units shall be available for occupancy in a time frame comparable to the
             availability of the rest of the dwelling units in the development.
         o The exterior design of the affordable housing units must be compatible and comparable with the rest of
             the dwelling units in the development.
         o The interior finish and quality of construction of the affordable housing units shall at a minimum be
             comparable to entry level rental or ownership housing in the City of Kirkland.
    e.   Applicants providing affordable housing units may request an exemption from payment of road impact fees
         for the affordable housing units as established by KMC 27.04.050.
    f.   Applicants providing affordable housing units may request an exemption from payment of park impact fees
         for the affordable housing units as established by KMC 27.06.050.
    g.   Applicants providing affordable housing units are eligible for exemption from various planning, building,
         plumbing, mechanical and electrical permit fees for the affordable housing and moderate income units as
         established in KMC 5.74.070 and KMC Title 21.
DRAFT
March 17, 2011
      h.      Property Tax Exemption ­ A property providing affordable housing units may be eligible for a property tax
              exemption as established in Chapter 5.88 KMC

9.    Signs for a development approved under this provision must be proposed within a Master Sign Plan application
      (KZC 100.80) for all signs within the project.

10.   Regulations to address sustainability in development are under study. LEED Silver Certification or better.

11.        This use must be part of a development that includes an increase in the number of parking stalls available exclusively to
           users of the Park and Ride facility.

12.        Parking stalls to serve the use must be in addition to those provided as part of the expansion of capacity for the Park and
           Ride facility.

2) Use: Independent Parking Structure
      (Standards to be developed. Likely issues: Building height, design guidelines, site design standards. See memo
      for discussion)
  




                    Major Pedestrian Sidewalk


                    Approximate location for
                    pedestrian pathway
                    through the site to Eastside
                    Rail Corridor



     Eventual Connection to Eastside
     Rail Corridor




                                   Approximate
                                   Scale 1:2,905
                                   1 in = 242 ft 

                         Produced by the City of Kirkland. (c)
                         2011, the City of Kirkland, all rights
                         reserved. No warranties of any sort,
                                                                  Attachment 2a




                         including but not limited to accuracy,
                         fitness or merchantability, accompany
                         this product. 
Attachment 2a
                                                                                                Attachment 2b




105.58   Location of Parking Areas Specific to Design Districts

         If the subject property is located in a Design District, the applicant shall locate parking areas on
         the subject property according to the following requirements:

         1. Location of Parking Areas in the CBD, TC (TL 1, TL 2, TL 3) Zones

             a. Parking areas shall not be located between a pedestrian-oriented street and a building
                unless specified in a Conceptual Master Plan in TL 2. (See Plate 34 in Chapter 180
                KZC and Chapters 92 and 110 KZC for additional requirements regarding
                pedestrian-oriented streets).

             b. On all other streets, parking lots shall not be located between the street and the building
                on the subject property unless no other feasible alternative exists.

         2. Location of Parking Areas in the JBD 2, and the NRHBD and YBD 1 Zones ­ Parking areas
            shall not be located between the street and the building unless no other feasible alternative
            exists on the subject property.

         3. Location of Parking Areas in the MSC Zones ­ Parking areas in the MSC zones shall not be
            located between the street and the building unless the Planning Official determines that the
            proposed landscape design provides superior visual screening of the parking area.

         4. Location of Parking Areas in Certain TLN and RHBD Zones ­ Parking areas and vehicular
            access may not occupy more than 50 percent of the street frontage in the following zones
            (see Figure 105.58.A):

             a. TL 4, only properties fronting on 120th Avenue NE;

             b. TL 5;

             c.   TL 6A, only properties fronting on 124th Avenue NE. Auto dealers in this zone are
                  exempt from this requirement;

             d. TL 6B, only properties fronting on NE 124th Street;

             e. TL 10E.

             Alternative configurations may be considered through the Design Review process, if the
             project meets the objectives of the KMC Design Guidelines for the Totem Lake
             Neighborhood.

             f.   In the Regional Center (RH 1A, RH 2A, RH 3 and RH 5A zones west of 124th Avenue).
                  For parcels over two acres in size, parking lots and vehicular access areas may not
                  occupy more than 50 percent of the NE 85th Street property frontage (see Figure
                  105.58.A). Alternative configurations will be considered through the Design Review
                  process, if the project meets the intent of the KMC Design Guidelines for the Rose Hill
                  Business District.
                  Attachment 2b




FIGURE 105.58.A
                                                                                           Attachment 2c




110.52 Sidewalks and Other Public Improvements in Design Districts
          1.   This section contains regulations that require various sidewalks, pedestrian circulation
               and pedestrian-oriented improvements on or adjacent to properties located in Design
               Districts subject to Design Review pursuant to Chapter 142 KZC such as CBD, JBD,
               TLN, TC, RHBD, and NRHBD and YBD zones.

               The applicant must comply with the following development standards in accordance
               with the location and designation of the abutting right-of-way as a pedestrian-oriented
               street or major pedestrian sidewalk shown in Plate 34 of Chapter 180 KZC. See also
               Public Works Pre-Approved Plans manual for public improvements for each Design
               District. If the required sidewalk improvements cannot be accommodated within the
               existing right-of-way, the difference may be made up with a public easement over
               private property; provided, that a minimum of five feet from the curb shall be retained
               as public right-of-way and may not be in an easement. Buildings may cantilever over
               such easement areas, flush with the property line in accordance with the International
               Building Code as adopted in KMC Title 21. (See Figure 110.52.A and Plate 34).

          2.   Pedestrian-Oriented Street Standards ­ Unless a different standard is specified in the
               applicable use zone chart, the applicant shall install a 10-foot-wide sidewalk along the
               entire frontage of the subject property abutting each pedestrian-oriented street. (See
               Figure 110.52.A).

    Required Sidewalk on Pedestrian-Oriented Streets and Major Pedestrian
                                 Sidewalks




                                             FIGURE 110.52.A
                                                                                    Attachment 2c




3.   Major Pedestrian Sidewalk Standards ­ If the subject property abuts a street
     designated to contain a major pedestrian sidewalk in Plate 34, Chapter 180 KZC, the
     applicant shall install that sidewalk on and/or adjacent to the subject property
     consistent with the following standards:

     a.   Install in the approximate location and make the connections shown in Plate 34;

     b.   A sidewalk width of at least eight feet, unless otherwise noted in Plate 34;

     c.   Have adequate lighting with increased illumination around building entrances and
          transit stops; and

     d.   If parcels are developed in aggregate, then alternative solutions may be proposed.

4.    Streets in the Totem Lake Neighborhood ­ Streets in the Totem Lake Neighborhood
     designated as major pedestrian sidewalks in Plate 34.E that are also shown to be
     within the landscaped boulevard alignment or "Circulator" in Plate 34.D in Chapter 180
     KZC may have varied or additional requirements, such as wider sidewalks, widened
     and meandering planting areas, continuous and clustered tree plantings, special
     lighting, directional signs, benches, varying pavement textures and public art, as
     determined by the Director of Public Works.

5.    NE 85th Street Sidewalk Standards ­ If the subject property abuts NE 85th Street, the
     applicant shall install a minimum 6.5-foot-wide landscape strip planted with street trees
     located adjacent to the curb and a minimum seven-foot-wide sidewalk along the
     property frontage. Where the public right-of-way lacks adequate width to meet the
     previous standard, a 10-foot-wide sidewalk with street trees in tree grates may be
     permitted or in an easement established over private property.
                                                                                                                                               Attachment 3
                                                                                                                                               ZON10-00014
      March 17, 2011
                                                          South Kirkland Park & Ride TOD
                                                             Design Guideline Matrix
Existing Comprehensive Plan           Proposed Design Guidelines1 -           Proposed Zoning                    Existing Zoning               Additional   Specific
                                      Design Review Board Authority                                                                            Guidelines   Regulations
Policies                                                                      Regulations                        Regulations
                                                                                                                                               Needed?      Needed?

1. Ensure high quality building and   · Building materials should exhibit     · Require Design Review Board      · Design Review Board
   design                               permanence.                             approval                           provisions in KZC Chapter
                                                                                                                   142
                                      · Building materials and color should   · A Master Sign Plan is required
                                        be selected to integrate with each      for signs on the subject         · Master Sign Plan
                                        other and complement architectural      property.                          provisions in KZC Chapter
                                        design.                                                                    100

                                      · Ornament and applied art should be
                                        integrated with the structures and
                                        the site environment and not
                                        haphazardly applied.

                                      · Emphasis should be placed on
                                        highlighting building features such
                                        as doors, windows, and eaves, and
                                        on the use of materials such as
                                        wood siding and ornamental
                                        masonry. Ornament may take the
                                        form of traditional or contemporary
                                        elements

                                      · Original artwork or hand-crafted
                                        details should be considered in
                                        special areas.




      1
          Proposed guidelines may address more than one policy.
Existing Comprehensive Plan            Proposed Design Guidelines1 -            Proposed Zoning                     Existing Zoning                Additional   Specific
                                       Design Review Board Authority                                                                               Guidelines   Regulations
Policies                                                                        Regulations                         Regulations
                                                                                                                                                   Needed?      Needed?


2. Ensure that regulations support     Building Scale & Massing                 · Limit size of any retail          · Various provisions in KZC
   appropriate building scale and                                                 establishment to 7,50015,000        Section 105.18 ­
   massing throughout the site,        · Large window areas should be             sq. ft.                             Pedestrian Access
   produce buildings that exhibit        avoided. Instead smaller window                                              o Pedestrian access from
   high quality design and               units should be used to achieve        · Limit height to 53' above              buildings to sidewalks
   incorporate pedestrian features       human scale.                             average building elevation             and transit facilities
   and amenities that contribute to                                                                                   o Pedestrian access
   a livable urban village character   · Above the street level, buildings      · Require limited types of street        between uses on
   for the TOD.                          above the 2nd story should use upper     level uses which include retail        subject property
                                         story step backs to create receding      and restaurant uses                 o Pedestrian connections
                                         building forms as building height                                               between properties
                                         increases to maintain human scale.     · Allow for decorative parapets       o Pedestrian access
                                         A rigid stair step of "wedding cake"     and peaked roofs to extend             through parking areas
                                         approach to upper story step backs       above the height limit              o Pedestrian access
                                         is not appropriate.                                                             through parking
                                                                                · Create new Plate 34L which             garages
                                                                                  shows pedestrian connections        o Overhead weather
                                       · Decks and/or balconies should be
                                                                                  in the YBD and future                  protection
                                         designed so that they do not
                                                                                  connection to Eastside Rail
                                         significantly increase the apparent
                                                                                  Corridor                          · Various provisions in KZC
                                         mass of the building.
                                                                                                                      110.19 ­ Public Pedestrian
                                                                                                                      Walkways
                                       · The final arrangement of building
                                         mass should be placed in context
                                                                                                                    · KZC 105.32 ­ Bicycle
                                         with existing and/or planned
                                                                                                                      Parking
                                         improvements, gateway features,
                                                                                                                      o Ratio of 1 bicycle space
                                         location of plazas and open space,
                                                                                                                         for each 12 required
                                         and orientation with the public
                                                                                                                         motor vehicle spaces.
                                         realm.
                                                                                                                         Planning official may
                                                                                                                         modify this
                                       · Building facades should be well
                                                                                                                         requirement based on
                                         modulated to avoid blank walls and
                                                                                                                         development size and
                                         provide architectural interest.
                                                                                                                         anticipated pedestrian
                                                                                                                         and bicycle activity.
                                       · Landscaping should be used to
                                                                                                                      o Contains requirements
                                         provide visual interest and help
                                                                                                                         for bike racks or
                                         soften building form at appropriate
                                                                                                                         enclosed storage
                                         locations, including upper level
                                                                                                                         container locations.
                                         terraces.
                                                                                                                    · 115.142 Transit Shelters
                                       · To help moderate the vertical scale
                                                                                                                      and Centers, Public.
                                         of buildings, buildings should
Existing Comprehensive Plan   Proposed Design Guidelines1 -           Proposed Zoning   Existing Zoning                 Additional   Specific
                              Design Review Board Authority                                                             Guidelines   Regulations
Policies                                                              Regulations       Regulations
                                                                                                                        Needed?      Needed?

                               incorporate design techniques which                        Public transit shelters and
                               clearly define the building's top,                         centers are allowed in all
                               middle, and bottom.                                        zones and shall not
                                                                                          exceed 15 feet above
                               Examples include using a sloped roof                       average building elevation
                               and strong eave lines to help define                       in low density zones. The
                               the top; using windows, balconies,                         public transit shelters and
                               and material changes to define a                           centers must not
                               building's middle; and pedestrian-                         unreasonably impede
                               oriented storefronts, awnings, and                         pedestrian movement or
                               use of `earth' materials such as                           create traffic safety
                               concrete and stone to help define                          problems. Transit route
                               the building's bottom.                                     and information signs and
                                                                                          markers may be installed.
                              · Vertical building modulation should                       One hundred percent lot
                                be used to add variety avoiding                           coverage is allowed. There
                                monotonous design and to make                             are no specific
                                large buildings appear to be an                           requirements for review
                                aggregation of smaller buildings.                         process, minimum lot size,
                                                                                          minimum required yards,
                              · Horizontal building modulation                            landscaping, or parking for
                                should be used to reduce the                              this use.
                                perceived mass of a building and to
                                provide continuity at the ground
                                level of large building complexes.
                                Building design should incorporate
                                strong pedestrian-oriented elements
                                at the ground level and distinctive
                                roof treatments.

                              High Quality Design

                              See Policy #1

                              Pedestrian Features & Amenities

                              · Pedestrian walkways should be
                                placed throughout the site to allow
                                for efficient access between the
                                residential, commercial, transit
                                center uses, and adjacent streets.
                                The walkways should be situated to
Existing Comprehensive Plan   Proposed Design Guidelines1 -              Proposed Zoning   Existing Zoning   Additional   Specific
                              Design Review Board Authority                                                  Guidelines   Regulations
Policies                                                                 Regulations       Regulations
                                                                                                             Needed?      Needed?

                                minimize walking distance from the
                                public sidewalk and transit facilities
                                to building entrances.

                              · Pedestrian and bicycle connections
                                should be well-defined and safe.

                              · Pedestrian connections should be
                                provided to adjacent properties to
                                allow for efficient access to the
                                transit facilities and commercial
                                uses.

                              · Landscaping should be used to help
                                define and provide visual interest
                                along pedestrian walkways.

                              · Convenient and safe pedestrian
                                areas should be designed in
                                centralized locations to
                                accommodate transit users.


                              · Lighting should be provided to
                                walkways and sidewalks through
                                building mounted light and canopy or
                                awning mounted lights.

                              · Low level lighting in the form of
                                bollards or similar style of lighting
                                should be encouraged along
                                pedestrian pathways not adjacent to
                                buildings.

                              · Vehicular (car and bus) circulation
                                should not conflict with bicycle and
                                pedestrian circulation throughout the
                                site.

                              · Safe crossing locations for
                                pedestrians should be provided.
Existing Comprehensive Plan            Proposed Design Guidelines1 -                Proposed Zoning                 Existing Zoning                 Additional   Specific
                                       Design Review Board Authority                                                                                Guidelines   Regulations
Policies                                                                            Regulations                     Regulations
                                                                                                                                                    Needed?      Needed?


3. Provide guidance for the            Streetscape                                  · Identify NE 38th Place as a   · 110.52 - Sidewalks and
   streetscapes along NE 38th Place                                                   Major Pedestrian Sidewalk       Other Public
   and 108th Avenue NE to ensure       · Street trees species should be               area                            Improvements in Design
   buildings do not turn their backs     selected and spaced to allow for                                             Districts
   on the streets and development        visual continuity along NE 38th
   provides a welcoming and              Place, buffer pedestrians from the                                         · KZC 110.60.11 - Entry or
   attractive presence at this           street, and provide visibility of                                            Gateway Features in
   gateway to Kirkland.                  ground floor retail uses.                                                    Design Districts ­ In
                                                                                                                      Design Districts, if the
                                       · Buildings should be oriented                                                 Comprehensive Plan or
                                         towards the street when located                                              Design Guidelines
                                         along NE 38th Place.                                                         designate the subject
                                                                                                                      property for an entry or
                                       · Design elements such as multiple                                             gateway feature, then the
                                                                                                                      applicant shall design and
                                         storefronts, pedestrian-oriented
                                                                                                                      install an entry feature
                                         signs, exterior light fixtures, glazing,
                                                                                                                      area on the subject
                                         landscaping, and awnings should be
                                                                                                                      property. The size of the
                                         utilized to add human scale and
                                                                                                                      entry feature area shall be
                                         interest at the street level.
                                                                                                                      at least 100 square feet,
                                                                                                                      and may include
                                       · Ground floor spaces along NE 38th
                                                                                                                      landscaping, art, signage
                                         Place should be transparent with
                                                                                                                      or lighting. The design
                                         windows of clear vision glass
                                                                                                                      shall be reviewed by the
                                         beginning no higher than 2' above
                                                                                                                      City and decided upon as
                                         grade to at least 10' above grade.
                                                                                                                      part of the Design Review
                                         Windows should extend across, at a
                                                                                                                      for the proposed
                                         minimum, 75% of the façade
                                                                                                                      development. The
                                         length. Continuous window walls
                                                                                                                      applicant shall provide an
                                         should be avoided by providing
                                                                                                                      easement or dedication of
                                         architectural building treatments,
                                                                                                                      property surrounding the
                                         mullions, building modulation, entry
                                                                                                                      entry feature.
                                         doors, and/or columns at
                                         appropriate intervals.

                                       ·   Varied window treatments should
                                           be encouraged. Architectural
                                           detailing at window jambs, sills,
                                           and heads should be emphasized.
                                           Use of ribbon windows should be
                                           avoided.
Existing Comprehensive Plan   Proposed Design Guidelines1 -               Proposed Zoning   Existing Zoning   Additional   Specific
                              Design Review Board Authority                                                   Guidelines   Regulations
Policies                                                                  Regulations       Regulations
                                                                                                              Needed?      Needed?

                              · A street wall is a wall or portion of a
                                wall of a building facing a street.
                                Continuous street walls should
                                incorporate vertical and horizontal
                                modulations into the building form.

                              · Along pedestrian oriented streets,
                                upper story building facades should
                                be stepped back to provide enough
                                space for decks, balconies, and
                                other activities overlooking the
                                street.

                              · Awnings or canopies should be
                                required on facades adjoining
                                sidewalks. Blank walls should be
                                avoided near sidewalks, open
                                spaces, and pedestrian areas.

                              · Blank walls should not be visible
                                from the street or sidewalk. Where
                                blank walls are unavoidable, they
                                should be treated with landscaping,
                                art, or other architectural
                                treatments.

                              Gateway

                              · A gateway is an urban design
                                feature that signifies a sense of
                                place and arrival into a city or
                                neighborhood. A gateway should be
                                designed in the location shown in
                                the Comprehensive Plan.

                              · The design of the gateway should
                                include a combination of
                                landscaping, architectural features,
                                and artwork which:
                                  o Establishes a landmark that
                                      reflects the TOD elements of
                                      the site
Existing Comprehensive Plan           Proposed Design Guidelines1 -            Proposed Zoning                  Existing Zoning               Additional   Specific
                                      Design Review Board Authority                                                                           Guidelines   Regulations
Policies                                                                       Regulations                      Regulations
                                                                                                                                              Needed?      Needed?

                                           o   Reinforces NE 38th Place and
                                               108th Avenue NE as a focal
                                               point
                                           o   Transitions between Kirkland
                                               and Bellevue and the Yarrow
                                               Bay Business District to the
                                               west

4. Protect the vegetative buffers     None Proposed                                                             · Tree retention standards
   and significant trees along the                                                                                in KZC Section 95.30
   site's eastern and southeastern
   borders through development
   standards.


5. Minimize the visual impacts of     · Parking areas should not be located    · Minimum 10' setback for        · KZC 95.44 ­ Internal
   parking facilities from adjacent     between NE 38th Place and buildings.     parking structures along NE      Parking Lot Landscaping
   rights-of-ways.                                                               38th Place                       Requirements
                                      · Access driveways to parking areas
                                                                               · Add regulation to KZC 105.58   · KZC 95.45 ­ Perimeter
                                        should be minimized.
                                                                                 ­ Location of Parking Areas      Landscape Buffering for
                                                                                 Specific to Design Districts     Driving and Parking Areas
                                      · Parking lots should be designed to
                                        provide for clear vehicular and
                                        pedestrian circulation and be well
                                        organized.

                                      · Screening and landscaping should be
                                        used to reduce the visual impact of
                                        parking lots and/or parking
                                        structures to the surrounding
                                        neighborhood.

                                      · Intervening uses, artwork, building
                                        setbacks, and/or dense landscaping
                                        should be used to reduce the visual
                                        impact of parking structures along
                                        streets. Portions of parking
                                        structures visible from the street
                                        should be designed to complement
                                        neighboring buildings.
Existing Comprehensive Plan             Proposed Design Guidelines1 -             Proposed Zoning                     Existing Zoning   Additional   Specific
                                        Design Review Board Authority                                                                   Guidelines   Regulations
Policies                                                                          Regulations                         Regulations
                                                                                                                                        Needed?      Needed?




6. Foster the creation of vibrant and   High Quality Design                       None Proposed                       None
   desirable living environment
   through the use of high quality      See Policy #1
   design, public amenities, and
   open space.                          Public amenities and Open Space

                                        · Public open space should be
                                          provided on the subject property
                                          which can be used by the general
                                          public, residents, and transit users.

                                        · Public open space should be open to
                                          the sky except where overhead
                                          weather protection is provided (e.g.
                                          canopies and awnings). The space
                                          should appear and function as public
                                          space rather than private space.

                                        · Public open space should be
                                          designed in close proximity to
                                          adjacent shops and contain outdoor
                                          dining/seating areas, art, water
                                          features, and/or landscaping while
                                          still allowing enough room for
                                          pedestrian flow.

                                        · A combination of lighting, access to
                                          sunlight, paving, landscaping, and
                                          seating should be used to enhance
                                          the pedestrian experience with the
                                          public open space.


7. Promote sustainable                  None Proposed                             ·   Regulations to address          None
   development through support of                                                     sustainability in development
   green building practices at the                                                    are under study. A
   Park and Ride.                                                                     reference to these
                                                                                      regulations t will be
                                                                                      addedNew regulation calls
                                                                                      for LEED Silver Certification
Existing Comprehensive Plan   Proposed Design Guidelines1 -   Proposed Zoning   Existing Zoning   Additional   Specific
                              Design Review Board Authority                                       Guidelines   Regulations
Policies                                                      Regulations       Regulations
                                                                                                  Needed?      Needed?

                                                                 or better.
                                                                                                Attachment 3a




                                               Chapter 3.30

                                      DESIGN REVIEW BOARD

Sections:
  3.30.010    Membership--Appointment--Compensation--Removal.
  3.30.020    Qualifications.
  3.30.030    Powers and duties.
  3.30.040    Design guidelines adopted by reference.
  3.30.050    Conflict of interest.

3.30.010 Membership--Appointment--Compensation--Removal.
   The design review board shall be composed of seven appointed members. In addition, the director of
planning and community development shall sit on the design review board ("DRB") as a nonvoting
member for purposes of advising the board on regulatory and urban design issues. Members shall be
appointed by a majority vote of the city council, without regard to political affiliation. The members of the
DRB shall serve without compensation. Each member shall be appointed to a four-year term; provided, that
as to the two positions added in 2003, one new member's initial term shall expire March 31, 2005, and the
other new member's initial term shall expire March 31, 2007. Any vacancy shall be filled for the remainder
of the unexpired term of the vacant position. When a member misses three or more consecutive meetings
not excused by a majority vote of the DRB, the DRB will consider recommending removal of that member.
The board shall recommend removal if the absences have negatively affected the board's abilities to
perform its duties. The recommendation will be forwarded to city council. Members finding themselves
unable to attend regular meetings are expected to tender their resignations. A member may be removed by a
majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 3901 § 1, 2003: Ord. 3683A § 1 (part), 1999)

3.30.020 Qualifications.
   Members of the design review board shall include design professionals and building/construction
experts, and residents of Kirkland capable of reading and understanding architectural plans and
knowledgeable in matters of building and design. The board shall at all times have a majority composition
of professionals from architecture, landscape architecture, urban design/planning, or similar disciplines. In
selecting members, professionals who are residents and/or whose place of business is within Kirkland will
be preferred. (Ord. 3683A § 1 (part), 1999)

3.30.030 Powers and duties.
   The design review board shall have the responsibilities designated in the Zoning Code. In addition, the
design review board shall perform such advisory functions related to design issues as designated by the city
council. (Ord. 3683A § 1 (part), 1999)

3.30.040 Design guidelines adopted by reference.
   The design review board in combination with the authority set forth in Chapter 142 of the Zoning Code
shall use the following design guidelines documents to review development permits:
   (1) The document entitled "Design Guidelines for Pedestrian Oriented Business Districts" bearing the
signature of the mayor and the director of the department of planning and community development dated
August 3, 2004, is adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein. The city council shall consult with
the planning commission prior to amending this document.
   (2) The document entitled "Design Guidelines for the Rose Hill Business District" bearing the signature
of the mayor and the director of the department of planning and community development dated January 3,
2006, is adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein. The city council shall consult with the
planning commission prior to amending this document.
                                                                                                 Attachment 3a




   (3) The document entitled "Design Guidelines for the Totem Lake Neighborhood" bearing the signature
of the mayor and the director of the department of planning and community development dated June 6,
2006, is adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein. The city council shall consult with the
planning commission prior to amending this document.
   (4) The document entitled "Kirkland Parkplace Mixed Use Development Master Plan and Design
Guidelines" bearing the signature of the mayor and the director of the department of planning and
community development, dated December 16, 2008, is adopted by reference as though fully set forth
herein. The city council shall consult with the planning commission prior to amending this document.
   (5) The document entitled "Design Guidelines for the Yarrow Bay Business District 1 Zone" bearing
the signature of the mayor and the director of the department of planning and community development
dated X, is adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein. The city council shall consult with the
planning commission and the Houghton community council prior to amending this document.
   (5) Text Amended. The following specific portions of the text of the design guidelines are amended as
set forth in Attachment A attached to Ordinance 4106 and incorporated by reference. (Ord. 4172 § 1, 2008:
Ord. 4106 § 1, 2007; Ord. 4052 § 1, 2006: Ord. 4038 § 1, 2006: Ord. 4031 § 1, 2006)

3.30.050 Conflict of interest.
   If a member of the design review board is an applicant or a paid or unpaid advocate, agent, or
representative for an applicant on a design review application, the member shall not participate in a decision
on that design review application. (Ord. 3683A § 1 (part), 1999)
                                                                                                                 Attachment 4




MEMORANDUM
Date:                February 8, 2011                                                                  TG:           10222.00
To:                  Gary Prince ­ King County Metro
                     Paul Stewart ­ City of Kirkland
From:                Mike Swenson and Stefanie Herzstein ­ Transpo Group
cc:                  Kurt Gahnberg ­ Transpo Group
Subject:             South Kirkland Park-and-Ride Transit Oriented Development Traffic and Parking
                     Assessment

This memorandum provides information to help inform the City's on-going efforts to consider
amendments to the Zoning and Municipal Codes. These would ultimately include new transit
oriented development (TOD) standards, design guidelines and/or regulations, and related code
amendments to implement existing Comprehensive Plan policies. While this assessment is
approached in a conservative manner consistent with SEPA traffic studies, the actual SEPA
review would occur at a later stage in the process. The work to-date has been coordinated with
City of Kirkland, City of Bellevue, and King County Metro staff.


TOD/Park and Ride Development Assumptions
The South Kirkland Park-and-Ride is located on the northwest corner of the 108th Avenue
NE/38th Place NE intersection, at the southern boundary of the City of Kirkland. The park-and-ride
lot contains approximately 600 designated parking stalls. King County currently owns and
operates the seven acre park-and-ride. Approximately half of the seven acre park-and-ride is
located within the City of Kirkland, while the
remainder is located in the City of Bellevue.

The TOD project is anticipated to include up
        1
to 250 multi-family units, 12,500 square-feet
of commercial use, and 250 additional park-
and-ride stalls for a total of 853 park-and-ride
stalls.

For the purpose of this assessment it is
assumed that approximately 20 to 50 percent
of the multi-family units are anticipated to be
affordable housing. Parking for the multi-
family units and commercial use would be
provided by additional stalls dedicated to the
TOD project as well as through shared
parking with the park-and-ride facility. Access
to the site is assumed to continue via the two
existing full access driveways along 38th
Place NE and 108th Avenue NE.




1
    The final residential unit count will be determined through King County's Request for Proposal (RFP) pro cess.
                                                                                           Attachment 4




Executive Summary
            Benefits of TOD ­ The development of TOD typically results in improved mobility by
            locating housing near transit services, reducing vehicle miles travelled for the region
            due to higher transit use, and improving air quality by reducing trip-making and trip
            lengths.
            Benefits of the Park-and-Ride ­ Provision of additional spaces within the park-and-
            ride will contribute to reducing regional vehicle demand for trips downstream of the
            park-and-ride by converting auto trips to transit trips and reduce off-site parking
            related to users parking along the transit routes.
            Localized Impacts ­ There is no significant change to off-site intersection operations
            anticipated to occur with development of the TOD and park-and-ride expansion, and
            mitigation is not likely to be triggered based on the current City standards.
            Access Improvements ­ A combination of providing additional capacity such as
            signalization at the 108th Avenue NE/NE 38th Place intersection and implementation
            of turn restrictions at the 108th Avenue NE may be required. The extent of these
            improvements are contingent on the final development plan and anticipated trip
            generation.
            Parking Requirements - When defining the required parking supply for the project,
            we recommend a baseline assumption of 1.08 stalls per unit, consistent with the
            Redmond data, with provisions to adjust the required parking supply to account for
            reductions due to senior and affordable housing components, as well as the ability to
            share parking with the park-and-ride facility. If overflow from the TOD is anticipated,
            the current utilization of the Park-and-Ride facility should be observed and the ability
            for shared parking confirmed.


Project Approach
The proposed TOD project and increase in park-and-ride parking supply represents one element
of the region's future transportation strategy to make more efficient use of limited resources. While
the technical analysis that follows is largely focused on the localized transportation impacts that
could occur, the TOD proposal can be viewed in the larger context of smart growth planning.

TOD Housing Development Considerations
While the analysis that is contained herein presents a conservative picture of the nature of
potential localized impacts of added housing on the site, there is a substantial amount of research
that has been published regarding the potential benefits of TOD projects. These benefits include
(but are not limited to):
            Increase Mobility ­ Improved mobility options within congested areas occurs when
            housing development is located proximate to regional transit service. The South
            Kirkland Park-and-Ride facility provides transit service to the entire region, and a quick
            connection to the regional employment centers of Seattle and Bellevue.
            Reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) ­ A critical metric for many Transportation
            Management Programs for employment facilities focuses on reducing overall VMT.
            This can occur through reduced trip generation, as well as through shortening of
            vehicle trips.
            Improved Air Quality ­ Linking housing development with access to transit would
            result in reduced emissions through both reduced trip-making (vehicle trip generation)




                                                                                                       2
                                                                                             Attachment 4




            and reduced trip lengths when housing is located within the urbanized area instead of
            suburban or rural locations.
            Provide Affordable Housing Opportunities/Reduced Auto Demand ­ Not only
            does a TOD project such as this contribute to the supply of affordable housing, but
            also its location adjacent to park-and-ride/transit facilities reinforces the opportunity to
            reside in such housing without the need for an automobile. This results in a significant
            reduction in both vehicle trip generation and the parking supply needed to directly
            serve the housing.

The regional benefits to TOD projects can be significant, although there is often some increase in
localized impacts in the immediate vicinity of the TOD project. The detailed analysis that follows is
largely focused on helping to understand the localized impacts of the TOD component and the
increased size of the park and ride facility. However, a TOD should also be considered in the
context of the overall regional smart growth strategies.

Park-and-Ride Considerations
Similar to the discussion above regarding the TOD component of the proposal, the proposed
increase in parking associated with the park-and-ride facility could accommodate additional and
future travel demand that would otherwise be making an auto trip, and would serve those parking
and accessing the transit system at other locations due to the high utilization currently experienced
at the South Kirkland Park-and-Ride. In all cases, since the proposal is simply to increase the
supply of parking, no new regional travel demand would occur as a result of the increased parking,
it would simply accommodate demand already on the system, effectively diverting trips from other
routes. The majority of these regional trips would be attracted from SR 520 and I-405. A lesser
proportion would be diverted from local streets near or adjacent to the site, such as Lake
Washington Boulevard, 108th Avenue NE, and Northup Way. These travel patterns to the park-
and-ride facility would result in the following impacts and benefits:
            Reduced Regional Auto Demand ­ Increasing the transit share of regional travel
            marginally (i.e., by auto trips being converted to park-and-ride users) improves the
            travel environment for all remaining travel modes on the system, including single
            occupant autos and high occupancy vehicles (HOV), especially for that portion of the
            regional trip "downstream" from the park -and-ride facility (i.e. to the west on SR 520).
            Minor Increases in Local Access Traffic ­ As traffic from other routes is reoriented
            to the park-and-ride facility, minor increases in local access traffic would occur.
            Reduced Off-Site Parking ­ While the level of current off-site parking is unknown,
            there have been comments from the community that such parking occurs as a result
            of the parking supply limitations of the existing park-and-ride. Increasing the on-site
            parking supply would reduce the demand for transit access parking that occurs
            elsewhere along transit routes serving the park-and-ride.

Overall, the combined development of proposed TOD (with an affordable housing component) and
the increase in parking supply of park-and-ride facility would:
            Further King County/Metro's and the City's goals to facilitate smart growth through
            encouraging development with reduced trip making characteristics
            Result in localized impacts associated with vehicle access that would be addressed in
            more detail at the project proposal/SEPA evaluation stage of the development
            process.

The remainder of the technical review is primarily focused on understanding the likely level of local
impacts and how those impacts should inform zoning requirements. As mentioned above, the



                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                          Attachment 4




detailed project-specific SEPA evaluation, including the City of Kirkland transportation concurrency
review, would be conducted as part of a separate review process.

Local Traffic Impacts
This section describes the potential traffic volume and intersection operation impacts associated
with a potential project (inclusive of the TOD and increase in park-and-ride stalls). The evaluation
focuses on the weekday PM peak hour (of the adjacent street system) consistent with the City of
Kirkland requirements and the final traffic analysis conducted by Washington State Department of
Transportation (WSDOT) as part of their
coordination on SR 520 with the City of Bellevue.

The year 2030 was selected for analysis of the
impacts of the long term affects of the proposed
rezone because it is consistent with the horizon
year for the regional transportation modeling that
supports the SR 520 improvements (tolling, etc.);
thus, the analysis gives decision makers the best
sense of how the proposal will integrate with the
long term transportation vision. SEPA review and
concurrency analysis will occur at a later stage,
and be based on the City of Kirkland TIA
procedures.

The scope of this study includes an evaluation of a
number of key intersections along Bellevue Way
and Lake Washington Boulevard as illustrated on
the map located to the right. Several of the study
area intersections are under the City of Bellevue
jurisdiction.

Trip Generation
The potential project has two primary components: residential/retail mixed-use and the park-and-
ride expansion. The following provides a summary of the assumptions made in regards to the
development of trip generation estimates for the project.

TOD Component. As identified in multiple research studies, TOD housing projects have a lower
vehicle trip generation rates when compared to stand alone residential projects due to the location
of the projects near transit service. Research has shown that TOD housing results in up to 50
percent fewer trips than non-TOD housing due to residents using transit rather than personal
         2,3
vehicles . There is also a component of affordable housing to be included in the TOD project.
                                                                                               4
Studies show that auto ownership for affordable housing residents (i.e., lower incomes) is less . To
account for the affordable housing as well as the transit oriented nature of the residential
                                                                           th
component, the trip rates published in the ITE Trip Generation Manual, 8 Edition, were reduced
by 40 percent. The detailed calculations are shown in Table 1.

Due to the presence of the retail use, there is also an element of trip internalization between uses
that needs to be considered. Internal trips that would occur within the site between the apartment

2
 Transit Cooperative Research Program (TCRP) Report 128 Effects of TOD on Housing, Parking, and Travel, G.B.
Arrington and Robert Cervero, Federal Transit Administration, Transportation Research Board, Washington D.C., 2008.
3
 New Transit Cooperative Research Program Research Confirms Transit-Oriented Developments Produce Fewer Auto
Trips, G.B. Arrington and Kimi Iboshi Sloop, ITE Journal, June 2009.
4
    National Household Travel Survey, 2009.



                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                              Attachment 4




and retail and park-and-ride and retail uses were estimated for purposes of developing overall off-
site trip generation. An internal trip reduction of approximately 4 percent or 13 trips was calculated
                                                   nd
using the ITE Trip Generation Handbook, 2 Edition. In addition to internalization of the residential
/retail trips, a portion of the retail trips are typically assumed to be pass-by trips i.e., trips already
on the adjacent roadway system that would travel to and from the retail. Based on the ITE Trip
Generation Handbook, 34 percent of the retail trips were assumed to be pass-by.

Park-and-Ride Facility. As discussed in the introduction to this memorandum, park-and-ride lots
are not anticipated to generate new traffic on a regional scale. The purpose of a park-and-ride is to
attract existing traffic in the area, concentrate it at one location, and transfer people to transit. As a
result, there would be some localized impact in the immediate vicinity of the project, and an overall
benefit to the region's transportation system. With the tolling of SR 520 scheduled to begin spring
2011, park-and-ride demand is expected to increase. To evaluate the potential impacts of the
park-and-ride component of the project, it was assumed that 50 percent of the park-and-ride trips
would be diverted from an existing route in the immediate vicinity while the remaining 50 percent
would be a "new trip" within the limits of the study area.

Traffic counts were conducted at the park-and-ride driveways on December 15, 2010 from 4:00 to
6:00 p.m. to develop an existing trip rate per stall for the South Kirkland Park-and-Ride during the
weekday PM peak hour of the adjacent street network. Although the parking lot is typically fully
occupied during the day, the weekday peak hour represents when traffic volumes to and from the
driveway and on the surrounding roadway system would be highest. Attachment A provides the
park-and-ride traffic counts. This data showed that for the existing 603 stall park-and-ride there
was a total of 303 vehicle trips (inbound and outbound) during the weekday PM peak hour of the
adjacent street or 0.50 trips per stall (see Attachment A).

Table 1 provides a summary of the trip generation estimated for the TOD project. Detailed trip
generation calculations are provided in Attachment B. As shown in the table, the potential TOD
and park-and-ride project would generate 194 net new weekday PM peak hour trips.

Table 1.         Estimated Weekday PM Peak Hour Trip Generation for the TOD and Park-and-Ride
                                                                                             PM Peak Hour Trips
                                                             1
Land Use                        Size                   Rate                  Inbound               Outbound                   Total
Apartment (#220)              250 units                 0.62                    101                     54                     155
             Transit/Affordable Housing Reduction3                              -39                     -21                    -60
Retail (#820)           12,500 square-feet              3.73                    23                      24                      47
                                    2
         Internal Trip Reduction                                                 -7                     -6                     -13
         Pass-by Trip Reduction4                                                 -7                     -7                     -14
Park-and-Ride                250 stalls                 0.50                    34                      91                     125
           Diverted Trip Reduction5                                              0                      -46                    -46
                                                         Total Trips            158                    169                     327
                           Trip Reductions (Diverted/Pass-by)                   53                      80                     133
                                                     Net New Trips              105                     89                     194
Source: Transpo Group, 2011.
1. Trip generation rate based on ITE Trip Generation, 8th Edition regression equation for apartment land use #220, average trip rate for
    shopping center (retail) land use #820, and traffic counts conducted at the South Kirkland park-and-ride on December 15, 2010 for the
    park-and-ride use.
2.   Internal trips calculated using ITE Trip Generation Handbook, 2nd Edition assuming internal trips only between apartment and retail and
    retail and park-and-ride. The ITE office data was used for the park-and-ride internal trip rates.
3. Based the Transit Cooperative Research Program (TCRP) Report 128 (2008), New Transit Cooperative Research Program Research
    Confirms Transit-Oriented Developments Produce Fewer Auto Trips, ITE Journal, (June 2009), and National Household Travel Survey
    (2009), a 40 percent reduction was taken to account for residents using transit rather than driving personal vehicles.
4. Pass-by rate (34 percent) is based on ITE Trip Generation Handbook, 2nd Edition for shopping center land use.
5. Fifty percent of the park-and-ride peak direction trips are assumed to be diverted.




                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                             Attachment 4




Trip Distribution and Assignment
The project-related trips were assigned to the roadway network based on existing travel patterns
and the Bellevue Kirkland Redmond (BKR) travel demand model. Given the differences in the
travel behaviors for the TOD (apartments and retail) and park-and-ride components, a separate
distribution was determined for each. Attachments C and D display the distribution for the TOD
and park-and-ride. Traffic was assigned to the study area based on the travel patterns as shown
on Attachments E and F.

2030 Traffic Volume Forecasts
Forecast Methodology. Baseline 2030 traffic volumes for the weekday PM peak hour were
provided by WSDOT and are based on the BKR travel demand model and work completed as part
of the coordination with Bellevue on the SR 520 project. For locations not included in the SR 520
evaluation, an annual growth rate of two percent per year was applied to the existing traffic
volumes based the forecasted growth from the travel demand model. This growth rate is
conservative when considering a 20year forecast, but it is inclusive of general background growth
as well as changes in travel patterns that may result from the SR 520 project. As mentioned, 2030
was selected as the analysis year to assure consistency with the long term regional planning and
anticipated improvements to SR 520. Project-specific SEPA analysis and concurrency review at a
later stage. Attachment A includes the existing weekday PM peak hour intersection turning
movement counts for the site access locations and the 108th Avenue NE/NE 38th Place
intersection. Attachment G shows the baseline 2030 traffic volumes for the study area. Project
traffic volumes were added to the future baseline traffic volumes to develop the 2030 with-project
traffic forecasts. Attachment H shows the weekday PM peak hour traffic volumes at the study
intersections.

Proportionate Share. Table 2 summarizes the anticipated total intersection traffic with the project
as well as the percent of future with-project volume attributable to the proposed project during the
weekday PM peak hour. As shown in the table, the TOD and park-and-ride would increase traffic
locally along 108th Avenue NE, NE 38th Place, and Northup Way. However, traffic would
decrease along Lake Washington Boulevard in the vicinity of the SR 520 interchange since the
additional park-and-ride stalls would attract users that may have otherwise travelled to and from
Seattle via SR 520.

Table 2.         Future 2030 Weekday PM Peak Hour Traffic Volume Impact at Study Intersections
                                                                               With-Project        TOD/Park-and-         Percent TOD
Intersection1                                                                 Traffic Volume        Ride Traffic1           Impact
1. Lake Washington Boulevard/NE 38th Place                                         3,278                  18                  0.5%
2. Lake Washington Boulevard/Northup Way/NE Points Drive                           5,023                  -7                 -0.1%
3. Lake Washington Boulevard/SR 520 WB On-Ramp                                     4,002                  -8                 -0.2%
4. Lake Washington Boulevard/SR 520 EB Off-Ramp                                    3,590                  -20                -0.6%
5. NE 38th Place/South Access Park-and-Ride                                         805                   60                  7.5%
6. 108th Avenue NE/East Access Park-and-Ride                                       2,041                 171                  8.4%
7. 108th Avenue NE/NE 38th Place                                                   2,334                 134                  5.7%
8. 108th Avenue NE/Northup Way                                                     4,797                 127                  2.6%
9. 108th Avenue NE/SR 520 WB On-Ramp                                               2,928                  98                  3.3%
10. 108th Avenue NE/SR 520 Transit-HOV Ramp/WB Off-Ramp                            3,754                  94                  2.5%
11. 108th Avenue NE/SR 520 EB Off-Ramp                                             3,075                  65                  2.1%
Source: Transpo Group, 2010.
Notes: EB = eastbound and WB = westbound
1. Negative traffic volume and percent impact due to park-and-ride trips being diverted from SR 520 to the park-and-ride and using transit
    to travel rather than SR 520.




                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                     Attachment 4




In addition to the intersection impacts shown in Table 2, impacts on key corridors include:
            Lake Washington Boulevard. North of NE 38th Place, the TOD/Park-and-Ride
            expansion traffic is anticipated to constitute approximately 0.6% of the project 2030
            volumes.
            108th Avenue NE. North of the South Kirkland Park-and-Ride Driveway, the TOD/Park-
            and-Ride expansion traffic is anticipated to constitute approximately 2.8% of the project
            2030 volumes.

The amount of TOD/Park-and-Ride expansion traffic volumes anticipated along Lake Washington
Boulevard and 108th Avenue NE are within the range of day-to-day traffic fluctuations.

Traffic Operations Impacts
Methodology. Traffic operational analysis was conducted for 2030 traffic forecasts at the study
intersections defined for this analysis. The City of Kirkland's adopted intersection LOS standard is
LOS D. Based on the City's Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines (February 2004), they generally
define a SEPA impact requiring mitigation at a signalized location where the project's proportional
                                                                                          5
share of daily intersection traffic related to the capacity of the intersection represents :
            More than 15 percent at intersections operating at LOS E
            More than 5 percent at intersections operating at LOS F

Although this analysis is not being prepared for SEPA purposes, review of the City's thresholds is
reasonable criteria to apply. The Lake Washington Boulevard/NE 38th Place intersection is the
only signalized study intersection located in the City of Kirkland. The City of Bellevue does not
have an adopted intersection LOS standard; however, LOS D/E are generally considered
acceptable.

Results. The results of the with-project analysis were compared to the 2030 baseline conditions to
identify long range localized traffic impacts associated with the proposal. The analysis assumes
that by 2030 WSDOT completes improvements at the SR 520 interchanges as well as tolling of
SR 520. Table 3 summarizes the future with and without-project LOS for the weekday PM peak
hour. Detailed LOS worksheets are included in Attachment I.




5
    See Table 1 of the City of Kirkland Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines, Revised February 2004.



                                                                                                             7
                                                                                                                      Attachment 4




Table 3.        Future 2030 Weekday PM Peak Hour LOS Summary
                                                                                 Baseline                     With-Project
                                                                                                3
                                                                                            V/C or                         V/C or
Intersection                                                             LOS1     Delay2     WM4        LOS       Delay     WM
1. Lake Washington Boulevard/NE 38th Place                                 F       >120      1.36         F       >120       1.36
2. Lake Washington Boulevard/Northup Way/NE Points Drive                   E        59       1.00         E         59       1.00
3. Lake Washington Boulevard/SR 520 WB On-Ramp                             B        12       0.77         B         12       0.78
4. Lake Washington Boulevard/SR 520 EB Off-Ramp                            C        21       0.59         C         21       0.58
5. NE 38th Place/South Access Park-and-Ride                                B        12        SB          B         13       SB
6. 108th Avenue NE/East Access Park-and-Ride                               E        35        EB          F         76       EB
7. 108th Avenue NE/NE 38th Place                                           F       >120      EBL          F       >120       EBL
8. 108th Avenue NE/Northup Way                                             E        64       0.97         E         70       1.00
10. 108th Avenue NE/SR 520 Transit-HOV Ramp/WB Off-Ramp                    D        49       0.92         D         51       0.93
11. 108th Avenue NE/SR 520 EB Off-Ramp                                     B        16       0.69         B         16       0.69
1.   Level of service, based on 2000 Highway Capacity Manual methodology.
2.   Average delay in seconds per vehicle.
3.   Volume-to-capacity ratio reported for signalized intersections.
4.   Worst movement reported for unsignalized intersections where, SB = southbound approach, EB = eastbound approach, and EBL =
     eastbound left-turn movement.


As shown in the table, several intersections are forecast to operate at LOS E/F in the future with or
without the proposed project.

The 108th Avenue NE intersections with the park-and-ride access and NE 38th Place are
anticipated to operate poorly due to the increase in vehicles to and from the site as well as the
anticipated growth along the 108th Avenue NE corridor. In order to enhance access to and from
the TOD and park-and-ride, intersection improvements would be needed at these locations.
Potential improvements to these locations would include:
                Access Restrictions at the 108th Avenue NE Driveway: Depending on the final
                project level of development and future traffic growth, the 108th Avenue NE driveway
                would likely need to have some access restrictions. The actual restriction should be
                determined in conjunction with the on-site design to ensure circulation is adequate for
                transit and general purpose vehicles. Examples of potential restrictions include right-
                in/right-out only or right-in/right-out/left-in only access.
                 NE 38th Place Main Access: Given the restricted access along 108th Avenue NE,
                the majority of the traffic would use this driveway. The site should be configured to
                allow for approximately 100-feet of storage on the outbound approach and to direct
                users to this location.
                Enhanced Traffic Control at 108th Avenue NE/NE 38th Place Intersection: Traffic
                control improvements should be implemented to add capacity to NE 38th Place such
                as installation of a traffic signal or similar traffic control measures.

Lake Washington Boulevard/NE 38th Place. This intersection is anticipated to operate at LOS F
during the PM peak hour, with or without the proposed project. Based on the City of Kirkland
proportional share calculation worksheet, the TOD and park-and-ride proportional share at the
Lake Washington Boulevard/NE 38th Place intersection is approximately 1.70 percent. Based on
the City of Kirkland's criteria, this would not be considered a significant impact in terms of the
SEPA thresholds.

Lake Washington Boulevard/Northup Way. This intersection is anticipated to operate at LOS E
during the weekday PM peak hour by 2030 with or without the project. The park-and-ride and TOD



                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                        Attachment 4




project would increase the total intersection volume at this location by less than one percent (see
Table 2). This intersection would continue operating at LOS E, which is within the acceptable LOS
D/E range typically used by the City of Bellevue.

108th Avenue NE/Northup Way. This intersection would operate at LOS E during the weekday
PM peak hour by 2030 with or without the project. The park-and-ride and TOD project would
increase the total intersection volume at this location by less than three percent (see Table 2). This
intersection would continue operating at LOS E, which is within the acceptable LOS D/E range
typically used by the City of Bellevue.

The suggested improvements have the potential to alter the circulation patterns internal to the site;
therefore, these improvements should be reassessed during the SEPA review at the time a
detailed plan is developed and a project moves forward. In general, the analysis shows that some
form of turn restrictions would be necessary at the 108th driveway and capacity improvements
would be needed at the 108th Avenue NE/NE 38th Place intersection to accommodate future
traffic levels associated with the project and potential shifts in traffic due to the turn restrictions on
108th Avenue NE.


Parking Guidelines
The purpose of this parking discussion is to provide information around the anticipated parking
demand in order to develop zoning regulations for the project. Currently no specific project has
been identified and as such no defined parking supply established. Parking demand for TOD
projects can be influenced by several key factors such as the mix of affordable housing and
provision of a senior housing component.

Data collected locally at four sites in the Redmond Urban Center, with market rate residential
                                                                      6
units, shows a parking demand range of 1.01 to 1.12 vehicles per unit . Provision of affordable
and/or senior housing would impact the parking demand significantly.

To understand the potential parking demand of the TOD component, this analysis assumed a
peak demand rate of 1.08 vehicles per unit for the residential component, which represents the
weighted average of the Redmond data. This does not take into consideration of factors discussed
previously regarding affordable and senior housing. Parking demand for the retail component was
                                                                                 th
calculated based on the average rate provided in the ITE Parking Generation, 4 Edition. It
anticipated the retail uses would be geared towards users of the park-and-ride facility as well as
the residential component; however, at this time only a 20 percent reduction in retail parking
demand has been assumed. In addition, TOD development in suburban areas is shown to the less
                                             th
than projected by ITE Parking Generation, 4 Edition. These assumptions should be further
refined when a development plan and potential uses are defined.

Based on the size of the TOD and the parking rates described above, Figure 1 shows the 24-hour
parking demand profiles for the retail and residential components of the TOD project. Time of day
distribution is also based on ITE.




6
    Assessing Multifamily Residential Parking Demand and Transit Service, ITE Journal, December 2010,



                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Attachment 4




                                               Figure 1.                                   TOD Component Weekday Parking Demand Curve

                              300
  Parking Demand (vehicles)


                              250

                              200

                              150

                              100

                              50

                               0
                                               1:00 AM




                                                                                                6:00 AM
                                                         2:00 AM
                                                                   3:00 AM
                                                                             4:00 AM
                                                                                       5:00AM


                                                                                                          7:00 AM
                                                                                                                    8:00 AM
                                                                                                                              9:00 AM


                                                                                                                                                   11:00 AM


                                                                                                                                                                         1:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                   2:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                             3:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                       4:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                              12:00 PM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              11:00 PM
                                    12:00 AM




                                                                                                                                        10:00 AM

                                                                                                  Time of Day
                                                                                Commerical Component       Residential Component


Initial plans call for approximately one stall per unit or 250 stalls dedicated to the TOD portion (250
residential units/ 12,500 square-feet of retail) of the project, but this could change with the final
development plans. As shown in the figure, assuming a supply of 250 stalls, the peak parking
demands for the TOD component could exceed the dedicated parking between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. by approximately 20 vehicles. This coincides with the low utilization periods of the park-and-
ride lot. As discussed above, the rate used to calculate residential parking demand is based on
market rate housing; therefore, this overflow from the TOD component would be less based on
adjustments to the peak demand to account for the affordable and/or senior housing.

Figure 2 provides an estimated parking demand curve for the park-and-ride based on data
collected at the South Kirkland Park-and-Ride during the peak periods (morning and evening) and
an assumed 100 percent occupancy during the peak periods. As discussed previously, the total
parking supply for the park-and-ride would be approximately 850 spaces with the project. The
graph shows that during the fringes of the peak period (i.e., prior to 7:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.),
more than adequate capacity would exist to accommodate any overflow from the TOD
components, even assuming the upper end of the demand curve and only 200 stalls of dedicated
TOD parking provided.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Attachment 4




                                  Figure 2.                                   Figure 2. Park-and-Ride Weekday Demand Curve

                     900
                     800
                     700
    Parking Demand




                     600
                     500
                     400
                     300
                     200
                     100
                       0
                           12:00 AM




                                                                                                                               10:00 AM
                                                                                                                                          11:00 AM
                                                                              5:00AM




                                                                                                                                                                1:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                          2:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                    3:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                              4:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                        5:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9:00 PM
                                                                                       6:00 AM
                                      1:00 AM
                                                2:00 AM
                                                          3:00 AM
                                                                    4:00 AM



                                                                                                 7:00 AM
                                                                                                           8:00 AM
                                                                                                                     9:00 AM



                                                                                                                                                     12:00 PM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     11:00 PM
                                                                                                                                 Time of Day

                                                                                                                     Park-andRide


Conclusions
A review of the potential local traffic impacts showed that relative to forecasted conditions without
the project, no significant change to off-site intersection operations would occur with development
of the TOD and park-and-ride expansion. For those intersections where forecasted operations are
projected to be LOS E/LOS F, mitigation would not likely be triggered based on current City of
Kirkland and City of Bellevue standards.
Improvements are recommended at the 108th Avenue NE/NE 38 Place intersection and the 108th
Avenue NE site access. These improvements include a combination of providing additional
capacity such as signalization at the 108th Avenue NE/NE 38th Place intersection and
implementation of turn restrictions at the 108th Avenue NE access. Several options exist for
capacity improvements and turn restrictions, and it is recommended that this be revisited when a
defined site plan is available such that any changes to the on-site circulation patterns can be
considered in the final recommendation. The effect of these recommendations would be to reduce
potential congestion along 108th Avenue NE near the access as well as a shift in traffic to NE 38th
Place, and accommodating increased side street demand by improving the 108th Avenue NE/
NE 38th Place intersection.
An analysis of the parking demand was conducted for the TOD component and park-and-ride. Due
to the nature of the TOD projects, it is desirable to have shared parking between the uses. Any
overflow from the TOD would be accommodated in the vacant stalls in the park-and-ride lot that
exist during non-peak times. The analysis showed that even with an average peak parking
demand of 1.08 vehicles per unit for the residential uses, a peak demand for shared parking would
not exceed 20 spaces. This can easily be met by the available parking at the park-and-ride lot.
When defining the required parking supply for the project, we recommend a baseline assumption
of 1.08 stalls per unit, consistent with the Redmond data, with provisions to adjust the required
parking supply to account for reductions due to senior and affordable housing components, as well
as the ability to share parking with the park-and-ride facility. If overflow from the TOD is
anticipated, the current utilization of the Park-and-Ride facility should be observed and the ability
for shared parking confirmed.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11
                                   Attachment 4




Attachment A: Traffic Counts and Existing
           Park-and-Ride Trip Generation
                                                                                                                                         Attachment 4
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 108th -- Park-n-Ride                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10565001
 CITY/STATE: Kirkland, WA                                                                                                     DATE: 12/15/2010
                       353 0.91 811                            Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                   2.8        1.7

                          20 333   0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                               30.0 1.2 0.0

       62      88                      0        0
                                                                                                                41.9   12.5                       0.0      0.0
        0.76   0            0.94       0   0.00
                                                                                                                       0.0                        0.0
       161     73                      0        0
                                                                                                                14.3   16.4                       0.0      0.0

                          42 723   0
                                                                                                                               47.6 0.4 0.0

                       406 0.91 765
                                                                                                                               3.9        3.0



                              0                                                                                                 1    0    0


                                                                                                                       0                           0

               0                       0                                                                               0                           0

                                                                                                                       0                           0


                              0                                                                                                 0    0    0




 5-Min Count                    108th                          108th                 Park-n-Ride                  Park-n-Ride
     Period                 (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                      Totals
     4:00 PM          3       46      0     0         0      17      2    0     5      0      6      0     0        0      0         0           79
     4:05 PM          1       43      0     0         0      42      0    0     1      0      6      0     0        0      0         0           93
     4:10 PM          3       65      0     0         0      26      1    0     2      0      2      0     0        0      0         0           99
     4:15 PM          0       53      0     0         0      23      0    0     4      0      5      0     0        0      0         0           85
     4:20 PM          5       51      0     0         0      27      2    0     3      0      3      0     0        0      0         0           91
     4:25 PM          1       50      0     0         0      27      2    0     1      0      2      0     0        0      0         0           83
     4:30 PM          7       56      0     0         0      24      1    0     8      0      9      0     0        0      0         0          105
     4:35 PM          3       68      0     0         0      32      2    0    10      0     12      0     0        0      0         0          127
     4:40 PM          5       63      0     0         0      23      1    0     5      0      5      0     0        0      0         0          102
     4:45 PM          4       61      0     0         0      28      0    0     2      0      3      0     0        0      0         0           98
     4:50 PM          5       52      0     0         0      26      3    0     6      0      5      0     0        0      0         0           97
     4:55 PM          3       48      0     0         0      24      1    0    15      0      6      0     0        0      0         0           97             1156
     5:00 PM          5       69      0     0         0      27      1    0     7      0     10      0     0        0      0         0          119             1196
     5:05 PM          1       46      0     0         0      30      2    0     2      0      2      0     0        0      0         0           83             1186
     5:10 PM          0       72      0     0         0      30      1    0     6      0      3      0     0        0      0         0          112             1199
     5:15 PM          5       59      0     0         0      23      2    0    14      0      7      0     0        0      0         0          110             1224
     5:20 PM          3       64      0     0         0      24      5    0     7      0      4      0     0        0      0         0          107             1240
     5:25 PM          1       65      0     0         0      42      1    0     6      0      7      0     0        0      0         0          122             1279
     5:30 PM          1       62      0     0         0      21      1    0     4      0      4      0     0        0      0         0           93             1267
     5:35 PM          9       64      0     0         0      24      2    0     1      0      4      0     0        0      0         0          104             1244
     5:40 PM          3       71      0     0         0      28      2    0     5      0     11      0     0        0      0         0          120             1262
     5:45 PM          4       65      0     0         0      17      3    0    11      0      8      0     0        0      0         0          108             1272
     5:50 PM          2       54      0     0         0      25      3    0     9      0      9      0     0        0      0         0          102             1277
     5:55 PM          4       57      0     0         0      20      0    0     8      0     10      0     0        0      0         0           99             1279
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       36      752      0     0         0     356     32    0   108      0     72      0     0        0      0         0                  1356
 Heavy Trucks        12        0      0               0       0      8         16      0     16            0        0      0                             52
  Pedestrians                  0                              0                        0                            0                                     0
   Bicycles           0        0      0               0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/20/2010 11:56 AM                                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
                                                                                                                                         Attachment 4
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 108th -- Park-n-Ride                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10565002
 CITY/STATE: Kirkland, WA                                                                                                     DATE: 12/15/2010
                       827 0.87 224                            Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM                                   1.9        4.5

                       128 699     0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 8:00 AM -- 8:15 AM
                                                                                                                               9.4 0.6 0.0

       196     17                      0        0
                                                                                                                13.8   23.5                       0.0      0.0
        0.67   0            0.87       0   0.00
                                                                                                                       0.0                        0.0
       67      50                      0        0
                                                                                                                38.8   44.0                       0.0      0.0

                          68 207   0
                                                                                                                               22.1 2.9 0.0

                       749 0.80 275
                                                                                                                               3.5        7.6



                              1                                                                                                 0    0    0


                                                                                                                       0                           0

               0                       0                                                                               0                           0

                                                                                                                       0                           0


                              7                                                                                                 0    0    0




 5-Min Count                    108th                          108th                 Park-n-Ride                  Park-n-Ride
     Period                 (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                      Totals
     7:00 AM          5       12      0     0         0      33      3    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0         0           55          398
     7:05 AM          3       11      0     0         0      39     14    0     0      0      4      0     0        0      0         0           71          449
     7:10 AM          6       16      0     0         0      33      7    0     1      0      2      0     0        0      0         0           65          495
     7:15 AM          8       10      0     0         0      38     11    0     0      0      5      0     0        0      0         0           72          543
     7:20 AM          8       12      0     0         0      40      7    0     1      0      4      0     0        0      0         0           72          582
     7:25 AM          6       13      0     0         0      50      8    0     0      0      4      0     0        0      0         0           81          645
     7:30 AM         10        9      0     0         0      49      9    0     4      0      6      0     0        0      0         0           87          705
     7:35 AM          6       20      0     0         0      69     10    0     3      0      8      0     0        0      0         0          116          793
     7:40 AM         11       14      0     0         0      46     10    0     0      0      4      0     0        0      0         0           85          846
     7:45 AM          4       11      0     0         0      57     16    0     2      0      4      0     0        0      0         0           94          909
     7:50 AM          5        8      0     0         0      50     16    0     1      0      3      0     0        0      0         0           83          941
     7:55 AM          8       15      0     0         0      58      6    0     1      0      3      0     0        0      0         0           91          972
     8:00 AM          3       27      0     0         0      63     14    0     1      0      2      0     0        0      0         0          110         1027
     8:05 AM          3       29      0     0         0      76      5    0     0      0      3      0     0        0      0         0          116         1072
     8:10 AM          1       23      0     0         0      74      7    0     2      0      2      0     0        0      0         0          109         1116
     8:15 AM          9       21      0     0         0      61     14    0     0      0      5      0     0        0      0         0          110         1154
     8:20 AM          1       17      0     0         0      47     11    0     1      0      2      0     0        0      0         0           79         1161
     8:25 AM          7       13      0     0         0      49     10    0     2      0      8      0     0        0      0         0           89         1169
     8:30 AM          5       15      0     0         0      34      5    0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0         0           61         1143
     8:35 AM          3        9      0     0         0      60     11    0     0      0      3      0     0        0      0         0           86         1113
     8:40 AM          1       13      0     0         0      63      6    0     0      0      3      0     0        0      0         0           86         1114
     8:45 AM          6       19      0     0         0      51      4    0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0           81         1101
     8:50 AM          4       15      0     0         0      57      8    0     1      0      2      0     0        0      0         0           87         1105
     8:55 AM          3       16      0     0         0      43      2    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0         0           65         1079
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       28      316      0     0         0     852    104    0    12      0     28      0     0        0      0         0                  1340
 Heavy Trucks        20       12      0               0       8      8          8      0     20            0        0      0                             76
  Pedestrians                  4                              0                        0                            0                                     4
   Bicycles           0        0      0               0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/20/2010 11:56 AM                                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
                                                                                                                                           Attachment 4
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Park-n-Ride -- 38th                                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10565003
 CITY/STATE: Kirkland, WA                                                                                                       DATE: 12/15/2010
                          69 0.59 28                               Peak-Hour: 4:55 PM -- 5:55 PM                                 0.0        0.0

                          48    1     20
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

       172     16                           12    145
                                                                                                                    2.3   0.0                       0.0      2.8
        0.81   256             0.86        122   0.87
                                                                                                                          0.0                       3.3
       274     2                            11    284
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                       0.0      0.4

                           2    0     8
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 12.5

                          14 0.50 10
                                                                                                                                 0.0       10.0



                                1                                                                                                0     0    0


                                                                                                                          0                          0

               6                             0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0


                                1                                                                                                0     0    0




 5-Min Count                    Park-n-Ride                     Park-n-Ride                  38th                         38th
     Period                    (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                      Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     4:00 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      2    0     1     20      0      0     1       14       1      0           39
     4:05 PM          0           0      0     0          1       0      1    0     1     29      0      0     3       12       3      0           50
     4:10 PM          1           0      2     0          1       0      1    0     0     24      2      0     2       11       0      0           44
     4:15 PM          0           0      2     0          1       0      4    0     0     20      1      0     2        8       0      0           38
     4:20 PM          0           0      2     0          1       0      0    0     1     14      0      0     2       14       1      0           35
     4:25 PM          1           0      1     0          0       0      0    0     0     17      0      0     0       12       0      0           31
     4:30 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      1    0     2     14      1      0     1        9       1      0           29
     4:35 PM          0           0      1     0          1       0     10    0     1     26      0      0     1        8       0      0           48
     4:40 PM          0           0      0     0          1       0      2    0     0     14      1      0     0        8       0      0           26
     4:45 PM          0           0      3     0          0       0      0    0     0     19      1      0     0       10       1      0           34
     4:50 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      0    0     2     22      0      0     0       15       1      0           40
     4:55 PM          0           0      1     0          4       0      5    0     1     21      0      0     1        7       0      0           40              454
     5:00 PM          0           0      0     0          2       0      2    0     3     26      0      0     0        6       1      0           40              455
     5:05 PM          0           0      0     0          1       0      6    0     0     30      0      0     1        9       1      0           48              453
     5:10 PM          0           0      0     0          1       0      4    0     2     27      0      0     1       15       0      0           50              459
     5:15 PM          0           0      1     0          2       0      6    0     1     21      0      0     1       12       2      0           46              467
     5:20 PM          1           0      0     0          2       0      3    0     0     19      1      0     0       10       0      0           36              468
     5:25 PM          0           0      1     0          0       1      1    0     5     20      0      0     2       12       1      0           43              480
     5:30 PM          1           0      3     0          2       0      4    0     1     20      1      0     0       11       0      0           43              494
     5:35 PM          0           0      1     0          2       0      0    0     0     14      0      0     2       11       2      0           32              478
     5:40 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      3    0     0     19      0      0     1       15       2      0           40              492
     5:45 PM          0           0      1     0          0       0      6    0     2     22      0      0     1        6       1      0           39              497
     5:50 PM          0           0      0     0          4       0      8    0     1     17      0      0     1        8       2      0           41              498
     5:55 PM          0           0      0     0          4       0      9    0     2     12      0      0     0        9       0      0           36              494
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                          Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        0           0      4     0         16       0     64    0    12    312      0      0    12      144      12      0                  576
 Heavy Trucks         0           0      0                0       0      0          0      0      0            0        4       0                          4
  Pedestrians                     0                               0                        0                            0                                  0
   Bicycles           0           0      0                0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0       0                          0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/20/2010 11:56 AM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
                                                                                                                                           Attachment 4
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Park-n-Ride -- 38th                                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10565004
 CITY/STATE: Kirkland, WA                                                                                                       DATE: 12/15/2010
                          26 0.52 95                               Peak-Hour: 7:20 AM -- 8:20 AM                                 0.0        0.0

                          18    0     8
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 7:45 AM -- 8:00 AM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

       209     58                           37    322
                                                                                                                    2.4   0.0                       0.0      1.6
        0.56   114             0.69        189   0.76
                                                                                                                          1.8                       2.6
       212     40                           96    136
                                                                                                                    0.9   0.0                       0.0      1.5

                           2    0     14
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                       136 0.64 16
                                                                                                                                 0.0        0.0



                                3                                                                                                0     0    0


                                                                                                                          0                          0

               1                             0                                                                            1                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0


                                0                                                                                                0     0    0




 5-Min Count                    Park-n-Ride                     Park-n-Ride                  38th                         38th
     Period                    (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                      Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                        Totals
     6:50 AM          0           0       0    0          1       0      0    0     0      3       1     0     1        9       3      0           18
     6:55 AM          0           0       0    0          0       0      0    0     7      7       2     0     4       14       0      0           34              172
     7:00 AM          0           0       0    0          1       0      2    0     4      2       0     0     1       17       1      0           28              192
     7:05 AM          0           0       0    0          0       0      1    0     3      5       0     0     3       14       3      0           29              214
     7:10 AM          0           0       0    0          0       1      2    0     5      2       1     0     0        5       4      0           20              227
     7:15 AM          0           0       0    0          0       0      1    0     6      1       0     0     0       11       1      0           20              234
     7:20 AM          0           0       0    0          0       0      1    0     3      6       0     0     2       12       2      0           26              246
     7:25 AM          0           0       0    0          0       0      0    0     3      2       2     0     5       14       6      0           32              264
     7:30 AM          0           0       3    0          1       0      2    0    12      5       4     0     6       12       1      0           46              293
     7:35 AM          0           0       2    0          2       0      6    0     6      3       2     0     6       17       4      0           48              322
     7:40 AM          0           0       1    0          0       0      2    0     3     11       4     0    13       15       1      0           50              359
     7:45 AM          1           0       1    0          1       0      2    0     3     14      13     0    15       10       4      0           64              415
     7:50 AM          0           0       1    0          0       0      0    0     7     17       5     0    15       15       1      0           61              458
     7:55 AM          0           0       2    0          0       0      2    0     5     27       4     0    21       20       4      0           85              509
     8:00 AM          0           0       2    0          1       0      0    0     5     14       5     0     9       18       3      0           57              538
     8:05 AM          1           0       2    0          0       0      2    0     6      5       0     0     3       22       4      0           45              554
     8:10 AM          0           0       0    0          2       0      1    0     3      4       1     0     0       17       6      0           34              568
     8:15 AM          0           0       0    0          1       0      0    0     2      6       0     0     1       17       1      0           28              576
     8:20 AM          0           0       0    0          1       0      0    0     3      4       0     0     0       15       2      0           25              575
     8:25 AM          1           0       1    0          0       0      0    0     1      7       0     0     1       16       2      0           29              572
     8:30 AM          0           0       0    0          0       0      1    0     2      3       2     0     0        8       0      0           16              542
     8:35 AM          0           0       0    0          1       0      0    0     1      6       0     0     0       20       1      0           29              523
     8:40 AM          0           0       0    0          0       0      0    0     2      5       0     0     1       17       0      0           25              498
     8:45 AM          0           0       0    0          0       0      3    0     0      4       0     0     1       12       2      0           22              456
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                          Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        4           0      16    0          4       0     16    0    60    232      88     0   204      180      36      0                  840
 Heavy Trucks         0           0       0               0       0      0          0      0       0           0        4       0                          4
  Pedestrians                     0                               4                        0                            0                                  4
   Bicycles           0           0       0               0       0      0          0      0       0           0        0       0                          0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 12/20/2010 11:56 AM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
                                                                                                                     Attachment 4


Peak Hour Summary



           Mark Skaggs
          (206) 251-0300


                                                      108th Ave NE & NE 38th Pl
                                                               5:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                                                             Thursday, January 20, 2011


                                       108th Ave NE              0                          0




                                                                     407                        808


                                                            52       355

                                                            É        Æ
NE 38th Pl                                                                 Peds   0




   0           191                                                                                                           0
                                     Peds 6




                                                                                                       Peds 0


                           79    È

   0           224                                                                                                           0

                           145   Ê

                                                                           Peds   0

                                                                                      Ç         Å

                                                                                      139       729
                                                                                                      108th Ave NE




                                                                     500                        868




                                                                 0                          0


 Approach       PHF         HV%          Volume
    EB          0.89        0.4%                      224
    WB          0.00        0.0%                      0
    NB          0.97        2.1%                      868
    SB          0.91        3.2%                      407
Intersection    0.95        2.1%               1,499

Count Period: 4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                                                                   Attachment 4
                                                                                                                                        In         Out




                                                                                                                         HV 3.2%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                        PHF 0.91
                                                                                                                                       407         808
                                                                                                                                       52    355
                                                                                                                                                                         HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                        PHF 0.00
                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                  79
                      Mark Skaggs                                                               Out 191                                                                                0 In




                                                                                                                                   6




                                                                                                                                                         0
                     (206) 251-0300
                                                                                                    In 224                                                                             0 Out
                                                                                                                 145

                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                              HV 0.4%
108th Ave NE & NE 38th Pl                                                                                    PHF 0.89




                                                                                                                                                              HV 2.1%
                                                                                                                                                             PHF 0.97
                                                                                                                                       139   729
Thursday, January 20, 2011                                                                                                             Out          In
                                                                                                                                       500         868
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                              Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                              5:00 PM to 6:00 PM
15-Minute Interval Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval              Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start               108th Ave NE                108th Ave NE                 NE 38th Pl                      NE 38th Pl                    Interval                   Crosswalk
   Time         L        T              HV           T      R       HV    L             R       HV                                             Total         North      South East            West
 4:00 PM       21       127              6          91       4       3   20            47        0                                              310           0           0      0             2
 4:15 PM       22       151              5          75       9       7   16            30        0                                              303           0           0      0             3
 4:30 PM       30       149              5          91       9       2   19            46        1                                              344           0           0      0             1
 4:45 PM       21       174              5          75       8       3   10            50        0                                              338           0           0      0             1
 5:00 PM       32       180              4          87       9       3   24            26        0                                              358           0           0      0             1
 5:15 PM       47       177              7          90      16       4   18            45        1                                              393           0           0      0             1
 5:30 PM       30       187              4          98      14       4   17            37        0                                              383           0           0      0             2
 5:45 PM       30       185              3          80      13       2   20            37        0                                              365           0           0      0             2
Total Survey   233     1,330            39          687     82      28   144            318     2                                                2,794         0          0        0           13



Peak Hour Summary
5:00 PM to 6:00 PM
                       Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
    By
                       108th Ave NE                108th Ave NE                 NE 38th Pl                      NE 38th Pl                       Total                   Crosswalk
 Approach
                In      Out     Total   HV    In    Out     Total   HV    In    Out     Total   HV       In     Out     Total                                North      South East            West
  Volume       868      500    1,368    18   407    808    1,215    13   224    191      415     1        0      0       0                       1,499        0           0      0             6
   %HV                     2.1%                        3.2%                        0.4%                            0.0%                          2.1%
   PHF                      0.97                        0.91                        0.89                            0.00                         0.95

                       Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound
   By
                       108th Ave NE                108th Ave NE                 NE 38th Pl                      NE 38th Pl                       Total
Movement
                 L       T          Total            T      R   Total      L            R  Total                                   Total
  Volume       139      729         868             355     52 407        79           145 224                                     0             1,499
   PHF         0.74     0.97        0.97            0.91   0.81 0.91     0.82         0.81 0.89                                    0.00          0.95



Rolling Hour Summary
4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 Interval              Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start               108th Ave NE                108th Ave NE                 NE 38th Pl                      NE 38th Pl                    Interval                   Crosswalk
   Time         L        T              HV           T      R       HV    L             R       HV                                             Total         North      South East            West
 4:00 PM       94       601             21          332     30      15   65            173       1                                             1,295          0           0      0             7
 4:15 PM       105      654             19          328     35      15   69            152       1                                             1,343          0           0      0             6
 4:30 PM       130      680             21          343     42      12   71            167       2                                             1,433          0           0      0             4
 4:45 PM       130      718             20          350     47      14   69            158       1                                             1,472          0           0      0             5
 5:00 PM       139      729             18          355     52      13   79            145       1                                             1,499          0           0      0             6
                                                                                                                                                                   Attachment 4
                                                                                                                                        In         Out




                                                                                                                         HV 3.2%
Total Vehicle Summary




                                                                                                                        PHF 0.95
                                                                                                                                       791         266
                                                                                                                                       81    710
                                                                                                                                                                         HV 0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                        PHF 0.00
                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                  11
                      Mark Skaggs                                                               Out 298                                                                                0 In




                                                                                                                                   3




                                                                                                                                                         0
                     (206) 251-0300
                                                                                                    In 122                                                                             0 Out
                                                                                                                 111

                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                              HV 0.8%
108th Ave NE & NE 38th Pl                                                                                    PHF 0.55




                                                                                                                                                              HV 4.7%
                                                                                                                                                             PHF 0.84
                                                                                                                                       217   255
Thursday, January 20, 2011                                                                                                             Out          In
                                                                                                                                       821         472
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
                                                                                                                             Peak Hour Summary
                                                                                                                             7:30 AM to 8:30 AM
15-Minute Interval Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval              Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start               108th Ave NE                108th Ave NE                 NE 38th Pl                      NE 38th Pl                    Interval                   Crosswalk
   Time         L        T              HV           T      R       HV    L             R       HV                                             Total         North      South East            West
 7:00 AM       29       39               6          86      11      10    1            10        0                                              176           0           0      0             0
 7:15 AM       48       51               2          104     11       3    1            15        0                                              230           0           0      0             0
 7:30 AM       50       70              10          169     18       9    4            24        1                                              335           0           0      0             0
 7:45 AM       73       67               3          181     27       5    2            53        0                                              403           0           0      0             0
 8:00 AM       46       68               7          187     22       8    3            23        0                                              349           0           0      0             2
 8:15 AM       48       50               2          173     14       3    2            11        0                                              298           0           0      0             1
 8:30 AM       36       47               4          156     19       6    3            16        0                                              277           0           0      0             2
 8:45 AM       54       60               6          126     15       5    5            16        0                                              276           0           0      0             2
Total Survey   384      452             40         1,182    137     49   21             168     1                                                2,344         0          0        0           7



Peak Hour Summary
7:30 AM to 8:30 AM
                       Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
    By
                       108th Ave NE                108th Ave NE                 NE 38th Pl                      NE 38th Pl                       Total                   Crosswalk
 Approach
                In      Out     Total   HV    In    Out     Total   HV    In    Out     Total   HV       In     Out     Total                                North      South East            West
  Volume       472      821    1,293    22   791    266    1,057    25   122    298      420     1        0      0       0                       1,385        0           0      0             3
   %HV                     4.7%                        3.2%                        0.8%                            0.0%                          3.5%
   PHF                      0.84                        0.95                        0.55                            0.00                         0.86

                       Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound
   By
                       108th Ave NE                108th Ave NE                 NE 38th Pl                      NE 38th Pl                       Total
Movement
                 L       T          Total            T      R   Total      L            R  Total                                   Total
  Volume       217      255         472             710     81 791        11           111 122                                     0             1,385
   PHF         0.74     0.91        0.84            0.95   0.75 0.95     0.69         0.52 0.55                                    0.00          0.86



Rolling Hour Summary
7:00 AM to 9:00 AM
 Interval              Northbound                  Southbound                   Eastbound                       Westbound                                               Pedestrians
   Start               108th Ave NE                108th Ave NE                 NE 38th Pl                      NE 38th Pl                    Interval                   Crosswalk
   Time         L        T              HV           T      R       HV    L             R       HV                                             Total         North      South East            West
 7:00 AM       200      227             21          540     67      27    8            102       1                                             1,144          0           0      0             0
 7:15 AM       217      256             22          641     78      25   10            115       1                                             1,317          0           0      0             2
 7:30 AM       217      255             22          710     81      25   11            111       1                                             1,385          0           0      0             3
 7:45 AM       203      232             16          697     82      22   10            103       0                                             1,327          0           0      0             5
 8:00 AM       184      225             19          642     70      22   13            66        0                                             1,200          0           0      0             7
