St. Helens Transportation System Plan                                                                                       August 2011




Appendix 2A             .............................................. Technical Memorandum #1: Background Document Review
Appendix 2B             ...................................................... Technical Memorandum #2: Existing Traffic Conditions
Appendix 2C             ........................................................Technical Memorandum #3: Future Traffic Conditions
Appendix 2D             ........................................................ Technical Memorandum #4: Transportation Solutions




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                                          1
Appendix 2A Technical Memorandum #1:
           Background Document Review
                                                                     Memorandum
Date:             July 13, 2010
To:               Technical Advisory Committee and Citizens Advisory Committee
cc:               Chris Brehmer, Kittelson & Associates
                  Matt Bell, Kittelson & Associates
From:             Matt Hastie
                  Darci Rudzinski
Re:               City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update - Task 2.2
                  Technical Memorandum #1: Background Document Review



I.      Introduction

This memorandum provides an overview of federal, state, regional, and local documents
that comprise the policy framework for transportation planning in the City of St. Helens.
Although each document reviewed contains many policies, only the policies and information
most pertinent to the St. Helens Transportation System Plan (TSP) Update were chosen to
help focus this work. The information in this memorandum is meant to provide a framework
for this planning process. New policies considered for inclusion in the updated Draft St.
Helens TSP should be consistent with the currently adopted policies reviewed here.

Section II contains summaries of regulatory documents that contain information pertinent to
the development and adoption of an updated TSP for the City of St. Helens. State
documents and requirements were reviewed for applicability to transportation planning in St.
Helens. Regional planning documents that contain policies or regulations with potential
impacts to the St. Helens transportation system are also reviewed. In the final subsection of
this memorandum, the City's adopted land use and transportation policies and regulations
are summarized

Appendix A is text from OAR 660-12-0020, the section of the TPR that lists the elements
that are required to be included in local TSPs.

The following documents were reviewed for policies and regulations applicable to the City's
transportation planning and resulting TSP Update. The page number (p.) where each
document's review begins in this memorandum is included for quick reference in the list
below.




 921 SW Washington Street, Suite 468, Portland, OR 97205 · tel 503.224.6974 · fax 503.227.3679 · www.angeloplanning.com
                                                  City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                  TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                7/13/10




State/ODOT

·   Transportation System Planning Guidelines (2008) - p. 3
·   Transportation Planning Rule (OAR 660-12, last amended 2005) - p. 4
·   Oregon Transportation Plan (1992) - p. 5
·   Oregon Highway Plan (1999, last amended 2005) - p. 7
·   Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan (1995) - p. 11
·   Oregon Public Transportation Plan (1997) - p. 12
·   Access Management Rule (OAR 734-051) - p. 12
·   Freight Moves the Oregon Economy (1999) - p. 12
·   State Transportation Improvement Program (2000-present) - p. 13

Regional Plans

·   Lower Columbia River Rail Corridor Study (2009) - p. 13
·   Columbia County Community-Wide Transit Plan and US 30 Transit Access Plan (2009) - p. 15
·   Columbia County Rural Transportation System Plan (1998) ­ p. 16

Local Plans and Ordinances

·   St. Helens Comprehensive Plan (2006) - p. 17
·   St. Helens Transportation System Plan (1997) - p. 18
·   St. Helens Bikeway Master Plan (1988) - p 20
·   City of St. Helens Public Facilities Plan (1999) - p. 20
·   City of St. Helens Economic Opportunity Analysis (2008) - p. 21
·   St. Helens Development Code - p. 21
·   St. Helens SDC Water, Wastewater, Stormwater, Transportation, and Parks System
    Development Charge Study Final Report (2008) - p. 23




                                              2
                                                      City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                      TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                    7/13/10



II.    PLAN & POLICY REVIEW

STATE OF OREGON
Transportation System Planning Guidelines (2008)

ODOT's Transportation System Plan Guidelines is comprised of four chapters: an overview of
transportation system planning (Chapter 1); guidance for the preparation of a jurisdiction's first TSP
and of TSP updates (Chapters 2 and 3); and policy guidance on transportation and land use issues
in a series of technical appendices (Chapter 4). The 2008 Guidelines differ from the 2001 Guidelines
in that they focus more on TSP updates, make stronger connections between local transportation
needs and the availability of transportation funding, and provide more guidance related to mobility
standards, the OTP, and project financing in the technical appendices, in addition to new electronic
links throughout the document for easy access to additional resources.

The chapter on TSP updates is divided into three steps: determining if an update is needed and
scoping the update project; preparing an assessment; and addressing recent regulatory and policy
changes. The last two steps are relevant to the St. Helens TSP update, at this point in the planning
process.

The TSP Guidelines direct TSP updates to address recent policy and regulatory changes, and calls
out recent changes to the Oregon Transportation Plan, Oregon Highway Plan, and Transportation
Planning Rule. A review of these documents and how they relate to the St. Helens TSP update are
provided in other sub-sections of this section of the memorandum.

Several important changes have been made to state policy since the 1997 adoption of the St. Helens
TSP. The 2006 Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) update emphasizes maintaining assets in place,
optimizing existing system performance through technology and better system integration, creating
sustainable funding, and investing in strategic capacity enhancements. Amendments to the Oregon
Highway Plan (OHP) that have potential relevance to transportation planning in St. Helens include
changes to Policy 1B (Land Use and Transportation), which requires a management plan for STAs
on state highways that are also designated as State Freight Routes, and revisions to Policy 1F
(Mobility Standards) that allows for the adoption of alternative mobility standards where "practical
difficulties make conformance with the highway mobility standards infeasible." OHP Appendix C
(Access Management Spacing Standards) was revised in 2004 to be consistent with amendments to
the Access Management Rule, OAR 734-051 (as reviewed later in this memorandum).

Amendments to the TPR have bearing on the St. Helens TSP update, as well as any other potential
Comprehensive Plan amendments in the city. Section -0050 (Project Development) revisions
protect determinations of need, mode, function and general location for projects identified in
TSPs. Revisions to Section -0060, relating to plan amendments, include the following:
· Require local jurisdictions to balance the need for development with the need for transportation
    improvements;
· Address "significant effect" by establishing the end of the planning period as the measure for
    determining whether proposed amendments would cause an imbalance between development
    and the transportation network serving that development;


                                                  3
                                                         City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                         TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                       7/13/10

·   Identify the transportation improvements that a local government can consider in determining
    whether a proposed amendment will significantly affect transportation facilities; and
·   Identify methods for local jurisdictions to determine whether or not a needed transportation
    facility is reasonably likely to be provided within the planning horizon.

Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) (last amended 2005)

Statewide Planning Goal 12, Transportation, requires cities, counties, metropolitan planning
organizations, and ODOT to provide and encourage a safe, convenient, and economic transportation
system. This is accomplished through development of Transportation System Plans (TSPs) based
on inventories of local, regional and state transportation needs. Goal 12 states that transportation
plans shall:

        consider all modes of transportation, including pedestrian, bicycle, highway, rail,
        mass transit, air, water, and pipeline
        be based upon an inventory of local, regional, and state transportation needs
        consider the differences in social consequences that would result from utilizing
        differing combinations of transportation modes
        avoid principal reliance on any one mode of transportation
        minimize adverse social, economic, and environmental impacts and costs and
        conserve energy
        meet the needs of the transportation disadvantaged
        facilitate the flow of goods and services so as to strengthen the local and regional
        economy
        conform with local and regional comprehensive land use plans
        be developed, adopted, amended and implemented in accordance with the
        standards set out in OAR 660, Division 12

In 1991, the Land Conservation and Development Commission (LCDC), with the concurrence of
ODOT, adopted the Transportation Planning Rule (TPR), OAR 660 Division 12, to implement State
Planning Goal 12, Transportation (amended in May and September 1995, and March 2005). The
TPR requires cities with a population of 2,500 or greater to prepare and adopt a Transportation
System Plan. All counties are also required to prepare and adopt a TSP.

The TPR requires local governments to adopt land use regulations consistent with state and federal
requirements "to protect transportation facilities, corridors, and sites for their identified functions (OAR
660-012-0045(2))."

The applicable portion of the TPR is found in OAR Section 660-12-0045, Implementation of the
Transportation System Plan. In summary, the Transportation Planning Rule requires that local
governments revise their land use regulations to implement the TSP. The following TPR
requirements are paraphrased from Section -0045:




                                                     4
                                                            City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                            TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                          7/13/10

         Amend land use regulations to reflect and implement the Transportation System
         Plan.
         Adopt land use or subdivision ordinance measures, consistent with applicable
         federal and state requirements, to protect transportation facilities, corridors and
         sites for their identified functions, to include the following topics:
         -    access management and control;
         -    protection of public use airports;
         -    coordinated review of land use decisions potentially affecting transportation
              facilities;
         -    conditions to minimize development impacts to transportation facilities;
         -    regulations to provide notice to public agencies providing transportation
              facilities and services of land use applications that potentially affect
              transportation facilities;
         -    regulations assuring that amendments to land use applications, densities, and
              design standards are consistent with the Transportation System Plan.
         Adopt land use or subdivision regulations for urban areas and rural communities to
         provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle circulation and bicycle parking,
         and to ensure that new development provides on-site streets and accessways that
         provide reasonably direct routes for pedestrian and bicycle travel.
         In MPO areas, adopt land use and subdivision regulations to reduce reliance on the
         automobile.
         Identify improvements to facilitate bicycle and pedestrian trips in developed areas.
         Establish street standards that minimize pavement width and total right-of-way.

A review of the St. Helens Community Development Code is included in this memorandum, under
the "Local Plans and Ordinances" subheading. This review highlights requirements within the local
ordinance that comply with -0045 and where there may be deficiencies with regards to TPR
compliance.1

Oregon Transportation Plan (2006)

Originally adopted in 1992, the Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) is a policy document
developed by ODOT in response to federal and state mandates for systematic planning for the
future of Oregon's transportation system. The OTP is intended to meet statutory requirements
(ORS 184.618(1)) to develop a state transportation policy and comprehensive long-range plan for
a multi-modal transportation system that addresses economic efficiency, orderly economic
development, safety, and environmental quality. The 2006 OTP expands on the policy objectives



1
 Draft implementation language will be prepared as part of Task 4: Draft TSP Preparation, which will include
proposed text amendments to the Community Development Code that will address TPR compliance.



                                                        5
                                                              City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                              TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                            7/13/10

of the 1992 plan, with an emphasis on maintaining assets2 in place, optimizing existing system
performance through technology and better system integration, creating sustainable funding, and
investing in strategic capacity enhancements.

The OTP's goals, policies and strategies guide the development of state multimodal, modal/topic3
and facility plans and regional and local transportation system plans. The OTP provides the
framework for prioritizing transportation improvements and funding, but it does not identify specific
projects for development.4 As required by Oregon and federal statutes, the OTP guides
development and investment in the transportation system through:

       · Transportation goals and policies,
       · Transportation investment scenarios and an implementation framework, and
       · Key initiatives to implement the vision and policies.

Goals in the OTP include: Mobility and Accessibility; Management of the System; Economic
Vitality; Sustainability; Safety and Security; Funding the Transportation System; and Coordination,
Communication and Cooperation. Policies and strategies under many of these goals emphasize
increasing coordination and cooperation among federal and state agencies, regional and local
governments and private entities to achieve these goals.

The Implementation Framework section of the OTP describes the implementation process and how
state multimodal, modal/topic plans, regional and local transportation system plans and master plans
will further refine the OTP's broad policies and investment levels. Local transportation system plans
can further OTP implementation by defining standards, instituting performance measures, and
requiring that operational strategies be developed.5

The Implementation section also describes three investment levels, examples of the investment
priorities for each level of investment, and their impacts on the transportation system. These levels
are described as "flat funding" (Level 1), "maintaining and improving existing infrastructure" (Level 2),
and "expanding facilities and services and services" (Level 3). The recommendation in the OTP is for
the State to invest at levels closer to Level 3 "in order to be competitive economically and to have the
transportation infrastructure and services that allow communities to function well."

Finally, a list of "key initiatives" describes the OTP's implementation priorities. The key initiatives are
intended to help frame plan implementation and reflect the directions of the OTP including system
optimization, integration of transportation modes, integration of transportation, land use, the
environment and the economy, and the need to make strategic investments using a sustainable

2
  The OTP defines "asset management" as a "systematic process of maintaining, upgrading and operating physical
assets cost-effectively. It combines engineering principles with sound business practices and economic theory, and it
provides tools to facilitate a more organized, logical approach to decision-making. Asset management provides a
framework for handling both short- and long-range planning."
3
  Modal or topic plans, as developed by ODOT and other state agencies, include plans for aviation,
bicycle and pedestrian facilities, highways, marine ports and waterways, public transportation and rail.
4
  Projects are identified through facility plans and regional and local transportation system plans, and sometimes
through modal plans.
5
  As stated in the Implementation section of the OTP, requirements for regional and local transportation system
plans (TSPs) are found in the Transportation Planning Rule (OAR 660-012). Regional and local TSPs must be
consistent with the state TSP (the OTP), state multimodal, modal/topic and transportation facility plans.



                                                          6
                                                       City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                       TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                     7/13/10

funding structure. The key initiatives envision creating the sustainable funding plan using both
traditional and new revenue sources.

Oregon Highway Plan (1999, last amended 2006)

The Oregon Highway Plan (OHP), an element and modal plan of the state's comprehensive
transportation plan (OTP), guides the planning, operations, and financing of ODOT's Highway
Division. Policies in the OHP emphasize the efficient management of the highway system to
increase safety and to extend highway capacity, partnerships with other agencies and local
governments, and the use of new techniques to improve road safety and capacity. These policies
also link land use and transportation, set standards for highway performance and access
management, and emphasize the relationship between state highways and local road, bicycle,
pedestrian, transit, rail, and air systems.

The Oregon Transportation Commission adopted the Highway Plan on March 18, 1999. In July
2006, ODOT published an update that includes amendments made from November 1999 through
January 2006. The updated St. Helens TSP will need to be consistent with the OHP and the
planning process will review and reference the recent changes to the OHP, where applicable.

The policies found within the OHP that apply to the St. Helens TSP include:

Policy 1A: State Highway Classification System;
Policy 1B: Land Use and Transportation;
Policy 1F: Highway Mobility Standards;
Policy 1G: Major Improvements;
Policy 2B: Off-System Improvements;
Policy 2E: Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS);
Policy 2F: Traffic Safety;
Policy 3A: Classification and Spacing Standards;
Policy 3B: Medians;
Policy 4A: Efficiency of Freight Movement;
Policy 4B: Alternative Passenger Modes;
Policy 4D: Transportation Demand Management; and
Policy 4E: Park-and-Ride Facilities.
Policy 1A: State Highway Classification System. The state highway classification system includes five
classifications: Interstate, Statewide, Regional, District, and Local Interest Roads. In addition, there
are four special purpose categories that overlay the basic classifications: special land use areas,
statewide freight route, scenic byways, and lifeline routes. These special designations supplement
the highway classification system and are used to guide management, needs analysis, and
investment decisions on the highway system.




                                                   7
                                                       City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                       TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                     7/13/10

The Columbia River Highway (US 30) runs north-south through St. Helens, connecting the city with
Portland in the south and Longview Washington and the Coast to the north. Through St. Helens, US
30 is part of the National Highway System (NHS), is a designated Freight Route, and is designated
with a Statewide Level of Importance.

The federal Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 required the establishment of a
National Highway System (NHS) to provide an interconnected system of principal arterial routes that
will serve "interstate and inter-regional travel." ODOT has an obligation to ensure that NHS roadways
in Oregon adequately perform this function of serving a larger geographic area.

Statewide Highways typically provide inter-urban and inter-regional mobility and provide connections
to larger urban areas, ports, and major recreation areas that are not directly served by Interstate
Highways. A secondary function is to provide connections for intra-urban and intra-regional trips. The
management objective is to provide safe and efficient, high-speed, continuous-flow operation. In
constrained and urban areas, interruptions to flow should be minimal.

Policy 1B: Land Use and Transportation. This policy recognizes that state highways serve as the
main streets of many communities and strives to maintain a balance between serving local
communities (accessibility) and the through traveler (mobility). This policy recognizes the role of both
the State and local governments related to the state highway system and calls for a coordinated
approach to land use and transportation planning. Special Transportation Areas (STAs), Urban
Business Areas (UBAs) and Commercial Centers (CCs) are included as action items under this
policy.

Policy 1F: Highway Mobility Standards Access Management Policy. This policy addresses state
highway performance expectations for planning and plan implementation or amendment, as well as
providing guidance for managing access and traffic control systems. For St. Helens, this policy
pertains to U.S. 30. Action 1F.1 states that highway mobility standards apply to all state highway
sections; for areas outside of the Portland Metro area, the maximum volume to capacity ratios for
peak hour operating conditions in Table 6 apply. 1F.5 states that within transportation system plans,
where the volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratio is worse than the identified standards in the OHP and
transportation improvements are not planned, the performance standard for the highway shall be to
improve performance as much as feasible and to avoid further degradation of performance.




                                                   8
                                                         City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                         TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                       7/13/10

Among the TSP Update study intersections, the standards shown in Table 1 apply:

            Table 1             Summary of ODOT Intersection Performance Standards

                                                            Posted Speed          OHP Mobility
                 Intersection         Traffic Control1       Limit (mph)           Standard

           US 30/
                                           Signal                 50                V/C  0.70
           Dear Island Road

           US 30/
                                           TWSC                   40                V/C  0.85
           Pittsburg Road

           US 30/
                                           TWSC                   40                V/C  0.85
           Wyeth Street

           US 30/
                                           Signal                 35                V/C  0.80
           St Helens Road

           US 30/
                                           Signal                 35                V/C  0.80
           Columbia Boulevard

           US 30/
                                           TWSC                   35                V/C  0.90
           Vernonia Road

           US 30/
                                           Signal                 35                V/C  0.80
           Gable Road

           US 30/
                                           TWSC                   45                V/C  0.80
           Milliard Road
             1
             TWSC: Two-way stop-controlled (unsignalized
             V/C = Volume-to-capacity ratio

Policy 1G: Major Improvements. This policy requires maintaining performance and improving safety
by improving efficiency and management before adding capacity.

Policy 2B: Off-System Improvements. This policy recognizes that the state may provide financial
assistance to local jurisdictions to make improvements to local transportation systems if the
improvements would provide a cost-effective means of improving the operations of the state highway
system.

Policy 2E: Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). This policy seeks to improve the safety and
efficiency of transportation facilities, and to generally maximize operations in a cost-effective way.
The policy requires coordination with the Oregon Intelligent Transportation Systems Strategic Plan.

Policy 2F: Traffic Safety. This policy emphasizes the state's efforts to improve safety of all users of
the highway system. Action 2F.4 addresses the development and implementation of the Safety
Management System to target resources to sites with the most significant safety issues.

Policy 3A: Classification and Spacing Standards. This policy addresses the location, spacing, and
type of road and street intersections and approach roads on state highways. It includes standards for
each highway classification. The adopted standards can be found in Appendix C of the Oregon
Highway Plan; generally, the minimum access spacing distance increases as either the highway's
importance or posted speed increases. The access management spacing standards established in




                                                     9
                                                                City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                                TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                              7/13/10

the OHP are implemented by OAR 734, Division 51.6 Table 2 illustrates the unsignalized intersection
access spacing standards as they apply to US 30 within St. Helens.

      Table 2           US 30 Access Spacing Standards for Private and Public Approaches1

                      Posted Speed (miles per hour)             Minimum Space Required (feet)

                                     25                                          520

                                  30 and 35                                      720

                                  40 and 45                                      990

                                     50                                         1,100

                                     55                                         1,320
                  1
                   These access management spacing standards do not apply to approaches in
                  existence prior to April 1, 2000 except as provided in OAR 734-051-0115(1)(c) and 734-
                  051-0125(1)(c).

                  * Measurement of the approach road spacing is from center to center on the same side
                  of the roadway.
Traffic signal spacing standards supersede access management spacing standards for approaches.
For signalized intersections on statewide highways such as US 30, OAR 734-020-470 identifies a
desired minimum spacing of ½ mile (2,640 feet) be maintained between signalized intersections.

Policy 3B: Medians. This policy establishes the state's criteria for the placement of medians. It
includes Action 3B.3 which requires the consideration of non-traversable medians for modernization
of all urban, multi-lane Statewide (National Highway System) Highways. The criteria for consideration
include:
·         Forecasted average daily traffic greater than 28,000 vehicles per day during the 20-year
          planning period;
·         A higher-than-average accident rate;
·         Pedestrian crossing safety issues; and
·         Topographic and alignment issues resulting in inadequate left-turn sight distances.

Policy 4A: Efficiency of Freight Movement. This policy emphasizes the need to maintain and improve
the efficiency of freight movement on the state highway system. U.S. 30 is a designated State
Highway Freight Route.

Policy 4B: Alternative Passenger Modes. This policy encourages the development of alternative
passenger services and systems as part of broader corridor strategies and promotes the
development of alternative passenger transportation services located off the highway system to help
preserve the performance and function of the state highway system.

Policy 4D: Transportation Demand Management. This policy establishes the state's interest in
supporting demand management strategies that reduce peak period single occupant vehicle travel,
thereby improving the flow of traffic on the state highway system.


6
 Oregon Revised Statute (OAR) 734, Division 51, was amended in September 2005 to be consistent with August
2005 OHP revisions to Policy 1B. Specifically, the spacing standards in OAR 734-051 were amended to be
consistent with the OHP tables in Appendix C, Access Management Standards.



                                                           10
                                                        City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                        TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                      7/13/10

Policy 4E: Park and Ride Facilities. This policy seeks to maximize the existing transportation system
and passenger capacity by supporting and developing park-and-ride facilities. The Columbia County
Community-Wide Transit Plan identifies three existing park and ride facilities in St. Helens, two
associated with commercial business parking lots (see Table 6 in the Transit Plan). To improve
access to the new Rainier­St. Helens flex route, the Transit Plan recommendations include a new
park and ride as part of the proposed Deer Island Road Transit Center on Highway 30. The Lower
Columbia River Rail Corridor Study identified the potential for commuter rail operations along the
Lower Columbia River and recommends that local jurisdictions consider optimal locations for possible
future commuter rail platforms, park and rides, and "other supporting services to facilitate multi-modal
choices along the corridor (5.7.4)."

Policy 5A: Environmental Resources. This policy intends to protect the natural and built environment
­ including air quality, fish and wildlife habitat, migration routes, vegetation, and water resources from
impacts from state highways and ODOT facilities. Impacts to identified natural resources must be
avoided or mitigated by any proposed construction or reconstruction projects on state facilities in St.
Helens.

Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan (1995)

The Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan is a modal element of the Oregon Transportation Plan and
provides guidance for planning, design and operation of facilities for bicycle and pedestrian travel.
The plan contains the standards and designs used on state highway projects for these facilities.

The plan includes two parts: the Policy and Action Plan and the Planning, Design, Maintenance, and
Safety part. The policy section provides background information, including relevant state and federal
laws, and contains the goals, actions, and implementation strategies proposed by ODOT to improve
bicycle and pedestrian transportation.

The plan states that bikeway and walkway systems will be established on rural highways by widening
shoulders as part of modernization projects, as well as on many preservation overlays, where
warranted. For urban highways, implementation may take place:

·       As part of modernization projects (bike lanes and sidewalks will be included);
·       As part of preservation projects, where minor upgrades can be made;
·       By restriping roads with bike lanes;
·       With minor betterment projects, such as completing short missing segments of sidewalks;
·       As bikeway or walkway modernization projects;
·       By developers as part of permit conditions, where warranted.

The second part ("Part Two") of the Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan governs the design of
bicycle and pedestrian facilities on state-owned facilities. ODOT is currently updating the design
section of the Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan.7 Many new pedestrian and bicycle treatments
have been developed and incorporated into the update. Once adopted, the updated Oregon Bicycle


7
 A July 2007 public review draft is available via ODOTs website:
http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/HWY/BIKEPED/bp_plan_update.shtml#Backgound_Information




                                                   11
                                                         City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                         TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                       7/13/10

and Pedestrian Plan Design Standards and Guidelines will be referenced where bicycle or pedestrian
facilities are planned as part of improvements to U.S. 30.

Oregon Public Transportation Plan (1997)

The Oregon Public Transportation Plan forms the transit modal plan of the Oregon Transportation
Plan. The vision guiding the Public Transportation Plan is as follows:

    The public transportation plan builds on and begins implementing the OTP's long-range
    vision for public transportation in the State of Oregon. That vision includes:
    ·   A comprehensive, interconnected and dependable public transportation system,
        with stable funding, that provides access and mobility in and between communities
        of Oregon in a convenient, reliable, and safe manner that encourages people to ride
    ·   A public transportation system that provides appropriate service in each area of the
        state, including service in urban areas that is an attractive alternative to the single-
        occupant vehicle, and high-quality, dependable service in suburban, rural, and
        frontier (remote) areas
    ·   A system that enables those who do not drive to meet their daily needs
    ·   A public transportation system that plays a critical role in improving the livability and
        economic prosperity for Oregonians.
The plan contains goals, policies, and strategies relating to the whole of the state's public
transportation system. The plan is intended to provide guidance for ODOT and public transportation
agencies regarding the development of public transportation systems.

Transit issues in St. Helens have recently been examined through the Columbia County Community-
Wide Transit Plan. Proposed policies and projects that result from this TSP update process will be
consistent with the findings in the County's Transit Plan and will be reviewed in consultation with the
Transit District, Columbia County Rider.

Access Management Rule (OAR 734-051)

Oregon Administrative Rule 734-051 defines the State's role in managing access to highway facilities
in order to maintain functional use and safety and to preserve public investment. The provisions in
the OAR apply to U.S. 30, the only roadway under Oregon State jurisdiction within the City of St.
Helens. The access management rules include spacing standards for varying types of state
roadways.8 It also lists criteria for granting right of access and approach locations onto state highway
facilities.

Freight Moves the Oregon Economy (1999)

This report summarizes a variety of information about issues and needs surrounding the transport of
freight by roads, rail lines, waterways, aircraft, and pipelines. The document's stated purpose is to

8
 "Spacing Standards" mean Access Management Spacing Standards as set forth in OAR 734-051-0115 and
specified in Tables 2, 3, and 4, adopted and made a part of Division 51 rules.



                                                    12
                                                       City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                       TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                     7/13/10

demonstrate the importance of freight to the Oregon economy and identify concerns and needs
regarding the maintenance and enhancement of current and future mobility within the state of
Oregon.

The report describes the federal National Highway System (NHS), a classification system that
identifies the most significant highways for moving people and freight. U.S. 30 is part of the NHS and
included in the Oregon Highway Plan's State Highway Freight System. The report describes the
State Highway Freight System as including all of the state's interstate highways and selected other
highways important to moving freight. The importance of freight movement will be a consideration
during the St. Helens TSP update as it pertains to access to U.S. 30 and how the local roadway
system intersects with Portland & Western Railroad rail operations.

State Transportation Improvement Program (2000-present)

The State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) is the programming and funding document
for transportation projects and programs statewide. The projects and programs undergo a selection
process managed by ODOT Regions or ODOT central offices. The document covers a period of four
years and is updated every two years.

The 2008-2001 STIP did not identify any improvement projects in the City of St. Helens. The Draft
2010-2013 STIP has been released for public review and is tentatively expected to be approved in
October 2010. The Draft 2010-2013 STIP includes two projects in St. Helens: a pavement
preservation project on Columbia Boulevard between US 30 and 1st Street and funding for the new
transit center to be located on Deer Island Road. The final project list and details are subject to the
STIP adoption process.

Regional Plans
Lower Columbia River Rail Corridor Study (2009)

The Lower Columbia River Rail Corridor Study (study) focuses on rail safety implications of longer,
more frequent freight trains ("unit trains") serving local industry in a transportation corridor between
Portland and Astoria that includes the Portland & Western Railroad's Portland-Astoria Line and U.S.
30. The study covers the portion of the corridor from the Columbia/Multnomah county boundary on
the south (or east) and Tongue Point, in Clatsop County. The study explored the impacts of
increased rail use and changes in what is hauled along the corridor, including severing communities
from business, residential, school, and emergency and law enforcement access; increased hazards
from accidents; required sounding of train horns; and disruptions in school bus routes and transit
routes.

Chapter 1 of the study recognizes the challenges for St. Helens in having both a highway and a
railway bisect the community and how existing problems will be exacerbated by expected growth
over the coming decades. Chapter 2 explores existing conditions in the corridor and makes reference
to earlier planning work. Relevant to planning in St. Helens, the Transit Feasibility Study from the
U.S. 30 Corridor Plan (1996) includes population projections that indicated commuter service would
be an effective way of addressing work-related travel. The study notes that Columbia County has
initiated commuter express service (CC Rider) to begin to address new commuter travel needs.



                                                  13
                                                         City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                         TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                       7/13/10

Existing rail conditions include the St. Helens Yard, a rail yard with multiple tracks for switching cars
that create the potential for conflict between trains and automobiles, pedestrian, and bicycles
(2.3.4.2.). The yard is an important facility for local rail-served business, but it also creates a mobility
barrier within the community for motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic. The yard is not fenced and,
because of safety risks and liability issues, both the community and the railroad are concerned about
trespassing (p. 38).

Another existing condition is the location of St. Helens High School on Gable Road, on the opposite
side of U.S. 30 from the railroad. According to the study, "the railroad has related some close calls
with children on the sidewalk as they cross the tracks" (2.3.4.3). Generally, the railroad does not
have a problem with the public crossings in St. Helens with regard to vehicle traffic. The one
exception is a problem with storage for cars turning left from US 30, where vehicles are stopped at
the railroad crossing protection gates and the crossing can hold only one or two vehicles (2.3.4.4.).

Chapter 3, Future Rail & Roadway Conditions, documents that St. Helens has four of the top ten
public crossings in the active portion of the corridor, three of which experience the greatest daily
delay (in vehicle hours per day) due to local and unit trains blocking crossings - Gable Road, St.
Helens Street, and Columbia Blvd. Dear Island Road is sixth on this list. (See Section 3.3.)

Based on existing and expected future conditions, the study makes recommendations for
improvements in the corridor in Chapter 5, including estimated costs for implementation (see Table
5.7-1: LCRRC Recommended Projects and Conceptual Cost Estimates). Solutions that impact St.
Helens include fencing the St. Helens Rail Yard along U.S. 30 and relocating storage activities
(5.3.4); a possible grade-separated pedestrian bridge at Gable Road (5.4.1.2); potential closure of
the Wyeth Road crossing (5.4.2.2); and an eventual grade separation at Pittsburg Road/West Road,
between Wyeth Street and Deer Island Road (5.7.2).

Other recommendations that relate to transportation planning in St. Helens include developing
alternate local routes that parallel U.S. 30 (5.7.3) and transit planning in the corridor. Along with
Scappoose, St. Helens is singled out as being particularly impacted by the lack of parallel
alternatives, forcing local traffic to the highway to make short local trips and resulting in peak hour
congestion and turn-lane storage problems on U.S. 30. The study states that St. Helens "may wish
to develop local traffic plans that address the problem" and notes that major impediments to
developing alternate routes include the disruption to local business and established circulation
patterns and right-of-way acquisition costs. Regarding transit planning, the study notes that, at the
time of its adoption, Columbia County was in the final phases of developing the Community-Wide
Transit Plan. The study recommends that removal of abandoned tracks and repaving should occur
prior to implementing the County's plans to develop the Stimson Lumber mill site (Deer Island Road)
as a transit hub. The study also recommends that local jurisdictions consider optimal locations for
possible future commuter rail platforms, park and rides, and "other supporting services to facilitate
multi-modal choices along the corridor (5.7.4)."




                                                    14
                                                      City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                      TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                    7/13/10

Columbia County Community-Wide Transit Plan and US 30 Transit Access Plan
(2009)

Columbia County initiated the Community wide Transit Plan Update (Plan) in 2008 to address
existing and future transit needs of the community. The Plan provides direction to the County for
planning and implementing transit services, operations, facilities, and funding within a 10 year
horizon. The Plan also incorporates the US 30 Transit Access Plan for transit facility improvements
along the US 30 transit corridor.

The CCCTP recommendations include a number of public transit improvements that will benefit the
citizens of St. Helens, including new Vernonia flex-route service and the Deer Island Road Transit
Center proposed to be located near Highway 30 within the city limits. With the notable exception of
the proposed redevelopment of the Stimson Site for the new transit center, recommended physical
improvements are confined to existing transit stops and include proposed street, parking, and
signage improvements.

The Plan includes an Implementation Plan that includes policy and code amendments specific to St.
Helens (Section 9). The Implementation Plan recommends that participating jurisdictions consider
updating background text in the transportation sections of the locally adopted comprehensive plan or
transportation system plan (TSP) to acknowledge Columbia County's role as a transit provider and
the recent county-wide planning effort to update transit facilities and service. Recommended sample
language is as follows:

        Transit service to communities in Columbia County is provided by Columbia County
       Rider, a service of the Columbia County Transit Division. Columbia County Rider
       provides fixed-route bus, flex-route bus, and dial-a-ride transit service. In 2004,
       Columbia County adopted the Countywide Community Transit Plan, which
       established a set of recommendations to provide this transit service within the county.
       Recommendations included developing a governance structure to provide public
       oversight and maximize available resources and ways to increase and improve
       service. In 2009, Columbia County adopted an updated transit plan, the Columbia
       County Community-wide Transit Plan (CCCTP), which provides direction for planning
       and implementation over a 10-year planning horizon for transit services, operations,
       facilities, funding, and promotion and information services. The CCCTP was
       developed in conjunction with the findings and recommendations of the US 30 Transit
       Access Plan, which will guide transit facility access, siting, and design along US 30
       through Columbia County, including within the cities of Clatskanie, Rainier, Prescott,
       Columbia City, St. Helens and Scappoose.

The Implementation Plan further recommends that Plan recommendations regarding physical
improvements, such as new bus stops, park and ride facilities, or transit centers along US 30, should
be added to the transportation project list of each jurisdiction. Transportation improvements
recommended for inclusion in the St. Helens' TSP are found below in Table 3 and in Table 1, US 30
Transit Access Plan Projects, in the Plan.




                                                 15
                                                        City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                        TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                      7/13/10

                   Table 3         US 30 Transit Access Plan Projects in St. Helens

                                                                                         Cost
              Location                    Project                  Time Frame          Estimate
                               Bus shelter and associated
         Safeway/Rite-aid                                           05 years            $8,500
                               amenities
                               Sidewalk and curb ramp
         Safeway/Riteaid       construction/repairs (non-           05 years           $36,000
                               transit need)
                               Sidewalk and curb ramp
         Ace Hardware                                               05 years           $67,000
                               construction/repairs
                               Construct transit center and
                               park-and-ride, including
         Stimson Site                                               05 years          $2,344,800
                               frontage improvements, and
                               intersection improvements
Proposed policy recommendations for St. Helens are intended to generally support public transit in
the County and to specifically address the Plan's recommendation based on the Plan's
recommendation to locate the proposed Deer Island Road Transit Center on Highway 30 in St.
Helens. The following policy statements are recommended for inclusion in the TSP:

        (n) Support public transit planning in Columbia County. Transit improvements within
            city limits shall be guided by the findings and recommendations of the Columbia
            County Community-wide Transit Plan, as adopted by Columbia County.

       (o) Work in partnership with the County in planning for public transit facilities located
           within city limits and, when feasible, facilitate the citing and operation of such
           facilities.

The Implementation Plan also includes some proposed changes to the city's Community
Development Code to strengthen requirements pertaining to transit (p. 9-30). Recommendations
include adding language to ensure coordination with the transit provider regarding notification of land
use proposals and decisions (17.24.130). A transit element under the Public Use section is
recommended for inclusion in Chapter 17.152, Street and Utility Improvement Standards to facilitate
public transit usage in the community. Proposed code language related to pedestrian access to
transit stops is also recommended (17.152.070).

Columbia County Rural Transportation System Plan (1998)

The Columbia County Rural Transportation System Plan provides for transportation development
in the rural areas of the County. While all modes of transportation are considered, the stated focus
of project improvements is on preservation and reconstruction of the primary County roads that
serve connections among the cities and rural communities. The TSP also assigns high priority to
intersection improvements that improve safety at high accident locations, increase the efficiency of
traffic flow, and improve conditions for trucks making turning movements.

Much of the background information in the county's TSP (Chapter 1) is out of date. For example,
U.S. 30 was being expanded to a five-lane highway through St. Helens at the time the TSP was




                                                   16
                                                     City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                     TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                   7/13/10

adopted. Echoing the city's TSP, the county's TSP also identifies the need for an alternative route
to U.S. Highway between Pittsburg Road in St. Helens and Scappoose-Vernonia Road.

The Goals and Policies in Chapter 1 are the policy framework for transportation planning in the
county. There are no policies that directly address coordination with the City of St. Helens. The
following county policies are consistent with, or support, transportation planning in St. Helens:

   Policies:
   1. The County shall undertake the development of a detailed transportation plan that
       should contain the following minimum elements:
       C. The location of future arterial streets inside the urban growth boundaries.

   4. The County will work with the State Highway Department to limit the number of
      access points onto arterial roads. Direct access to U.S. Highway 30 will be limited
      as much as is practical in order to reduce the potential for congestion and
      conflicting traffic patterns which would disrupt the flow of traffic.

   6. The County will support reducing the number of rail crossings.

   7. The County will work with the Port of St. Helens to encourage the establishment
      and use of dock facilities.

Chapter 4 of this document is the TSP, which includes the Road Plan (4.1), Transit Plan (4.2),
Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan (4.3), and Air/Water/Rail/Pipeline Modes (4.5). Again, information
relevant to transportation planning in St. Helens is out of date, but ultimately the recommendations
that result from the St. Helens TSP update will need to be consistent with the Rural TSP. The
updated St. Helens TSP may include recommendations to the county for updates to the Rural TSP.


LOCAL PLANS AND ORDINANCES
St. Helens Comprehensive Plan

This city's Comprehensive Plan was first developed in 1978 in response to Oregon Revised Statute
197 and Senate Bill 100 and was acknowledged by the Department of Land Conservation and
Development in 1984. Last updated in 2006, the following Comprehensive Plan transportation
policies are more current than those in the city's TSP's.

   19.08.040 Transportation goals and policies.
    (2) Goals.
       (a) To develop and maintain methods for moving people and goods which are:
           (i) Responsive to the needs and preferences of individuals, business and
                 industry;
           (ii) Suitably integrated into the fabric of the urban communities; and
           (iii) Safe, rapid, economical and convenient to use.
       (b) To remove existing congestion and prevent future congestion so that
           accidents and travel times would both be reduced.



                                                17
                                                         City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                         TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                       7/13/10

        (c) To create relatively traffic-free residential areas.
        (d) To strengthen the economy by facilitating the means for transporting industrial
             goods.
        (e) To maintain a road network that is an asset to existing commercial areas.
        (f) To provide a more reliable basis for planning new public and private
             developments whose location depends upon transportation.
        (g) To cooperate closely with the county and state on transportation matters.
        (h) To assure that roads have the capacity for expansion and extension to meet
             future demands.
             (i) To ensure future arterial rights-of-way are not encroached upon.
             (j) To encourage energy-conserving modes of transit.
             (k) To increase appropriate walking and bicycling opportunities.
    (3) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:
        (a) Require all newly established streets and highways are of proper width,
             alignment, design and construction and are in conformance with the
             development standards adopted by the city.
        (b) Review diligently all subdivision plats and road dedications to ensure the
             establishment of a safe and efficient road system.
        (c) Support and adopt by reference road projects listed in the Six-Year Highway
             Improvement Program; specifically, work towards attaining left turn lanes and
             traffic lights on Highway 30.
        (d) Control or eliminate traffic hazards along road margins through building
             setbacks, dedications or regulation of access at the time of subdivision, zone
             change or construction.
        (e) Regulate signs and sign lighting to avoid distractions for motorists.
        (f) Work with the railroad owners and operators to improve the safety at railroad
             crossings.
        (g) Plan and develop street routes to alleviate Highway 30's traffic load.
        (h) Regulate or prevent development within areas required for future arterials or
             widening of rights-of-way.
        (i) Follow good access management techniques on all roadway systems within
             the city.
        (j) Develop a plan for walking trails.
        (k) Maintain, implement, and update the bikeway plan.
        (l) Work with Columbia County and other agencies in their efforts to meet the
             needs of the transportationally disadvantaged in the community.
        (m) Encourage increased opportunities for public local and regional transit
             facilities.

Upon adoption, the updated TSP policies will replace the Transportation element of the City's
Comprehensive Plan. The revised goals and policies in the TSP will update the City's adopted long-
range vision for transportation planning.

St. Helens Transportation System Plan (1997)

The current TSP project will update the 1997 St. Helens Transportation System Plan (TSP).
The stated purpose of the 1997 TSP is to serve as a guide for the management of existing
transportation facilities and for the design and implementation of future transportation facilities. It is a


                                                    18
                                                        City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                        TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                      7/13/10

multi-modal transportation plan and establishes goals and policies to guide transportation planning in
the City. The TSP documents existing conditions and estimates transportation needs based on traffic
forecasts. Based on these needs, the TSP presents an implementation plan that includes
recommended projects by mode and a financing plan (Chapter 8).

Chapter 7 of the document includes the plans for each transportation mode (Street System,
Pedestrian System, Bicycle Plan, Public Transportation Plan, and Air/Rail/Pipeline Plan). The Street
System Plan includes new roadways and improvements to the city's existing streets (Table 7.1 and
7.2), as well as recommended new traffic signals. The TSP includes a description of the functional
classification system and categorizes each road within the city (p. 7.7, p. 7.9); Recommended Street
Design Standards for each classification are illustrated in Figure 7.3.

The goal of the Pedestrian Plan is to provide a connected sidewalk system that enhances safety for
the pedestrian and provides opportunities to walk, rather than drive. Table 7.3 in the TSP lists the
recommended improvements to the pedestrian network and Figure 7.5 shows the recommended
pedestrian network. The Pedestrian Plan states that sidewalks will also be installed as part of all new
arterial and collector street projects, as well as major reconstruction projects. In residentially zoned
areas, sidewalks are required to be 5 feet in width; new sidewalks in commercial and industrial areas
and along arterial streets must be at least 6 feet wide. Policies in the Pedestrian Plan state that the
City should require sidewalks on all new roadway and reconstruction projects and that sidewalks
provided as part of development projects should be connected to the pedestrian system. The
Pedestrian Plan also discusses street crossing opportunities and safety for pedestrians. Locations for
crosswalk improvements are listed on p. 7-17.

The Bicycle Plan includes the objectives of the 1988 Bikeway Master Plan and, based on these
objectives, presents the recommended Bicycle Plan in Figure 7.6. Table 7.4 lists the recommended
bicycle improvements and cost estimates needed to implement the Bicycle Plan. The stated main
objective of the Bicycle Plan is "to provide bicycle routes that enable safe and efficient travel for both
the everyday bicycle commuter as well as the occasional recreational rider." The Bicycle Plan
recommends striped lanes on many, but not all, of the city's arterials and collectors. Local streets
have been identified as the bicycle route where it has been determined that they provide good
parallel facilities. As with the Pedestrian Plan, the Bicycle Plan also has been designed to connect
major destinations to residential neighborhoods. The Bicycle Plan was also intended to provide
additional off-street, multi-use paths for recreational use. This plan notes that many of the desired
improvements have already been implemented on the east side of St. Helens, but that the west side
has a very limited bicycle network. The standards and policies section of this plan (p. 7-18)
emphasizes the need for a routine maintenance program and law enforcement policies to increase
safety by ensuring that both motorists and cyclists follow traffic requirements.

The background information in the Public Transportation Plan is based on a 1996 feasibility study
and is out of date. The information and analysis in the 2009 Columbia County Community-Wide
Transit Plan (see review in this memorandum) will inform the TSP update to a greater extent than the
recommendations of the 1997 TSP. The TSP update planning process also will review the sections
of the adopted TSP that cover Air, Rail and Pipeline transportation. Currently, the TSP catalogues
existing facilities in each of these modes and states the city's recognition of their importance and
support of various improvements.




                                                   19
                                                       City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                       TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                     7/13/10



St. Helens Bikeway Master Plan (1988)

The Bikeway Master Plan reexamines the city's priorities for providing bicycle facilities, as they were
identified in a 1979 City Council proposal, and updates the project list. The Bikeway Master Plan
also includes the following goals and objectives:

       Goal:

       Provide a safe, convenient, useful and attractive system of bicycle paths and routes
       through the City and Urban Growth Area which will accommodate commuters,
       tourists and recreational users.

       Objectives:

       1.      Complete the bikeways in the old town area which will tie in with the existing
               routes in the downtown area.

       2.      Provide a safe system of bikeways which will be a show case for St. Helens.

       3.      Provide a system of bikeways which will link major community centers (i.e.
               Eisenschmidt Pool, Junior High School, McCormick Park) with residential
               areas.

       4.      Provide bikeways in the residential area west of US Hwy 30 that will provide
               access to schools and parks on the east side of town and eventually tie in
               with existing routes on the east side of US Hwy 30.

       5.      Provide for maintenance of bicycle facilities.

       6.      Provide adequate areas for parking bicycles for those uses that attract
               bicycles (e.g. parks).

       7.      Minimize unsafe conflicts between bicycles, pedestrians and motorized traffic.

City of St. Helens Public Facilities Plan (1999)

The City's Public Facilities Plan (PFP) includes a transportation chapter that describes the overall
transportation system, lists the roadways in the city according to functional classification, and
summarizes the pedestrian system, bikeway system, and the public transportation plan. This
information is taken from, and is largely identical to the information found in the 1997 TSP.

Under "Future Needs," the PFP states that connecting Achilles Road and Pittsburg Road will be vital
to carry north-south traffic on the west side of town and reducing reliance on U.S. 30. Adding
capacity on designated arterials and bridges is also identified as a need. The Deficiencies and Needs
section identifies existing funding mechanisms (systems development charge for new street
improvements and local improvement district for maintenance), but concludes that an "alternative
method of financing the upgrading of arterial streets with in the City's UGB is necessary in order for



                                                  20
                                                        City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                        TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                      7/13/10

St. Helens to continue to adequately move traffic (p.19)." The list of transportation improvement
priorities, costs, and timing is PFP Appendix D.



City of St. Helens Economic Opportunity Analysis (2008)

The purpose of the Economic Opportunity Analysis (EOA) is to comply with Oregon Statewide
Planning Goal 9 (Economic Development), including quantifying employment projections and land
needs. The EOA documents that St. Helens has increasingly become a bedroom community for the
greater Portland area over past 15 years and that an important community goal is to broaden the
city's employment (and fiscal) base. The Economic Overview section provides recent population
projections, a breakout of employment by sector, and an opportunities and constraints analysis
regarding job creation.

The EOA does not contain recommendations for transportation system improvements. However,
many of the economic goals and policies in the EOA - such as making waterfront development a
priority, allocating adequate amounts of land for economic growth, and developing local tourist and
recreation sectors ­ have implications for transportation system planning in the community. Notably,
the EOA concludes that the city has a surplus of industrial land over the 20-year planning horizons
and, therefore, no UGB expansion is necessary to accommodate the city's employment needs.
However, the EOA also documents a shortage of commercial land and recommends that the city
should "adjust its zoning to transfer some industrial lands to commercial lands to meet the 20 year
needs for more commercial lands (p. 21, ORD 3101 ­ Attachment A)

St. Helens Community Development Code

The St. Helens Community Development Code (CDC) is Title 17 of the city's Municipal Code.
Development codes implement the land use plan established in jurisdictions' Comprehensive Plans.
Chapter 17.32 Zones and Uses in the CDC establishes the zoning in the City, the uses permitted
under each zoning (land use) category, and the regulations that apply in each zone.

The CDC allows "minor public facilities" outright in all zone districts, with the exception of the R10 and
R7, which are the City's low-density residential zones, and the Olde Towne zone, a mixed-use zone
in the historic downtown. The definition of minor public facilities includes street improvements within
existing development including sidewalks, curbs, gutters, catch basins, paving, signs and traffic
control devices and street lights and transit improvements, such as shelters or pedestrian and bicycle
safety improvements, located within public right-of-way or on public property (17.16.010 General and
Land Use Definitions). A major public facility is defined as "any public service improvement or
structure developed by or for a public agency that is not defined as a minor public facility." Major
public facilities are a conditional use in all the city zone districts. The Planning Commission has
decision-making authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny conditional uses permits.
Planning Commission approval is based on how well the proposal meets the criteria in Chapter
17.100, Conditional Use.

The following sections of the CDC contain provisions that regulate transportation facilities and
improvements in the city:



                                                   21
                                                         City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                         TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                       7/13/10

      ·   Chapter 17.76 Visual Clearance Areas
      ·   Chapter 17.80 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
      ·   Chapter 17.84 Access, Egress, and Circulation
      ·   Chapter 17.136 Land Division ­ Subdivision
      ·   Chapter 17.148 Planned Development
      ·   Chapter 17.152 Street and Utility Improvement Standards

Chapter 17.76 Visual Clearance Areas requires that proper sight distances be maintained on the
corners of all property adjacent to the intersection of two streets, a street and a railroad, or a driveway
providing access to a public or private street in order to reduce the hazard from vehicular turning
movements.

Chapter 17.80 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements addresses parking space
dimensions, bicycle parking standards (17.80.020.15), parking structure design standards, and
minimum and maximum off-street parking requirements. The code allows for the conversion of up to
10 percent of existing required parking spaces to accommodate transit supportive facilities
(17.80.030.(3)).

Provisions in Chapter 17.84 Access, Egress, and Circulation, address joint access, public street
access, required walkway location, and inadequate or hazardous access. Tables in this chapter
provided for the vehicular access and egress requirements for residential, commercial, and industrial
uses; the requirements address the minimum number of driveways, minimum access width, and
minimum pavement width per number of units for residential uses and number of required parking
spaces for non-residential uses.

Section 17.84.050 requires commercial, institutional, and industrial uses to have walkways
connecting ground floor entrances to streets and providing safe access to other uses within
developments and between developments. This section also requires attached housing and multi-
unit developments to have walkways connecting each residential dwelling to vehicular parking areas
and common open space and recreation facilities. The CDC does not, however, include
requirements that new development provide for transit facilities or provide pedestrian access to
existing and planned transit stops.

In Chapter 17.136 Land Division ­ Subdivision, approval criteria for land divisions require that the
proposed preliminary plat complies with the city's comprehensive plan and that proposed streets
continue the pattern approved for the streets on adjoining property (17.136.060). Final plat approval
criteria for subdivisions require that roads for private use shown on the preliminary plat be approved
by the city and that roads for public use be dedicated to the city (17.136.150). Approval criteria in
Chapter 17.148 Planned Development, require that subdivision standards are met, as well as the
standards in Chapter 17.84, Access, Egress, and Circulation (see below).

Chapter 17.152 Street and Utility Improvement Standards regulates a number of transportation
facilities and related topics. It establishes block design and size requirements and includes
standards for sidewalks (17.152.060) and bikeways (17.152.110). Sidewalk regulations include
requiring they be constructed on both sides of streets (except for industrial uses, where only one side
is required) but sidewalk width is not specified. Developments adjoining proposed bikeways
identified on the adopted pedestrian/bikeway plan must dedicate easements or rights-of-way; permits
for planned unit developments, conditional use permits, subdivisions, and "other developments which



                                                    22
                                                             City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
                                                                             TM #1 Background Document Review
                                                                                                           7/13/10

will principally benefit from such bikeways" will be conditioned to include the cost or construction of
bikeway improvements. Bikeway widths are required to be at least five feet per bicycle travel lane;
bikeways separated from the road must be at least eight feet wide.

Section 17.152.030 contains the city's street standards. Minimum right-of-way and street widths are
established for minor arterials, collectors, local streets (residential and business/industrial), residential
access roads (through streets and cul-de-sacs), and alleys (residential and business/industrial). The
table in Figure 9 presents the minimum widths for right-of-way and roadway (pavement), as well as
the number of lanes, according to functional classification. Cross-section diagrams are not included
in the CDC. Consistent with the Transportation Planning Rule and the goal to minimize pavement
width (660-12-0045(7), the CDC allows for reduced pavement and right-of-way widths for local
residential streets that carry less than 500 ADT.9

For street alignment and connections, all local and collector streets that abut a development site must
be extended within the site; proposed street or street extensions must be located to provide direct
access to existing or planned transit stops and other neighborhood activity centers, such as schools,
shopping areas and parks; and all developments should provide an internal network of connecting
streets that minimizes travel distances (17.152.030(6)). Proposed street or street extensions must be
located to provide direct access to existing or planned transit stops (17.152.030.7.c).

The CDC does not contain a requirement for providing a transportation impact analysis or study as
part of a development proposal or comprehensive plan or zone change request. The CDC also does
not currently include language addressing TPR Section -0060 10

St. Helens Water, Wastewater, Stormwater, Transportation, and Parks System
Development Charge Study Final Report (2008)

The Water, Wastewater, Stormwater, Transportation, and Parks System Development Charge Study
Final Report ("SDC Study") was the culmination of a process to update the system development
charges (SDCs) for these city services to ensure that charges were equitable, adequate, and
defensible and that they would generate adequate funding to meet the infrastructure needs of growth
"without unduly burdening existing residents and business owners."

The transportation SDC analysis begins on page 14 of the SDC Study. The city's existing
transportation SDCs are based on projected trip generation by land use and the SDC Study. The
SDC Study estimates the number of adjusted average daily trips (ADTs) to be generated by growth
through 2025 and explains the methodology employed. The recommended transportation SDC is
$402 per average daily trip; SDCs for a comprehensive list of land uses are provided in a table on
page 16 of the SDC Study. Ultimately, transportation SDC fees will likely need to be adjusted to
reflect the TSP update and new transportation-related capital improvement projects recommended
as part of this process.



9
 Requirements are 40 ­ 46 for right of way width and 24 ­ 28 for roadway width.
10
  Section -0060 was amended in March 2005 and includes provisions for local jurisdictions on how to make a
determination whether or not an amendment to the City's adopted plans or land use regulations has a significant
affect on a transportation facility.



                                                        23
City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update, Background Document Review         APPENDIX A



TPR Requirement (OAR Section 660-12-0020)
(1) A TSP shall establish a coordinated network of transportation facilities adequate to serve state, regional
and local transportation needs.
(2) The TSP shall include the following elements:
    (a) A determination of transportation needs as provided in OAR 660-012-0030;
    (b) A road plan for a system of arterials and collectors and standards for the layout of local streets and
    other important non-collector street connections. Functional classifications of roads in regional and
    local TSPs shall be consistent with functional classifications of roads in state and regional TSPs and
    shall provide for continuity between adjacent jurisdictions. The standards for the layout of local streets
    shall provide for safe and convenient bike and pedestrian circulation necessary to carry out OAR 660-
    012-0045(3)(b). New connections to arterials and state highways shall be consistent with designated
    access management categories. The intent of this requirement is to provide guidance on the spacing of
    future extensions and connections along existing and future streets which are needed to provide
    reasonably direct routes for bicycle and pedestrian travel. The standards for the layout of local streets
    shall address:
        (A) Extensions of existing streets;
        (B) Connections to existing or planned streets, including arterials and collectors; and
        (C) Connections to neighborhood destinations.
    (c) A public transportation plan which:
        (A) Describes public transportation services for the transportation disadvantaged and identifies
           service inadequacies;
        (B) Describes intercity bus and passenger rail service and identifies the location of terminals;
        (C) For areas within an urban growth boundary which have public transit service, identifies
            existing and planned transit trunk routes, exclusive transit ways, terminals and major transfer
            stations, major transit stops, and park-and-ride stations. Designation of stop or station
            locations may allow for minor adjustments in the location of stops to provide for efficient
            transit or traffic operation or to provide convenient pedestrian access to adjacent or nearby
            uses.
        (D) For areas within an urban area containing a population greater than 25,000 persons, not
            currently served by transit, evaluates the feasibility of developing a public transit system at
            buildout. Where a transit system is determined to be feasible, the plan shall meet the
            requirements of paragraph (2)(c)(C) of this rule.
    (d) A bicycle and pedestrian plan for a network of bicycle and pedestrian routes throughout the
        planning area. The network and list of facility improvements shall be consistent with the
        requirements of ORS 366.514;
    (e) An air, rail, water and pipeline transportation plan which identifies where public use airports,
       mainline and branchline railroads and railroad facilities, port facilities, and major regional pipelines
       and terminals are located or planned within the planning area. For airports, the planning area shall
       include all areas within airport imaginary surfaces and other areas covered by state or federal
       regulations;
TPR Requirement (OAR Section 660-12-0020)
    (f) For areas within an urban area containing a population greater than 25,000 persons a plan for
       transportation system management and demand management;
    (g) A parking plan in MPO areas as provided in OAR 660-012-0045(5)(c);
    (h) Policies and land use regulations for implementing the TSP as provided in OAR 660-012-0045;
    (i) For areas within an urban growth boundary containing a population greater than 2,500 persons, a
        transportation financing program as provided in OAR 660-012-0040.
(3) Each element identified in subsections (2)(b)­(d) of this rule shall contain:
    (a) An inventory and general assessment of existing and committed transportation facilities and
       services by function, type, capacity and condition:
       (A) The transportation capacity analysis shall include information on:
           (i) The capacities of existing and committed facilities;
           (ii) The degree to which those capacities have been reached or surpassed on existing facilities;
               and
           (iii) The assumptions upon which these capacities are based.
       (B) For state and regional facilities, the transportation capacity analysis shall be consistent with
           standards of facility performance considered acceptable by the affected state or regional
           transportation agency;
       (C) The transportation facility condition analysis shall describe the general physical and operational
          condition of each transportation facility (e.g., very good, good, fair, poor, very poor).
   (b) A system of planned transportation facilities, services and major improvements. The system shall
      include a description of the type or functional classification of planned facilities and services and
      their planned capacities and levels of service;
   (c) A description of the location of planned facilities, services and major improvements, establishing
      the general corridor within which the facilities, services or improvements may be sited. This shall
      include a map showing the general location of proposed transportation improvements, a description
      of facility parameters such as minimum and maximum road right-of-way width and the number and
      size of lanes, and any other additional description that is appropriate;
   (d) Identification of the provider of each transportation facility or service.




                                                      A-2
Appendix 2B Technical Memorandum #2:
              Existing Traffic Conditions
                                                          


TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM
City of St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update
Date:        January 25, 2011                                                                
To:          Jacob Graichen, City of St. Helens  
             Seth Brumley, ODOT  
From:        Chris Brehmer, P.E., Kittelson & Associates, Inc. 
             Matt Bell, Kittelson & Associates, Inc. 
Project:     St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update 
Subject:     Final Chapter 3: Existing Conditions 
Cc:          Technical Advisory Committee and Citizens Advisory Committee 
 


Introduction
During  the  past  fifteen  years,  the  city  of  St.  Helens  has  experienced  a  population  growth  of  more 
than  50  percent.  At  the  same  time,  the  demand  for  through  traffic  on  Columbia  River  Highway 
(US  30)  and  freight  rail  traffic  along  the  Portland  and  Western  rail  line  has  risen  steadily.  As  a 
result, the demand for multimodal transportation facilities within St. Helens has increased. 

The  longterm  vision  for  the  city's  transportation  system  is  currently  reflected  in  the  1997 
Transportation  System  Plan  (TSP    Reference  1).  The  TSP  was  adopted  in  1997  and  reflects  an 
existing  conditions  analysis  consistent  with  year  1995  travel  demands  and  patterns.  With  the 
growth  experienced,  it  is  now  time  to  update  the  1997  TSP  to  ensure  that  the  multimodal  system 
can  meet  the  needs  of  the  city  and  the  surrounding  communities  for  the  next  twenty  years.  As 
such,  this  memorandum  documents  the  existing  conditions  analysis  for  the  TSP  Update.  Major 
topics presented include: 

      ·   Transportation System Inventory  
             o   Street system 
             o   Pedestrian system 
             o   Bicycle system 
             o   Public transportation system 
             o   Rail system 
             o   Air, pipeline, and water service 
      ·   Key Intersection Operations 
             o   Mobility standards 
             o   Intersection performance 
      ·   Safety Analysis 

FILENAME: H:\PROJFILE\10639 - ST HELENS TSP UPDATE\REPORT\TSP CHAPTER
3\FINAL_TO_TSP\10639_CHPT3_FINAL.DOC
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                    Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                          Page 2


             o       US 30 Corridor 
             o       Study intersections 
    ·    Financing Plan 
In  addition  to  identifying  and  assessing  the  available  transportation  infrastructure,  existing 
system  deficiencies  are  highlighted.  Future  TSP  Update  tasks  will  identify  potential 
transportation options. 


STUDY AREA
Figure  31  shows  a  street  map  of  St.  Helens,  with  the  city  limits  and  urban  growth  boundary 
(UGB) indicated. The study area for the TSP Update consists of the area within the UGB. Based on 
the  requirements  of  the  Transportation  Planning  Rule  (TPR),  the  focus  of  the  existing  conditions 
analysis  is  on  significant  roadways  (arterials  and  collectors)  and  intersections  of  these  streets  as 
well  as  pedestrian  and  bicycle  facilities,  public  transportation,  and  other  transport  facilities  and 
services, including rail service, air service, pipelines and water service. 


Transportation System Inventory
This  section  describes  the  current  performance  and  operational  deficiencies  of  the  city's 
transportation system, covering the automobile, pedestrian, bicycle, public transportation, freight, 
air, marine, and pipeline/transmission transportation modes. 


STREET SYSTEM
Highways  and  streets  are  the  primary  means  of  mobility  for  St.  Helens'  citizens,  serving  the 
majority of trips over multiple modes. Pedestrians, bicyclists, public transportation, and motorists 
all utilize public roads for the majority of their trips.  


Jurisdiction
Public  roads  within  the  study  area  are  operated  and  maintained  by  three  separate  jurisdictions: 
the  City  of  St.  Helens, Columbia County, and the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT). 
Each jurisdiction is responsible for the following: 

    ·    Determining the road's functional classification; 
    ·    Defining the roadway's major design and multimodal features; 
    ·    Maintenance; and, 
    ·    Approving construction and access permits. 




City of St. Helens                                                                                     Chapter 3
                                                          St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   January 2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FRONTAGE ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lake




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Col
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N 6T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EE T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IS      LA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              bia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RO
                                                                                                                                                ROAD                                                                                                                                                                                              AD
                                                                                                                                         HANKEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     REE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               T               ST R                                                ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WES                                                              TRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Isla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WYE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N 16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S 7TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PITTSBURG ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N 11TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              YE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S 1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TH
                                                                                                                                                                                             NV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ET
                                                                                                                                                                                               ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N 15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S 4T
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RE E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                      NIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                                  PITTSB




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LE
                                                                                                                         UR     G ROAD                                                                                                                                      ST. HE




                                                                                                                                                                                                        RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NS ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               REET




                                                                                                                                                                                                            AD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S 8T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COLUMBIA                   BLV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S 15



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LEV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AY
                                                                                                                 SYKES ROAD                                                                                       BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EET
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         T
                                                                                                                                                                                                 L UM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TH S



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TR E



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ET
                                                                                                                                                                                               CO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MATZEN STR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ILT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TR E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                 FIRLOCK BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                       GA                                               PO                                                                   KA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                          BL                                              RT                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                             E                                               AV                                                                            TE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RO                                           EN                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AD                                        UE                                                                                      AD
                                                                                            BACHELOR FLAT ROAD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LE    R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                         ROSS CO. ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          US
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IAL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                 MILLARD ROAD
H:\projfile\10639 - St Helens TSP Update\gis\Fig3-1.mxd




                                                                                                                                                            AD
                                                                                                                                                        RO
                                                                                                                                                      O.
                                                                                                                                                    EC




                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                  RS




                                                          LEGEND                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AD
                                                                                                                                                 MO




                                                                                                                                                                                                      RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                 DN
                                                                                                                                                                                               LA




                                                                   Street Network
                                                                                                                                                                                            RT
                                                                                                                                                                                          PO
                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                     OA




                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                      OL
                                                                                                                                                 .R




                                                                   Creeks
                                                                                                                                                CO
                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                           RS
                                                                                                                                         MO




                                                                   City Parks

                                                                   Major Rivers

                                                                   City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FIGURE
                                                                   City UGB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EXISTING STREET NETWORK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST. HELENS, OREGON    3-1
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                       Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                             Page 4


Coordination is required among the three jurisdictions to ensure that the transportation system is 
planned,  operated,  maintained,  and  improved  to  safely  meet  public  needs.  Figure  32  illustrates 
the existing street system and which agency is responsible for each street within the UGB. 


Functional Classification
A  street's  functional  classification  reflects  its  role  in  the  transportation  system  and  defines  desired 
operational  and  design  characteristics  such  as  pavement  width,  rightofway  requirements, 
driveway (access) spacing requirements, and pedestrian and bicycle features. The City's 1997 TSP 
defines the following functional classification hierarchy: 

         Major  Arterials:  These  facilities  carry  the  highest  volumes  of  through  traffic  and  primarily 
         function  to  provide  mobility  and  not  access.  Major  arterials  provide  continuity  for 
         intercity  traffic  through  the  urban  area  and  are  usually  multilane  highway  facilities.  The 
         only major arterial in St. Helens is the Lower Columbia River Highway (US 30).  

         Minor  Arterials:  These  facilities  interconnect  and  augment  the  major  arterial  system  and 
         accommodate  trips  of  somewhat  shorter  length.  Such  facilities  interconnect  residential, 
         shopping, employment, and recreational activities within the community. 

         Collector:  These  streets  provide  both  land  access  and  movement  within  residential, 
         commercial, and industrial uses. These streets gather traffic from local streets and serve as 
         connectors to arterials. 

         Local  Streets:  These  streets  provide  land  access  to  residential  and  other  properties  within 
         neighborhoods and generally do not intersect any arterial routes. 

Figure  33  illustrates  the  current  functional  classification  of  the  study  area  roadways  per  the  1997 
TSP.  As  shown,  many  of  the  roadways  designated  as  minor  arterials  on  the  west  side  of  US  30 
have  direct  access  from  local  streets.  Further  review  indicates  that  many  also  have  direct  access 
from  residential  driveways  and  are  posted  with  comparatively  low  travel  speeds.  Also  shown  in 
the  figure,  there  are  relatively  few  northsouth  roadways  designated  as  collectors  or  minor 
arterials.  The  functional  classification  of  the  existing  roadways  will  be  further  evaluated  in  the 
transportation options analysis. 

ODOT  has  a  separate  classification  system  for  its  highways,  which  guide  the  planning, 
management,  and  investment  for  state  highways.  The  Oregon  Highway Plan (OHP  ­ Reference 2), 
designates  US  30  as  a  Statewide  Freight  Route  in  the  study  area.  This  designation  reflects  the 
roadway's  function,  providing  the  primary  route  linking  communities  such  as  Astoria, 
Clatskanie,  Rainer,  Prescott,  and  Columbia  City  to  the  north  with  St.  Helens,  Scappoose,  and  the 
greater Portland metropolitan area to the south. 




City of St. Helens                                                                                        Chapter 3
                                                          St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   January 2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FRONTAGE ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lake




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Col
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N 6T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EE T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IS      LA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              bia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RO
                                                                                                                                                ROAD                                                                                                                                                                                              AD
                                                                                                                                         HANKEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     REE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               T               ST R                                                ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WES                                                              TRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Isla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WYE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N 16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S 7TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PITTSBURG ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N 11TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              YE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S 1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TH
                                                                                                                                                                                             NV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ET
                                                                                                                                                                                               ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N 15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S 4T
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RE E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                      NIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                                  PITTSB




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LE
                                                                                                                         UR     G ROAD                                                                                                                                      ST. HE




                                                                                                                                                                                                        RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NS ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               REET




                                                                                                                                                                                                            AD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S 8T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COLUMBIA                   BLV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S 15



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LEV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AY
                                                                                                                 SYKES ROAD                                                                                       BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EET
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         T
                                                                                                                                                                                                 L UM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TH S



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TR E



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ET
                                                                                                                                                                                               CO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MATZEN STR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ILT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TR E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                 FIRLOCK BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                       GA                                               PO                                                                   KA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                          BL                                              RT                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                             E                                               AV                                                                            TE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RO                                           EN                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AD                                        UE                                                                                      AD
                                                                                            BACHELOR FLAT ROAD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LE    R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                         ROSS CO. ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          US
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IAL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                 MILLARD ROAD
H:\projfile\10639 - St Helens TSP Update\gis\Fig3-2.mxd




                                                                                                                                                            AD
                                                                                                                                                        RO
                                                                                                                                                      O.
                                                                                                                                                    EC




                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                  RS




                                                          LEGEND                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AD
                                                                                                                                                 MO




                                                                                                                                                                                                      RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                 DN
                                                                                                                                                                                               LA




                                                          Jurisdiction
                                                                                                                                                                                            RT
                                                                                                                                                                                          PO
                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                     OA




                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                      OL
                                                                                                                                                 .R
                                                                                                                                                CO




                                                                   ODOT Road
                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                           RS
                                                                                                                                         MO




                                                                   City Road

                                                                   County Road

                                                                   City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FIGURE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ROADWAY JURISDICTION
                                                                   City UGB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST. HELENS, OREGON     3-2
                                                          St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   January 2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FRONTAGE ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lake




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Col
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N 6T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EE T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IS      LA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              bia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RO
                                                                                                                                                ROAD                                                                                                                                                                                              AD
                                                                                                                                         HANKEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     REE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               T               ST R                                                ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WES                                                              TRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Isla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WYE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N 16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S 7TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PITTSBURG ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N 11TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              YE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S 1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TH
                                                                                                                                                                                             NV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ET
                                                                                                                                                                                               ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N 15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S 4T
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RE E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                      NIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                                  PITTSB




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LE
                                                                                                                         UR     G ROAD                                                                                                                                      ST. HE




                                                                                                                                                                                                        RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NS ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               REET




                                                                                                                                                                                                            AD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S 8T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COLUMBIA                   BLV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S 15



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LEV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AY
                                                                                                                 SYKES ROAD                                                                                       BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EET
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         T
                                                                                                                                                                                                 L UM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TH S



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TR E



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ET
                                                                                                                                                                                               CO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MATZEN STR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ILT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TR E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                 FIRLOCK BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                       GA                                               PO                                                                   KA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                          BL                                              RT                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                             E                                               AV                                                                            TE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RO                                           EN                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AD                                        UE                                                                                      AD
                                                                                            BACHELOR FLAT ROAD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LE    R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                         ROSS CO. ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          US
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IAL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                 MILLARD ROAD
H:\projfile\10639 - St Helens TSP Update\gis\Fig3-3.mxd




                                                                                                                                                            AD




                                                          LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                        RO
                                                                                                                                                      O.
                                                                                                                                                    EC




                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                  RS




                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                          Classification
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AD
                                                                                                                                                 MO




                                                                                                                                                                                                      RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                 DN
                                                                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                                                            RT




                                                                   Major Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                          PO
                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                     OA




                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                      OL
                                                                                                                                                 .R
                                                                                                                                                CO




                                                                   Minor Arterial
                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                           RS
                                                                                                                                         MO




                                                                   Collector Road

                                                                   Local Street

                                                                   City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FIGURE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EXISTING ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION
                                                                   City UGB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ST. HELENS, OREGON                                      3-3
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                       Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                             Page 7




Truck Routes
The  existing  designated  truck  routes  were  established  to  limit  heavy  truck  traffic  on  local  streets 
while connecting the industrial areas within St. Helens to US 30. Figure 34 illustrates the existing 
designated truck routes through St. Helens. 

Each  of  the  truck  routes  were  qualitatively  evaluated  to  determine  if  there  is  sufficient  width 
along  the  roadways  and  at  intersections  to  accommodate  wide  turning  movements  associated 
with  large  trucks.  East  of  US  30,  relatively  few  of  the  truck  routes  have  curbs  or  sidewalks 
provided  at  the  intersections,  therefore,  large  trucks  can  utilize  the  extra  shoulder  space  to  turn. 
Where  curbs  do  exist,  such  as  at  the  Old  Portland  Road/Kaster  Road  intersection,  the  turning 
radii  is  sufficient  to  accommodate  the  wide  turning  movements.  Old  Portland  Road  and  Kaster 
Road  currently  have  incomplete  pedestrian  facilities.  Old  Portland  Road  has  designated  bicycle 
lanes  and  is  a  designated  bicycle  route;  however,  updates  to  the  functional  classification  plan 
should  consider  whether  designating  the  roadway  as  both  a  bicycle  and  freight  route  introduces 
unintended conflicts. 

West  of  US  30,  both  Sykes  Road  and  Pittsburg  Road  are  relatively  narrow  streets  through 
predominantly  residential  areas;  however,  the  routes  are  relatively  straight  and  do  not  require 
significant  turning  movements.  McBride  Elementary  School  is  in  the  northwest  corner  of  the 
Sykes Road/Columbia Boulevard intersection.  


Street Section Standards
The  1997  TSP  provided  standard  street  cross  sections  for  each  of  the  functional  classifications 
within  the  city.  Per  the  TSP,  these  cross  sections  were  intended  to  be  implemented  with  some 
flexibility  recognizing  unique  and  special  situations  as  appropriate.  The  cross  section  design 
standards from the 1997 TSP are summarized in Table 31 and illustrated in Figure 35. 


                             Table 3-1     Existing Street Section Standards

 Functional                          Land-           Bicycle        On-Street                         Right-of-
Classification       Sidewalk       scaping          Lanes           Parking       Travel Lanes       Way (feet)

    Major Arterial      6'                5'            5'             None          (5) 12'-14'          102'

    Minor Arterial      6'               None       8' Parking or Bicycle Lanes        (2) 14'             60'

Collector Street        5'               None          None              8'            (2) 11'             60'

    Local Street        5'               None          None              7'          (1) 12'-13'           50'
 

While  individual  local  streets  are  not  reviewed  as  part  of  the  TSP  update,  the  Oregon  TPR 
requires  that  local  governments  offer  "skinny  street"  standards  for  local  streets  in  order  to 
minimize  pavement  width  and  rightofway.  The  Department  of  Land  Conservation  and 
Development's  Neighborhood  Street  Design  Guidelines  (DLCD   Reference  3),  indicates  a  street  with 
a paved section wider than 28 feet is by definition not a "narrow street." The DLCD guidelines 


City of St. Helens                                                                                       Chapter 3
                                                                         St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Januar 2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FRONTAGE ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lake




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Col
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N 6T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EE T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IS      LA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             bia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RO
                                                                                                                                                               ROAD                                                                                                                                                                                              AD
                                                                                                                                                        HANKEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    REE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              T               ST R                                                ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WES                                                              TRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Isla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WYE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N 16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S 7TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PITTSBURG ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N 11TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             YE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S 1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N 15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S 4T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                NO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RE E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U
                                                                                                                                 PITTSB




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LE
                                                                                                                                        UR     G ROAD                                                                                                                                      ST. HE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NS ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              REET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S 8T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               COLUMBIA                   BLV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S 15



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AY
                                                                                                                                SYKES ROAD                                                                                       BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                L UM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TH S



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TR E



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                              CO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MATZEN STR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ILT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TR E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                                FIRLOCK BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GA                                               PO                                                                   KA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BL                                              RT                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E                                               AV                                                                            TE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RO                                           EN                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AD                                        UE                                                                                      AD
                                                                                                           BACHELOR FLAT ROAD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LE    R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                        ROSS CO. ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         US
H:\projfile\10639 - St Helens TSP Update\gis\chapter 3 figs\Fig3-4.mxd




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IAL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                MILLARD ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                           AD
                                                                                                                                                                       RO
                                                                                                                                                                     O.
                                                                                                                                                                   EC




                                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                 RS




                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AD
                                                                                                                                                                MO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                DN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PO
                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                    OA




                                                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                                                     OL
                                                                                                                                                                .R




                                                                         LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                               CO
                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                          RS
                                                                                                                                                        MO




                                                                                  Designated Truck Route

                                                                                  Other Roadway

                                                                                  City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FIGURE
                                                                                  City UGB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EXISTING TRUCK ROUTES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST. HELENS, OREGON   3-4
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                  Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                       Page 10


cite  benefits  of  streets  with  reduced  pavement  widths  including  improved  livability,  improved 
safety,  slower  vehicle  speeds,  and  reduced  environmental  impacts.  The  guidelines  further 
indicate  that  narrow  streets  must  meet  the  operational  needs  including  pedestrian  and  bicycle 
circulation and emergency vehicle access. 

As  shown  in  Figure 35, the cross sections provided in the TSP currently include two options that 
comply  with  the  "skinny  street"  standard,  showing  the  narrowest  paved  crosssection  to  be  20 
feet  wide1.  While  the  curbtocurb  road  section  is  relatively  narrow,  the  50foot  rightofway 
shown  for  the  two  skinny  streets  is relatively wide; this should be reevaluated as part of the TSP 
update. 

In  addition  to  the  TSP,  the  City  also  published  roadway  standards  in  the  City's  Community 
Development Code. City staff indicate the Development Code standards have been used to guide 
transportation  improvements  constructed  in  conjunction  with  new  developments,  not  the  TSP. 
Table 32 displays the Road Standards shown in the City's Community Development Code. 


       Table 3-2            Development Code Required Minimum Right-of-Way and Street Widths

                      Type of                            Right-of-way   Roadway      Moving       Bicycle
                       Street                               Width        Width       Lanes        Lanes

Minor Arterial                                                60'        36-48'       2-4           2-6'

Collector                                                     60'        24-40'       2-3           2-5'

Local ­ Commercial, Industrial                                50'          34'         2            2-4'

Local ­ Residential                                           50'          34'         2            2-4'

Residential Access ­ through street
                                                            40-46'       24-28'       1-2            0
with less than 500 ADT

Residential Access ­ cul-de-sac dead-
ends (not more than 400 feet long and                       36-44'       24-28'       1-2            0
serving more than 20 dwelling units)

Turnarounds for dead-ends in
                                                           50' radius   42' radius                   0
industrial and commercial zones only

Turnarounds for cul-de-sac dead-ends
                                                           42' radius   35' radius                   0
in residential zones only

Alley
Residential                                                   16'          16'                       0
Business or Industrial                                        20'          20'
Source:  City of St. Helens Community Development Code, Section 17.152.030 Street 

When  comparing  Figure  35  and  Table  32,  it  quickly  becomes  apparent  that  the  cross  sections 
provided in the current TSP are not consistent with the cross section standards shown in the city's 
Community  Development  Code.  The  development  of  standard  cross  sections  will  be  an 
important part of the TSP update process. 


                                                      
1
    Sidewalks are not considered part of the paved section.

City of St. Helens                                                                                  Chapter 3
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                      Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                           Page 11


Access Management
Spacing requirements for public roadways and private driveways can have a profound impact on 
transportation  system  operations  as  well  as  land  development.  Access  management  strategies 
and  implementation  require  careful  consideration  to  balance  the  needs  for  access  to  developed 
land with the need to ensure movement of traffic in a safe and efficient manner. 

Access  management  generally  becomes  more  stringent  as  the  functional  classification  level  of 
roadways  increases  and  the  corresponding  importance  of  mobility  increases.  Exhibit  31 
illustrates the general relationship between access and mobility.   

                                                  Exhibit 31 
                       Relationship Between Access, Mobility, and Functional Classification 




                                                                                          


ODOT Access Spacing Standards
Access  spacing  requirements  for  US  30  are  implemented  by  Oregon  Administrative  Rule  (OAR) 
734,  Division  512  and  relate  directly  to  the  functional  classification  of  US  30  as  both  a  Statewide 
Highway  and  Freight  Route.  Table  33  illustrates  the  access  spacing  standards  for  public  and 
private approaches along US 30 within St. Helens. 




                                                      
2
 Oregon Revised Statute (OAR) 734, Division 51, was amended in September 2005 to be consistent with August
2005 OHP revisions to Policy 1B. Specifically, the spacing standards in OAR 734-051 were amended to be consistent
with the OHP tables in Appendix C, Access Management Standards.

City of St. Helens                                                                                       Chapter 3
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                         Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                              Page 12



        Table 3-3     US 30 Access Spacing Standards for Private and Public Approaches2

                               Posted Speed                  Minimum Space Required *(feet)
                              (miles per hour)

                                      25                                      520

                                  30 and 35                                   720

                                  40 and 45                                   990

                                      50                                     1,100

                                      55                                     1,320
                     1
                       These access management spacing standards do not apply to approaches in
                     existence prior to April 1, 2000 except as provided in OAR 734-051-0115(1)(c)
                     and 734-051-0125(1)(c).

                     * Measurement of the approach road spacing is from center to center on the
                     same side of the roadway.
 

For  signalized  intersections  on  statewide  highways  such  as  US  30,  OAR  734020470  identifies  a 
desired minimum spacing of ½ mile (2,640 feet) be maintained between signalized intersections. 

US  30  has  access  points  serving  small  commercial  properties  throughout  the  downtown  area  that 
do  not  meet  ODOT's  access  spacing  standards  for  new  construction.  As  private  properties 
redevelop in the future, ODOT will review driveway spacing with respect to US 30 access spacing 
requirements  and  may  determine  that  changes  in  land  use  require  the  consolidation  or 
reconfiguration  of  existing  accesses.  In  the  interim,  many  of  the  existing  driveways  that  do  not 
conform with the access spacing standards will continue to operate safely due to: 1) the relatively 
slow  travel  speeds,  2)  the  separation  of  left  and  rightturn  movements  at  many  of  the  major 
intersections, and 3) the presence of a twoway leftturn lane (TWLTL) along US 30. 


Curb and Gutter
St.  Helens  requires  curb  and  gutter  be  constructed  along  its  street  network  in  conjunction  with 
adjacent  development.  Streets  constructed  in  recent  development  areas  provide  curb,  gutter,  and 
sidewalks;  however,  many  older  roadways  have  not  been  improved  with  curb  and  gutter,  which 
can limit the functionality of the roadway, particularly for pedestrians and bicycles. The curb and 
gutter  deficiencies  identified  in  St.  Helens  are  addressed  along  with  the  pedestrian  and  bicycle 
facilities. 


Other Street System Deficiencies
The  following  deficiencies  were  identified  through  review  of  the  transportation  network  as  well 
as through feedback from agency staff and the general public: 

    ·     Substandard  pavement  conditions  were  identified  along  a  number  of  city  roadways, 
          including segments of Bachelor Flat Road, Ross Road, and Millard Road; 



City of St. Helens                                                                                         Chapter 3
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                     Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                          Page 13


    ·    Existing  City  and  County  roadways  within  the  city  limits  are  generally  not  constructed  to 
         current City roadway standards; 
    ·    The  flashing  beacon  at  the  westbound  approach  to  the  Williams/Columbia  Boulevard 
         intersection is burned out. 
    ·    The  traffic  signal  at  the  18th  Street/Old  Portland  Road  intersection  does  not  meet  current 
         Manual  on  Uniform  Traffic  Control  Devices  (MUTCDReference  4)  standards.  To  correct 
         existing deficiencies, the City should consider either of the following: 
             o       augment  the  existing  intersection  signal  displays  with  a  second  signal  head  on 
                     each approach (this could be postmounted in each quadrant) and consider adding 
                     pedestrian signal displays or, 
             o       Complete  a  traffic  study  per  the  requirements  of  the  MUTCD  and,  based  on  the 
                     study  findings,  operate  the  intersection  as  either  a  twoway  or  allway  stop  as 
                     appropriate,  including  provision  of  MUTCDcompliant  signing  and  striping.  If 
                     twoway  or  allway  stop  control  is  implemented,  then  the  existing  signal  should 
                     either be turned off and removed or operated as a supplemental warning beacon in 
                     support of the new stop control per the engineering study recommendations. 
    ·    Significant  queuing  occurs  during  the  morning  and  afternoon  school  peaks  near  the  main 
         entrance  to  Lewis  and  Clark  Elementary  School  located  near    the  9th  Street/Columbia 
         Boulevard  and 11th Street/Columbia Boulevard intersections. 
             o       Although  morning  and  afternoon  peak  hour  operations  are  not  analyzed  in  the 
                     TSP  Update,  the  City  should  consider  how  schools  can  be  better  served  by  the 
                     future transportation system. 
    ·    Turn  lane  vehicle  storage  deficiencies  were  identified  by  ODOT  at  the  following 
         intersections along US 30: 
             o       The  southbound  leftturn  lane  at  Deer  Island  Road  does  not  have  enough  left  turn 
                     lane striping to meet minimum storage requirements. 
             o       The  southbound  rightturn  lanes  at  Dear  Island  Road,  Pittsburg  Road, Wyeth 
                     Street,  and  Achilles Road  are  substandard  in  length  based  on  ODOT's 
                     current minimum storage and deceleration design requirements. 
    ·    Abandoned  railroad  spurs  are  located  near  the  southbound  approach  to  the  Oregon 
         Street/Deer Island Road intersection 
             o       These  will  be  removed  as  part  of  the  redevelopment  of  the  site  located  in  the 
                     Southwest  corner  of  the  intersection  for  the  future  Columbia  County  Rider  Transit 
                     Center. 


PEDESTRIAN SYSTEM
Pedestrian facilities serve a variety of needs, including: 

    ·    Relatively  short  trips  (generally  considered  to  be  under  a  mile)  to  major  pedestrian 
         attractors, such as schools, parks, and public facilities;  

City of St. Helens                                                                                      Chapter 3
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                     Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                          Page 14


    ·    Recreational trips (e.g., jogging or hiking) and circulation within parks;  
    ·    Access to transit (generally trips under 1/2mile to bus stops); and,  
    ·    Commute  trips,  where  mixeduse  development  is  provided  and/or  people  have  chosen  to 
         live near where they work.  
Pedestrian  facilities  should  be  integrated  with  transit  stops  and  effectively  separate  pedestrians 
from conflicts with vehicular traffic. Furthermore, pedestrian facilities should provide continuous 
connections  among  neighborhoods,  employment  areas,  and  nearby  pedestrian  attractors. 
Pedestrian  facilities  usually  refer  to  sidewalks  or  paths,  but  also  include  pedestrian  crossing 
treatments for high volume roadways. 

The  existing  pedestrian  network  serving  St.  Helens  is  shown  in  Figure  36  along  with  major 
pedestrian  attractors  such  as  public  schools  and  transit  stop  locations.  As  shown  in  Figure  36, 
relatively  few  of  the  arterial  and  collector  roadways  in  St.  Helens  currently  provide  sidewalks  on 
both sides of the street. 

The following roadway segments have been identified as improvement priorities by the City: 

    ·    Sykes Road between Columbia Boulevard and Summit View Drive; 
    ·    Gable/Bachelor Flat Road between US 30 and Summit View Drive, and; 
    ·    Columbia Boulevard between Sykes Road and Gable/Bachelor Flat Road. 
Each  of  these  three  streets  serves  as  a  major  connector  between  the residential areas east of US 30 
and  the  St.  Helens  High  School,  McBride  Elementary,  and  retail  uses  along  US  30.  Despite  their 
prominent function, each street has incomplete sidewalks, bike lanes, curbs, and gutters as well as 
constrained rightofway. 


Pedestrian Crossings at Intersections
All  unsignalized  intersections  in  Oregon  are  considered  legal  cross  walks  and  motor  vehicles  are 
required  to  yield  the  right  of  way  to  allow  pedestrians  to  cross.  However,  compliance  is  not 
consistent  statewide  and  pedestrians  may  have  difficulty  crossing  high  volume  roadways.  The 
City  of  St.  Helens  has  several  marked  and  unmarked  crosswalks  at  unsignalized  intersections 
along  key  roadway  facilities  such  as  Columbia  Boulevard  and  St.  Helens  Street  that  rely  on 
drivers  to  yield  the  rightofway.  These  and  other  locations  throughout  the  downtown  area  tend 
to  have  wide  roadway  cross  sections  that  require  pedestrians  to  cross  not  only  the  travel  lanes, 
but also onstreet parking lanes provided on one or both sides of a given roadway. The pedestrian 
environment  at  these  locations  could  be  enhanced  and  will  be  further  reviewed  in  the 
transportation options analysis. 

The  City  of  St.  Helens  converted  the  intersection  of  West  Street  and  N.  6th  Street  to  allway  stop 
control and added a curb extension in June of 2010 in part to facilitate safe pedestrian movements 
at the intersection.  

All of the signalized intersections on US 30 in St. Helens have protected pedestrian crossings. 

City of St. Helens                                                                                      Chapter 3
                                                                         St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          January 2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRONTAGE ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lake




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Col
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N 6T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EE T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IS      LA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    bia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      À




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ST R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RO
                                                                                                                                                               ROAD                                                                                                                                                                                                     AD
                                                                                                                                                        HANKEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           REE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T               ST R                                                ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WES                                                              TRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Isla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WYE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S 7TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PITTSBURG ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N 11TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    YE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S 1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    À




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! k




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S 4T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RE E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                                 PITTSB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LE
                                                                                                                                        UR     G ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S 8T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               À!                ! BLVD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COLUMBIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S 15



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LEV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                SYKES ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L UM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TH S



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TR E



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MATZEN STR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ILT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TR E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                        FIRLOCK BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GA                                               PO                                                                  KA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E                      À                     RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S          TE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RO                                           EN                                                                              R

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AD                                        UE                                                                                     AD
                                                                                                           BACHELOR FLAT ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LE    R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                        ROSS CO. ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 US
H:\projfile\10639 - St Helens TSP Update\gis\chapter 3 figs\Fig3-6.mxd




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IAL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                         LEGEND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                MILLARD ROAD



                                                                                 Sidewalks on Both Sides                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                           AD
                                                                                                                                                                         RO
                                                                                                                                                                     O.
                                                                                                                                                                   EC




                                                                                 Sidewalks on One Side
                                                                                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                                 RS




                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AD
                                                                                                                                                                MO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D




                                                                                 No Sidewalks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LA




                                                                                                                                                                    AC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RT




                                                                                                                                                                         HI
                                                                                                                                                                           LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PO




                                                                                                                                                                                ES
                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                    OA




                                                                                                                                                                                     RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                               D




                                                                                 Existing Shared-Use Path
                                                                                                                                                                                                             OL




                                                                                                                                                                                       AD
                                                                                                                                                                .R
                                                                                                                                                               CO
                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                          RS




                                                                           !     Pedestrian Crossing Deficiency
                                                                                                                                                        MO




                                                                           À     Transit Stop

                                                                          k      Schools

                                                                                 City UGB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FIGURE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EXISTING PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
                                                                                 City Limits                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST. HELENS, OREGON                     3-6
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                    Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                         Page 16


Figure  36  also  illustrates  the  location  of  known  pedestrian  crossings  deficiencies  based  on  input 
from  City  staff  and  the  general  public  through  the  interactive  Safe  Routes  to  School  map. 
Improvements  at  each  of  these  intersections  will  be  addressed  in  the  transportation  options 
analysis. The Safe Routes to School map will be discussed later in this report.  


BICYCLE SYSTEM
Similar  to  pedestrian  facilities,  bicycle  facilities  (including  dedicated  bicycle  lanes  in  the  paved 
roadway, multiuse paths shared with pedestrians, etc.) serve a variety of trips. These include:  

    ·    Trips to major attractors, such as schools, parks and open spaces, retail centers, and public 
         facilities; 
    ·    Commute trips, where changing and showering facilities are provided at the workplace;  
    ·    Recreational trips; and  
    ·    Access to transit, where bicycle storage facilities are available at the stop, or where space is 
         available on busmounted bicycle racks.  
Figure  37  summarizes  the  existing  bicycle  facilities  in  St.  Helens.  As  shown,  several  roadways 
east  of  US  30  currently  have  complete  bicycle  facilities,  while  west  of  US  30  the  only  completed 
bicycle  facilities  are  located  on  Sykes  Road  between  US  30  and  Columbia  Boulevard.  Similar  to 
the  previously  identified  pedestrian  issues,  improvements  are  needed  along  Gable/Bachelor  Flat 
Road and Columbia Boulevard to provide better access to schools and retail areas. 

Figure  37  also  shows  the  location  of  known  bicycle  crossing  deficiencies  based  on input received 
from  City  Staff  and  the  St.  Helens  Pedestrian  and  Bicycle  Committee.  Improvements  at  each  of 
these intersections will be addressed in the transportation options analysis. 


Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan
The  following  general  guidelines  were  derived  from  the  Oregon  Bicycle  and  Pedestrian  Plan 
(Reference 5).  

    ·    Dedicated  bicycle  facilities  should  be  provided  along  major  streets  where  automobile 
         traffic speeds are significantly higher than bicycle speeds. 
    ·    Bicycle  facilities  should  connect  residential  neighborhoods  to  schools,  retail  centers,  and 
         employment areas.  
    ·    Allowing  bicycle  traffic  to  mix  with  automobile  traffic  in  shared  lanes  is  acceptable  where 
         the average daily traffic (ADT) on a roadway is less than 3,000 vehicles per day.  
    ·    Lower volume roadways should be considered for bike shoulders or lanes if anticipated to 
         be used by children as part of a Safe Routes to School program. 
    ·    In  areas  where  no  street  connection  currently  exists  or  where  substantial  outofdirection 
         travel  would  otherwise  be  required,  a  multiuse  path  may  be  appropriate  to  provide 
         adequate facilities for bicyclists. 

City of St. Helens                                                                                     Chapter 3
                                                                         St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          January 2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRONTAGE ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lake




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Col
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N 6T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EE T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IS      LA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    bia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      À
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ST R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RO
                                                                                                                                                               ROAD                                                                                                                                                                                                     AD
                                                                                                                                                        HANKEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           REE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T               ST R                                                ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WES                                                              TRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Isla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WYE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S 7TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PITTSBURG ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N 11TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    YE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S 1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    À                                 k




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S 4T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RE E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                                 PITTSB




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LE
                                                                                                                                        UR     G ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S 8T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              À      COLUMBIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S 15



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LEV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                SYKES ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L UM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TH S



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TR E



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MATZEN STR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ILT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TR E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                        FIRLOCK BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GA                                               PO                                                                  KA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E                    À                       RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S          TE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RO                                           EN                                                                              R

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AD                                        UE                                                                                     AD
                                                                                                           BACHELOR FLAT ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LE    R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                        ROSS CO. ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 US
H:\projfile\10639 - St Helens TSP Update\gis\chapter 3 figs\Fig3-6.mxd




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IAL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                MILLARD ROAD


                                                                         LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                           AD
                                                                                                                                                                         RO
                                                                                                                                                                     O.
                                                                                                                                                                   EC




                                                                                  Existing Bike Lanes
                                                                                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                                 RS




                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AD
                                                                                                                                                                MO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D




                                                                                  Existing Shared-Use Path
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LA




                                                                                                                                                                    AC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RT




                                                                                                                                                                         HI
                                                                                                                                                                           LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PO




                                                                                                                                                                                ES
                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                    OA




                                                                                                                                                                                     RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                               D




                                                                                  No Bike Lanes
                                                                                                                                                                                                             OL




                                                                                                                                                                                       AD
                                                                                                                                                                .R
                                                                                                                                                               CO
                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                          RS




                                                                           !      Bicycle Crossing Deficiency
                                                                                                                                                        MO




                                                                           À      Transit Stops

                                                                          k       Schools

                                                                                  City UGB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FIGURE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EXISTING BICYCLE FACILITIES
                                                                                  City Limits                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST. HELENS, OREGON           3-7
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                          Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                               Page 18


ODOT categorizes roadway bicycle facilities into the following four major classifications: 

    ·    Shared roadway ­ As implied by the name, no special treatments are available for bicycles 
         and  both  bicycles  and  vehicles  share  the  same  roadway  area  under  this  classification.  The 
         shared  roadway  facility  is  best  used  where  there  is  minimal  vehicle  traffic  to  conflict  with 
         bicycle traffic. 
    ·    Shoulder  bikeways  ­  This  bicycle  facility  consists  of  roadways  with  paved  shoulders  that 
         can accommodate bicycle traffic. 
    ·    Bike  lanes  ­  A  separate  lane  is  designated  adjacent  to  the  vehicle  travel  lane  for  the 
         exclusive use of bicyclists. 
    ·    Bike  paths  ­  These  bicycle  facilities  are  exclusive  bicycle  ways  separated  from  the 
         roadway. 


Bicycle Facilities
The  1997  TSP  implemented  the  1988  St.  Helens  Bikeway  Master  Plan  (Reference  6)  that  was 
designed  to  provide  a  safe  and  convenient  system  of  bicycle  paths  through  the  City  and  within 
the  UGB.  The  plan  identified  several  facilities  that  were  complete  as  of  1988,  including  US  30, 
Sykes  Road  between  Columbia  Boulevard  and  Matzen  Street,  Oregon  Street  north  of  West  Street, 
West  Street  east  of  Oregon  Street,  16th  to  15th  Street,  and  parts  of    6th  Street,  4th  Street,  and  Old 
Portland  Road.  The  plan  also  identified  several  proposed  facilities,  including  along  Pittsburg 
Road  east  of  Vernonia  Road,  Vernonia  Road,  Columbia  Boulevard,  Gable  Road,  a  connection 
between  Millard  Road  and  Old  Portland  Road,  and  others.  As  of  today,  the  following  facilities 
identified as needed in the 1988 plan have been completed: 

    ·    Columbia Boulevard east of US 30 
    ·    Gable Road east of US 30 
    ·    Old Portland Road north of Gable Road 


PUBLIC TRAIL SYSTEM
Figure  38  illustrates  the  public trail system located within the city, including the trails within the 
Dalton  Lake  Recreational  Area  which  consists  of  several  paved  and  unpaved  paths,  trails,  and 
trailheads  that  surround  Dalton  Lake.  The  Draft  Conceptual  Dalton  Lake  Recreational  Plan, 
developed  in  July  2010,  identifies  several  opportunities  and  constraints  associated  with  each  trail 
within  the  system,  including  the  potential  development  of  observation  and  picnic  areas.  In 
addition  to  several  side  trials  and  footpaths,  the  following  major  trails  are  located  within  the 
Dalton Lake Recreational Area: 

    ·    Rutherford  Parkway:  an  existing  8foot  wide  paved  multiuse  path  that  extends  north  of 
         Oregon Street connecting the City of St. Helens with Columbia City to the north. 
    ·    Dalton Lake West Path: a dirt road along existing electricity lines that connects Rutherford 
         Parkway to the trail system within the Dalton Lake recreational area. 


City of St. Helens                                                                                           Chapter 3
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                   Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                        Page 19


    ·    Dalton  Lake  East  Path:  a  gated  gravel  road  path  that  extends  east  of  Rutherford  Parkway 
         and south along the edge of the Columbia River. 
    ·    Madrona  Court  Trail:  a  narrow  trail  that  extends  north  from  the Crestwood Mobile Home 
         Court to Dalton Lake West Path. 


SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL
Safe  Routes  to  School  (SRTS)  programs  encourage  school  children  to  walk  and  bike  to  school 
safely.  In  Oregon,  elementaryage  children  living  within  a  mile  of  school  and  middle  schoolage 
children  living  within  1.5  miles  of  school  typically  are  not  eligible  to  receive  bus  service 
(pedestrian  routes  that  require  crossing  railroad  tracks,  such  as  the  Portland  &  Western  Railroad 
through St. Helens, require bus service). 

SRTS  program  efforts  are  typically  administered  by  the  local  school  district  directed  to  these 
students  and  are  built  around  5Es:  Education,  Encouragement,  Enforcement,  Engineering,  and 
Evaluation. The goals of the Oregon SRTS program are to increase the ability and opportunity for 
children  to  walk  and  bicycle  to  school;  promote  walking  and  bicycling  to  school  and  encourage  a 
healthy  and  active  lifestyle  at  an  early  age;  and  facilitate  the  planning,  development  and 
implementation  of  projects  and  activities  that  will  improve  safety  and  reduce  traffic,  fuel 
consumption and air pollution within two miles of the school (Reference 7). 

The  St.  Helens  School  District  does  not  currently  have  a  formal  SRTS  Program.  While 
development  of  a  SRTS  program  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the  TSP  Update,  identification  of 
deficiencies  within  the  pedestrian  and  bicycle  network  near  the  four  major  public  schools  in  St. 
Helens  was  considered.  In  addition,  a  webbased  reporting  mechanism  was  developed  to  solicit 
specific  information  from  students  and  the  general  public  regarding  inadequacies  along  key 
travel  routes  between  neighborhoods  and  schools.  Though  not  a  comprehensive  inventory,  the 
following  deficiencies  were  derived  from  the  information  collected  to  date  and  could  be  used  in 
part for a future SRTS program.  

    ·    There  are  virtually  no  sidewalks  and  no  transit  pullouts  or  shelters  to  serve  several 
         residential neighborhoods along Pittsburg Road. 
    ·    There  are  incomplete  sidewalks  along  Gable  Road  from  Columbia  Boulevard  to  the  High 
         School. 
    ·    There  are  no  sidewalks  or  bike  lanes  in  the  Firlock  Park  development  that  feeds  the  High 
         School and serves as a transfer location for other schools in St. Helens. 
    ·    There  are  also  no  sidewalks  or  bike  lanes  in  the  Sherwood  Estates  area that feeds both the 
         High School and McBride Elementary. 
Additional  information  related  to  other  transportation  deficiencies  is  provided  in  Appendix  "A". 
Appendix "A" contains all of the safe routes to school information collected for the TSP Update. 




City of St. Helens                                                                                    Chapter 3
                                                                         St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       January 2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FRONTAGE ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dalton Lake Trails



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lake




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Botanical Garden Trails




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Col
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N 6T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EE T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IS      LA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RO
                                                                                                                                                               ROAD                                                                                                                                                                                                  AD
                                                                                                                                                        HANKEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        REE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T               ST R                                                ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WES                                                              TRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Isla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WYE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N 16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S 7TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PITTSBURG ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N 11TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   YE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S 1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              STRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               T ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N 15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S 4T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RE E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                                                 PITTSB




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LE
                                                                                                                                        UR     G ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ET




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S 8T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    COLUMBIA                  BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Knob Hill Park Trails




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S 15



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TH S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LEV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TH S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AY
                                                                                                                                SYKES ROAD                                                                                             BO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L UM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TH S



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TR E



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MATZEN STR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ILT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TR E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ET


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                                                        FIRLOCK BOULEVARD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GA                                              PO                                                                KA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BL                                             RT                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E                                              AV                                                                         TE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RO                                           EN                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AD                                        UE                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                           BACHELOR FLAT ROAD


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              McCormick Park Trails
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LE    R OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                        ROSS CO. ROAD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                US
H:\projfile\10639 - St Helens TSP Update\gis\chapter 3 figs\Fig3-6.mxd




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IAL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        UL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                MILLARD ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                           AD
                                                                                                                                                                         RO
                                                                                                                                                                     O.
                                                                                                                                                                   EC




                                                                                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                                 RS




                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AD
                                                                                                                                                                MO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LA




                                                                                                                                                                    AC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RT




                                                                                                                                                                         HI
                                                                                                                                                                           LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PO




                                                                                                                                                                                ES
                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                    OA




                                                                                                                                                                                     RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                             OL




                                                                                                                                                                                       AD
                                                                                                                                                                .R




                                                                         LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                               CO
                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                          RS
                                                                                                                                                        MO




                                                                                  Existing Trails
                                                                                  Rutherford Parkway
                                                                                  City UGB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIGURE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EXISTING PUBLIC TRAILS SYSTEM
                                                                                  City Limits                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ST. HELENS, OREGON                     3-8
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                      Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                           Page 21




PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Public  transportation  within  Columbia  County  include  fixedroute,  flexroute,  and  dialaride 
services  provided  by  the  Columbia  County  Transit  Division.  In addition, limited specialized dial
aride  services  are  offered  by  various  providers  for  specialneeds  populations,  such  as  senior 
citizens. Each of these services is described below. 


Columbia County Rider
The Columbia County Transit Division is the largest transit service provider in Columbia County, 
operating  under  the  name  Columbia  County  Rider  (CCR).  The  types  of  services  offered  by  CCR 
consist of the following: 

    ·    Fixed  routes  that  operate  on  a  fixed  schedule  along  a  specified  route  and  stopping  only  in 
         designated locations; 
    ·    A  flex  route  that  operates  on  a  fixed  schedule  and  stops  at  certain  designated  locations  on 
         each trip, but is also allowed to make a limited number of deviations offroute each trip to 
         pick up and drop off passengers at other locations; and 
    ·    Dialaride  service  throughout  the  County  that  operates  on  an  advancereservation  basis, 
         picking  up  and  dropping  off  passengers  at  locations  of  their  choosing.  Rides  can  be 
         scheduled up to one week in advance, and depending on space availability, riders may be 
         able to reserve on the day of their desired trip. 
CCR  provides  fixedroute  service  through  the  county  along  US  30  and  within  the  cities  of  St. 
Helens and Scappoose, as well as DialARide service throughout the entire County. 


Fixed-Route Service
CCR currently operates two fixed routes with the city of St. Helens: 

    ·    St. Helens ­ Portland; and 
    ·    St. Helens ­ PCC Rock Creek and Willow Creek Transit Center 
The  St.  Helens  ­  Portland  route  currently  operates  10  times  per  weekday,  with  five  morning  and 
five afternoon departures. The first trip of the day leaves St. Helens Medical Mall at 5:50 a.m. and 
is  scheduled  to  arrive  in  downtown  Portland  at  7:00  a.m.,  with  intermediate  stops  in  Warren  and 
Scappoose.  The  last  trip  departs  St.  Helens  Medical  Mall  at  5:00  p.m.,  arrives  in  downtown 
Portland  at  6:00  p.m.,  and  returns  to  St.  Helens  between  approximately  7:00  and  7:10  p.m.  Adult 
fares are currently $3.30 oneway for local trips between St. Helens and Scappoose and $4.80 one
way  for  trips  between  Columbia  County  and  Portland.  Reduced  fares  of  $2.05  and  $3.80, 
respectively  are  available  for  riders  under  10  years  old,  students,  riders  55  and  over,  and  persons 
with  disabilities.  Monthly  passes  are  available  for  $106.80  (adult)  and  $91.80  (reduced  fare)  and 
are valid on all Columbia County fixedroute services.  




City of St. Helens                                                                                       Chapter 3
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                        Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                             Page 22


The St. Helens ­ Portland Community College (PCC) Rock Creek operates six times per weekday, with 
three  morning  and  three  afternoon  departures.  The  routing  is  the  same  as  the  St.  Helens  ­ 
Portland  route  while  in  Columbia  County;  however,  this  route travels via Cornelius Pass Road to 
PCC  Rock  Creek,  Tanasbourne  Shopping  Center,  and  TriMet's  Willow  Creek  Transit  Center  in 
Washington County. The scheduled travel time for this route is approximately 8090 minutes end
toend.  Departures  are  scheduled  every  two  hours  from  St.  Helens,  between  6:30  a.m.  and  4:30 
p.m.  Return  trips  from  Willow  Creek  operate  between  7:25  a.m.  and  5:25  p.m.,  with  departures 
from  PCC  occurring  approximately  11  minutes  later  on  each  trip.  Connections  are  available  to 
several TriMet bus lines and the MAX Blue line, providing Columbia County residents the ability 
to  reach  other  destinations  in  Washington  County  and  beyond.  Fares  are  the  same  as  the 
downtown  Portland  route.  Appendix  "B"  contains  the  current  Columbia  County  Rider  route  map  and 
schedule for St. Helens to Portland. 


Flex-Route Service
Columbia  County  recently  started  FlexRoute  service  between  St.  Helens  and  Scappoose  to  help 
reduce  the  number  of  dialaride  trips  between  the  two  cities.  The  route  operates  with  90minute 
headways.  Its  first  run  begins  at  9:00  a.m.  and  the  last  run  begins  at  4:30  p.m.,  for  a  total  of  9 
hours  of  service.  The  FlexRoute  operates  differently  than  the  fixed  routes  in  that  it  will  make  a 
certain  number  of  deviations  from  its  standard  route,  upon  request.  Deviations  are  limited  to  a 
maximum  of  10  minutes  per  trip.  Flagdown  stops  are  also  allowed  where  safe  within  St.  Helens 
(but not on US 30). The fare is $1.50 for all trips and riders. 

Because  the  FlexRoute  can  deviate  offroute  to  pick  up  passengers  who  are  not  able  to  travel  to 
one  of  the  standard  stop  locations,  ADA  "complementary  paratransit"  service  is  not  required  for 
this route. 


Dial-A-Ride Service
DialARide  service  is  available  to  all  Columbia  County  residents.  The  service  can  operate  from 
6:30  a.m.  to  6:30  p.m.  Monday  through  Friday;  the  contractor  is  required  to  provide  8  hours  of 
service  each  weekday  during  this  time  period.  Passengers  may  call  ahead  or  submit  an  online 
request  form  to  schedule  a  ride,  from  one  day  up  to  one  week  in  advance.  This  service  will  then 
transport  the  individual  from  the  requested  pickup  location  to  the  requested  dropoff  location. 
Fares for travelers vary by distance, ranging from $1.80 for trips within the same city, up to $25.00 
for the longest trips currently programmed. 


RAIL SERVICE

Passenger Rail
The City of St. Helens has no passenger rail service. 




City of St. Helens                                                                                          Chapter 3
St. Helens Transportation System Plan Update                                                       Project #: 10639
January 25, 2011                                                                                            Page 23


Freight Rail
Freight  rail  service  is  provided  through  and  within  the  City  of  St.  Helens  by  the  Portland  & 
Western  Railroad.  The  "PortlandAstoria  Line"  connects  the  cities  of  Astoria,  Clatskanie,  Rainier, 
Columbia City, St. Helens, and Scappoose with Portland & Western's facilities and the Burlington 
Northern Santa Fe Railroad (BNSF) in Portland.  

Two rail studies have been recently completed that considered freight rail needs in St. Helens; the 
Lower Columbia River Rail Corridor Study/US 30 Intersection Study and the Lower Columbia River Rail 
Corridor/Rail  Safety  Study  (References  8  and  9).  The  Lower  Columbia  River  Rail  Corridor/Rail  Safety 
Study reports between four and six trains per day currently travel through St. Helens. 


Track Conditions
The  Portland  &  Western  Railroad,  working  with  the  ODOT  Rail  Division,  recently  completed  an 
upgrade  of  its  track  between  the  junction  with  BNSF  in  Portland  and  Port  Westward  (north  of  St. 
Helens).  All  but  five  miles  of  the  54mile  connection  to  Port  Westward  have  been  upgraded  with 
heavy  rail  to  allow  for  safe  and  efficient  movement  of  heavyhaul  unit  trains  along  the  corridor. 
The maximum authorized speed for freight trains in St Helens is 25 miles per hour, reflecting over 
a designation as Class 2 track under Federal Rail Administration rating criteria. 


Rail Yard
The  Portland  &  Western  Railroad  operates  a  rail  yard  in  St.  Helens  east  of  US  30  that  is  generally 
situated  north  of  Gable  Road  and  south  of  Columbia  Boulevard.  The  rail  yard  supports  local 
customers  served  by  the  railroad,  offering  a  location  to  stage  and  switch  rail  equipment. 
Trespassing is prohibited, though the yard area is not currently fenced. 


Improvement needs
The  two  rail  studies  examined  existing  and  future  rail  needs  and  impacts  to  the  US  30  corridor. 
Key existing conditions needs identified through the study included: 

      ·      Fencing the St. Helens rail yard, particularly along US 30; 
      ·      Alternative roadway travel routes parallel to US 30; 
      ·      Removal  of  abandoned  tracks  near  the  former  Stimson  Lumber  mill  site  adjacent  to  Deer 
             Island Road3;  
      ·      Lack  of  pedestrian  attention  to  the  rail  crossing  at  Gable  Road  ­  related  to  some  school 
             children walking to St. Helens High School and unaware of approaching trains; and 




                                                      
3
  Note: the abandoned railroad tracks will be removed in conjunction with a planned transit center at the former mill
site.
City of St. Helens                                                                                        Chapter 3
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Columbia Blvd -- Sykes Rd                                                                                      QC JOB #: 10517609
 CITY/STATE: St Helens, OR                                                                                                DATE: 5/4/2010
                      158 0.86 259                           Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                 0.6       0.4

                       11    66    81
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                           0.0 1.5 0.0

       82      33                       89    169
                                                                                                              0.0   0.0                      1.1      0.6
        0.83   81           0.94        60   0.87
                                                                                                                    2.5                      0.0
       126     12                       20    185
                                                                                                              1.6   0.0                      0.0      1.1

                       11 137 23
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.0 0.0

                       98 0.93 171
                                                                                                                           1.0       0.0



                             0




               0                         0




                             0




 5-Min Count             Columbia Blvd                   Columbia Blvd              Sykes Rd                     Sykes Rd
     Period              (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                    Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     4:00 PM          0     7       2    0            2     5      0    0     1      5      0      0     2        4      5       0          33
     4:05 PM          2     9       1    0            4     4      2    0     2      1      0      0     2        8      7       0          42
     4:10 PM          1    11       3    0            1     3      0    0     2      8      3      0     2        4      2       0          40
     4:15 PM          0     7       1    0            8     3      1    0     2      4      0      0     1        6      7       0          40
     4:20 PM          1     9       2    0            5     5      2    0     3      9      0      0     0        4      2       0          42
     4:25 PM          0     5       1    0            4     5      0    0     1      8      1      0     2        2      7       0          36
     4:30 PM          1     4       2    0            6     9      0    0     4     12      1      0     0        5      1       0          45
     4:35 PM          0     5       2    0            5     4      1    0     2      9      0      0     1        6      6       0          41
     4:40 PM          1     6       1    0            6     1      0    0     2     10      0      0     2        4      8       0          41
     4:45 PM          0    11       2    0            5     2      1    0     2      6      0      0     1        4      7       0          41
     4:50 PM          0    12       3    0            6     7      2    0     0      8      0      0     2        6      3       0          49
     4:55 PM          2    12       0    0           10     6      2    0     1      3      0      0     1        5      6       0          48              498
     5:00 PM          0    17       1    0           10     5      0    0     1      2      0      0     0        3      8       0          47              512
     5:05 PM          1    11       0    0            7     3      0    0     2      6      0      0     2        8     10       0          50              520
     5:10 PM          2    10       3    0            8     8      1    0     2      6      1      0     1        8      5       0          55              535
     5:15 PM          4    12       4    0            9     3      1    0     3     10      0      0     2        4      9       0          61              556
     5:20 PM          0     7       2    0            6     7      1    0     4      9      0      0     0        3     10       0          49              563
     5:25 PM          1    11       4    0            4     5      4    0     5      5      2      0     3        6      5       0          55              582
     5:30 PM          0    11       3    0            4     3      1    0     2     10      0      0     4        3     10       0          51              588
     5:35 PM          0    14       1    0            6     4      0    0     1      8      3      0     3        9      3       0          52              599
     5:40 PM          0    11       1    0            8     7      0    0     6      7      1      0     2        1     14       0          58              616
     5:45 PM          0    14       1    0           10     6      1    0     1      5      1      0     1        6      1       0          47              622
     5:50 PM          2     7       1    0            4     7      1    0     2      5      1      0     1        5      8       0          44              617
     5:55 PM          1    12       2    0            5     8      1    0     4      8      3      0     1        4      6       0          55              624
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right      U          Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       28   132      28    0           96    56      8    0    28     88      4      0    20       80     96       0                 664
 Heavy Trucks         0     0       0                 0     0      0          0      0      0            0        0      4                          4
  Pedestrians               0                               0                        0                            0                                 0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 7/6/2010 5:19 PM                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 30 -- Vernonia Rd                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10517608
 CITY/STATE: St Helens, OR                                                                                             DATE: 5/4/2010
                    747 0.90 1025                         Peak-Hour: 4:20 PM -- 5:20 PM                                 4.7       2.3

                    35 712    0
                                                         Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                        2.9 4.8 0.0

       198    18                    0      0
                                                                                                           1.5   0.0                      0.0      0.0
       0.76   0        0.98         0   0.00
                                                                                                                 0.0                      0.0
       131    113                   0      0
                                                                                                           2.3   2.7                      0.0      0.0

                    163 1007 0
                                                                                                                        1.2 2.4 0.0

                    825 0.90 1170
                                                                                                                        4.5       2.2



                         1




              6                     0




                         0




 5-Min Count               US 30                          US 30                 Vernonia Rd                 Vernonia Rd
     Period            (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At Left                                                                                                                       Total
                        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
     4:00 PM     9       69      0     0         0      61      1    0     1      0     11      0     0        0      0       0         152
     4:05 PM    10       79      0     0         0      50      4    0     4      0      9      0     0        0      0       0         156
     4:10 PM    12       61      0     0         0      67      1    0     1      0      6      0     0        0      0       0         148
     4:15 PM    13       79      0     0         0      50      2    0     4      0     18      0     0        0      0       0         166
     4:20 PM    18       90      0     0         0      67      2    0     1      0      8      0     0        0      0       0         186
     4:25 PM    14       77      0     0         0      56      0    0     2      0     13      0     0        0      0       0         162
     4:30 PM    15       79      0     0         0      64      2    0     1      0      9      0     0        0      0       0         170
     4:35 PM     8       86      0     0         0      51      4    0     3      0      7      0     0        0      0       0         159
     4:40 PM    12       81      0     0         0      55      6    0     2      0      7      0     0        0      0       0         163
     4:45 PM    14       96      0     0         0      56      2    0     0      0     11      0     0        0      0       0         179
     4:50 PM    15       98      0     0         0      44      2    0     3      0      7      0     0        0      0       0         169
     4:55 PM    18       84      0     0         0      59      3    0     1      0      6      0     0        0      0       0         171             1981
     5:00 PM    15       73      0     0         0      62      5    0     1      0      8      0     0        0      0       0         164             1993
     5:05 PM    12       76      0     0         0      70      1    0     2      0     12      0     0        0      0       0         173             2010
     5:10 PM    15       82      0     0         0      57      2    0     0      0     14      0     0        0      0       0         170             2032
     5:15 PM     7       85      0     0         0      71      6    0     2      0     11      0     0        0      0       0         182             2048
     5:20 PM    21       64      0     0         0      63      3    0     2      0     13      0     0        0      0       0         166             2028
     5:25 PM    18       80      0     0         0      59      1    0     2      0      6      0     0        0      0       0         166             2032
     5:30 PM    14       82      0     0         0      57      7    0     2      0      5      0     0        0      0       0         167             2029
     5:35 PM    18       65      0     0         0      46      2    0     2      0      8      0     0        0      0       0         141             2011
     5:40 PM    13       57      0     0         0      48      2    0     4      0      6      0     0        0      0       0         130             1978
     5:45 PM    17       63      0     0         0      40      1    0     2      0      7      0     0        0      0       0         130             1929
     5:50 PM    17       64      0     0         0      48      1    0     1      0      6      0     0        0      0       0         137             1897
     5:55 PM    14       65      0     0         0      39      2    0     3      0      7      0     0        0      0       0         130             1856
 Peak 15-Min                Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                Total
  Flowrates    Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles 136      972      0     0         0     792     36    0    16      0    148      0     0        0      0       0                 2100
 Heavy Trucks    0       20      0               0      24      0          0      0      4            0        0      0                          48
  Pedestrians             0                              0                        8                            0                                  8
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 7/6/2010 5:19 PM                                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Vernonia Rd -- Columbia Blvd                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10517607
 CITY/STATE: St Helens, OR                                                                                                DATE: 5/4/2010
                       130 0.92 201                             Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                              0.8       3.0

                       12    55    63
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                           0.0 1.8 0.0

       210     30                        68    233
                                                                                                              1.0   6.7                      0.0      0.9
        0.92   164          0.91        147   0.83
                                                                                                                    1.2                      1.4
       227     33                        18    277
                                                                                                              1.8   0.0                      0.0      0.7

                       51 103 50
                                                                                                                           0.0 3.9 0.0

                       106 0.91 204
                                                                                                                           0.9       2.0



                             1




               9                          3




                             15




 5-Min Count                 Vernonia Rd                     Vernonia Rd            Columbia Blvd             Columbia Blvd
     Period                 (Northbound)                    (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                    Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                       Totals
     4:00 PM          3        4       4    0          3       7      1    0     1     6      3      0     2     11      7       0          52
     4:05 PM          1        7       3    0          6       3      5    0     3    10      2      0     4     11      4       0          59
     4:10 PM          0       11       1    0          3       3      3    0     0    16      1      0     1      9      3       0          51
     4:15 PM          6        5       5    0          6      13      0    0     2    11      0      0     3      9      4       0          64
     4:20 PM          1       11       2    0          5       6      1    0     2     9      6      0     1     10      0       0          54
     4:25 PM          4        9       7    0          3       4      1    0     3    16      1      0     0      7      4       0          59
     4:30 PM          1        6       9    0          4       9      0    0     4    12      3      0     1      7      7       0          63
     4:35 PM          0        3       5    0          4       5      1    0     2    13      2      0     2      8      4       0          49
     4:40 PM          4        7       4    0          2       5      3    0     1    21      2      0     1     12      1       0          63
     4:45 PM          3        9       3    0          8       3      1    0     2    11      2      0     3     11      8       0          64
     4:50 PM          3        6       4    0          7       3      2    0     2    13      4      0     4      7      5       0          60
     4:55 PM          3        9       2    0          5       2      1    0     5    15      2      0     0     12      5       0          61              699
     5:00 PM          6       13       9    0          6       7      0    0     4    12      0      0     0     18      7       0          82              729
     5:05 PM          5        7       4    0          9       3      0    0     4    12      2      0     0     17      8       0          71              741
     5:10 PM          3        5       3    0          6       6      2    0     0    15      6      0     1     11      8       0          66              756
     5:15 PM          2       11       4    0          1       6      1    0     3    19      2      0     2     12      7       0          70              762
     5:20 PM          6       11       5    0          6       8      0    0     1     9      3      0     1     13      4       0          67              775
     5:25 PM          5        8       4    0          5       5      0    0     4    11      3      0     1     13      4       0          63              779
     5:30 PM          7        3       7    0          4       5      3    0     3    15      2      0     2     10      3       0          64              780
     5:35 PM          4       10       2    0          2       3      2    0     0    14      4      0     1      9      7       0          58              789
     5:40 PM          4       11       3    0          4       4      0    0     2    18      3      0     3     14      2       0          68              794
     5:45 PM          4       10       3    0          7       3      1    0     1    11      0      0     3      7      5       0          55              785
     5:50 PM          3        5      10    0          7       4      0    0     2    13      2      0     0     15      4       0          65              790
     5:55 PM          3        5       4    0          6       3      1    0     1    12      4      0     2      9      5       0          55              784
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates         Left     Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       56      100      64    0         84      64      8    0    32   156     32      0     4    184     92       0                 876
 Heavy Trucks         0        0       0               0       4      0          0     0      0            0      4      0                          8
  Pedestrians                 12                               0                      12                          4                                28
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 7/6/2010 5:19 PM                                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 12th -- Columbia Blvd                                                                                         QC JOB #: 10517606
 CITY/STATE: St Helens, OR                                                                                               DATE: 5/4/2010
                       46 0.72 77                              Peak-Hour: 4:25 PM -- 5:25 PM                              0.0       2.6

                       21    22    3
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 0.0 0.0

       309     35                       10    252
                                                                                                             1.3   2.9                      0.0      2.0
        0.76   285          0.80       229   0.84
                                                                                                                   1.1                      1.7
       433     113                      13    294
                                                                                                             0.9   0.0                      7.7      1.0

                       59    32    6
                                                                                                                          0.0 3.1 0.0

                       148 0.79 97
                                                                                                                          0.7       1.0



                             3




               6                         3




                             14




 5-Min Count                     12th                           12th               Columbia Blvd             Columbia Blvd
     Period                 (Northbound)                   (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                              Total
                    Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                     Totals
     4:00 PM          5        0      1     0         0       0       0   0     3    17      7      0     2     14      1       0          50
     4:05 PM          6        2      0     0         2       1       1   0     3    30      6      0     0     21      0       0          72
     4:10 PM          2        2      0     0         1       2       2   0     3    19      6      0     1     23      0       0          61
     4:15 PM          2        2      0     0         0       3       1   0     4    14      6      0     2     11      2       0          47
     4:20 PM          4        0      3     0         0       0       2   0     1    15      7      0     1     11      2       0          46
     4:25 PM          4        1      0     0         0       0       1   0     4    26      3      0     1     21      0       0          61
     4:30 PM          5        1      2     0         1       1       1   0     2    19      8      0     1     14      1       0          56
     4:35 PM          4        3      0     0         0       4       3   0     1    20     13      0     2     15      2       0          67
     4:40 PM          3        2      1     0         0       3       0   0     3    13     10      0     2     20      0       0          57
     4:45 PM          6        2      0     0         0       1       4   0     4    21      8      0     0     19      1       0          66
     4:50 PM          1        6      0     0         0       3       3   0     2    23     12      0     1     20      0       0          71
     4:55 PM          4        4      0     0         1       3       2   0     3    30      2      0     1     17      2       0          69              723
     5:00 PM          5        2      1     0         1       2       3   0     4    25     14      0     1     23      2       0          83              756
     5:05 PM          8        0      0     0         0       1       1   0     3    31     18      0     0     28      0       0          90              774
     5:10 PM          9        4      0     0         0       3       1   0     6    32      9      0     0     20      1       0          85              798
     5:15 PM          4        4      1     0         0       0       1   0     3    27      8      0     3     21      0       0          72              823
     5:20 PM          6        3      1     0         0       1       1   0     0    18      8      0     1     11      1       0          51              828
     5:25 PM          3        2      1     0         0       1       2   0     2    23      5      0     0     13      0       0          52              819
     5:30 PM          1        3      1     0         0       3       0   0     0    18      6      0     1     14      2       0          49              812
     5:35 PM          3        2      1     0         1       3       0   0     2    12      9      0     1     14      1       0          49              794
     5:40 PM          7        2      1     0         0       2       1   0     2    19      5      0     0     11      1       0          51              788
     5:45 PM          5        1      3     0         0       1       3   0     7    21      6      0     4     17      1       0          69              791
     5:50 PM          6        0      1     0         1       2       4   0     2    11      5      0     1     20      2       0          55              775
     5:55 PM          6        2      2     0         0       2       1   0     1    14      6      0     1     28      2       0          65              771
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                                  Total
  Flowrates         Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       88       24      4     0         4      24      20   0    52   352    164      0     4    284     12       0                 1032
 Heavy Trucks         0        0      0               0       0       0         0     4      0            0      4      0                           8
  Pedestrians                 20                              0                      12                         12                                 44
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 7/6/2010 5:19 PM                                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 30 -- Wyeth St                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10517605
 CITY/STATE: St Helens, OR                                                                                                DATE: 5/6/2010
                       520 0.82 873                          Peak-Hour: 4:20 PM -- 5:20 PM                                 6.3       5.4

                       10 475 35
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                           0.0 6.9 0.0

       48      12                     30     86
                                                                                                              0.0   8.3                      0.0      1.2
        0.83   5           0.89        2   0.63
                                                                                                                    0.0                      0.0
       90      73                     54    120
                                                                                                              6.7   6.8                      1.9      0.0

                       36 831 80
                                                                                                                           0.0 5.5 0.0

                       602 0.96 947
                                                                                                                           6.5       4.9



                            0




               0                       0




                            3




 5-Min Count                   US 30                         US 30                   Wyeth St                    Wyeth St
     Period                (Northbound)                  (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                               Total
                    Left    Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
     4:00 PM          4      52       3    0        8      53      2    0     1      0      7      0     5        0      2       0         137
     4:05 PM          7      54       5    0        1      25      0    0     0      0      5      0     1        0      1       0          99
     4:10 PM          7      48       5    0        2      39      1    0     1      0      6      0     1        0      1       0         111
     4:15 PM          2      50       3    0        6      34      2    0     0      0      4      0     4        0      3       0         108
     4:20 PM          1      67       5    0        3      41      0    0     0      0      8      0     3        0      1       0         129
     4:25 PM          2      58       5    0        3      35      0    0     0      1      7      0     2        0      3       0         116
     4:30 PM          6      76       4    0        1      45      2    0     2      0      4      0    10        0      4       0         154
     4:35 PM          5      68       5    0        3      57      0    0     1      1      6      0     9        0      6       0         161
     4:40 PM          0      76       5    0        2      49      4    0     2      0      6      0     4        0      0       0         148
     4:45 PM          3      69       7    0        4      30      2    0     1      0      8      0     2        0      0       0         126
     4:50 PM          3      75       8    0        2      35      0    0     0      1      6      0     4        0      3       0         137
     4:55 PM          4      62      10    0        5      40      1    0     0      1      3      0     4        0      1       0         131             1557
     5:00 PM          3      71      10    0        3      36      0    0     1      1      9      0     2        0      4       0         140             1560
     5:05 PM          1      68       7    0        1      36      0    0     2      0      7      0     6        0      4       0         132             1593
     5:10 PM          5      74       7    0        4      37      0    0     1      0      6      0     5        0      2       0         141             1623
     5:15 PM          3      67       7    0        4      34      1    0     2      0      3      0     3        2      2       0         128             1643
     5:20 PM          1      60       7    0        4      42      2    0     2      2      2      0     1        0      1       0         124             1638
     5:25 PM          4      57       3    0        3      31      0    0     2      0      6      0     3        0      0       0         109             1631
     5:30 PM          1      62       4    0        2      48      0    0     3      0      3      0     3        1      1       0         128             1605
     5:35 PM          3      70       5    0        6      37      1    0     1      0      4      0     1        0      0       0         128             1572
     5:40 PM          1      54       5    0        3      37      0    0     0      1      0      0     2        1      1       0         105             1529
     5:45 PM          1      75       5    0        4      41      1    0     1      0      3      0     4        0      1       0         136             1539
     5:50 PM          2      62       8    0        8      39      1    0     0      0      4      0     3        0      1       0         128             1530
     5:55 PM          1      53       6    0        7      49      1    0     0      1      1      0     1        1      3       0         124             1523
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                   Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates         Left    Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       44     880      56    0       24     604     24    0    20      4     64      0    92        0     40       0                 1852
 Heavy Trucks         0      52       0             0      48      0          4      0      4            4        0      0                          112
  Pedestrians                12                             0                        0                            0                                 12
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 7/6/2010 5:19 PM                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: 6th -- Columbia Blvd                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10517604
 CITY/STATE: St Helens, OR                                                                                                   DATE: 5/4/2010
                       83 0.70 162                                 Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                              3.6       0.6

                       45       4     34
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:00 PM -- 5:15 PM
                                                                                                                              2.2 25.0 2.9

       219     95                           65    241
                                                                                                                 1.4   1.1                       0.0      0.8
        0.88   194             0.80        174   0.65
                                                                                                                       1.0                       1.1
       296     7                             2    229
                                                                                                                 1.0   0.0                       0.0      1.7

                           0    2     1
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 100.0

                       13 0.42        3
                                                                                                                              7.7       33.3



                                0




               0                             7




                                7




 5-Min Count                         6th                            6th                Columbia Blvd             Columbia Blvd
     Period                    (Northbound)                    (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                        Totals
     4:00 PM          0           0      1     0          2       0      2    0     3    14      1      0     0     14      6       0           43
     4:05 PM          1           0      0     0          2       0      3    0     9    18      1      0     0     20      6       0           60
     4:10 PM          0           1      0     0          5       0      8    0     7    15      0      0     0     13      2       0           51
     4:15 PM          0           0      0     0          4       0      4    0     6    13      1      0     0      9      3       0           40
     4:20 PM          0           0      0     0          3       0      3    0    12    13      0      0     0      9      2       0           42
     4:25 PM          1           0      0     0          1       0      7    0     9    16      0      0     0     10      1       0           45
     4:30 PM          0           0      0     0          5       0      7    0     8    10      0      0     1     10     10       0           51
     4:35 PM          0           0      0     0          5       0      7    0     8    21      0      0     0     14      5       0           60
     4:40 PM          0           1      0     0          1       0      3    0     7     8      1      0     0     15      1       0           37
     4:45 PM          0           0      0     0          4       0      5    0     1    20      1      0     0     11      3       0           45
     4:50 PM          0           0      0     0          2       0      1    0     4    16      0      0     0     19      3       0           45
     4:55 PM          0           0      0     0          2       0      2    0     8    24      0      0     0     14      4       0           54              573
     5:00 PM          0           0      0     0          2       0      2    0     3    20      1      0     0     21     10       0           59              589
     5:05 PM          0           0      0     0          4       1      2    0    10    16      0      0     0     25     12       0           70              599
     5:10 PM          0           1      1     0          0       1      4    0    12    19      2      0     0     20      6       0           66              614
     5:15 PM          0           0      0     0          2       0      3    0     7    20      0      0     0     10      5       0           47              621
     5:20 PM          0           0      0     0          4       0      5    0    13     7      1      0     1      8      2       0           41              620
     5:25 PM          0           0      0     0          3       2      4    0    14    13      1      0     0      7      4       0           48              623
     5:30 PM          0           0      0     0          3       0      4    0     6    17      0      0     0     16      2       0           48              620
     5:35 PM          0           0      1     0          6       0      6    0     8     7      0      0     0     13      5       0           46              606
     5:40 PM          0           0      0     0          3       0      8    0     6     9      0      0     0      9      2       0           37              606
     5:45 PM          0           0      0     0          0       0      5    0    13    10      0      0     0     12      4       0           44              605
     5:50 PM          1           0      0     0          2       1      3    0     7     7      0      0     0     22      4       0           47              607
     5:55 PM          0           1      0     0          1       0      4    0     4    15      0      0     0     22      3       0           50              603
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                     Southbound               Eastbound                  Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles        0           4      4     0         24       8     32    0   100   220     12      0     0    264   112        0                  780
 Heavy Trucks         0           0      4                0       4      0          0     4      0            0      4      0                          16
  Pedestrians                     8                               0                       0                         12                                 20
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 7/6/2010 5:19 PM                                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                     Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: US 30 -- Pittsburg Rd                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10517603
 CITY/STATE: St Helens, OR                                                                                             DATE: 5/4/2010
                   489 0.89 775                          Peak-Hour: 4:20 PM -- 5:20 PM                                  5.3       3.2

                   52 437    0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                        5.8 5.3 0.0

       183    51                  0       0
                                                                                                           5.5   3.9                      0.0      0.0
       0.80   0       0.96        0   0.00
                                                                                                                 0.0                      0.0
       104    53                  0       0
                                                                                                           5.8   7.5                      0.0      0.0

                   131 724   0
                                                                                                                        5.3 3.2 0.0

                   490 0.93 855
                                                                                                                        5.5       3.5



                        1




              0                   0




                        0




 5-Min Count              US 30                          US 30                 Pittsburg Rd                 Pittsburg Rd
     Period           (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At Left                                                                                                                       Total
                       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right       U   Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
     4:00 PM     6      54      0     0         0      41      8    0     3       0      3      0     0        0      0       0         115
     4:05 PM     7      54      0     0         0      33      4    0     4       0      3      0     0        0      0       0         105
     4:10 PM     7      40      0     0         0      41      5    0     3       0      3      0     0        0      0       0          99
     4:15 PM     4      69      0     0         0      29      5    0     8       0      9      0     0        0      0       0         124
     4:20 PM     7      60      0     0         0      41      7    0     4       0      4      0     0        0      0       0         123
     4:25 PM     7      38      0     0         0      43      9    0     7       0      7      0     0        0      0       0         111
     4:30 PM    14      79      0     0         0      36      4    0     3       0      4      0     0        0      0       0         140
     4:35 PM    14      64      0     0         0      39      4    0     1       0      1      0     0        0      0       0         123
     4:40 PM     6      51      0     0         0      46      4    0     4       0      3      0     0        0      0       0         114
     4:45 PM     4      59      0     0         0      30      1    0     1       0      1      0     0        0      0       0          96
     4:50 PM     8      78      0     0         0      32      1    0     7       0      7      0     0        0      0       0         133
     4:55 PM    16      57      0     0         0      31      6    0     1       0      1      0     0        0      0       0         112             1395
     5:00 PM    11      61      0     0         0      28      2    0     8       0      9      0     0        0      0       0         119             1399
     5:05 PM    15      51      0     0         0      34      6    0     4       0      5      0     0        0      0       0         115             1409
     5:10 PM    12      53      0     0         0      45      3    0     3       0      3      0     0        0      0       0         119             1429
     5:15 PM    17      73      0     0         0      32      5    0     8       0      8      0     0        0      0       0         143             1448
     5:20 PM     8      40      0     0         0      47      5    0     7       0      7      0     0        0      0       0         114             1439
     5:25 PM     6      60      0     0         0      36     10    0     3       0      3      0     0        0      0       0         118             1446
     5:30 PM     4      57      0     0         0      34      6    0     5       0      4      0     0        0      0       0         110             1416
     5:35 PM     6      50      0     0         0      37      7    0     3       0      3      0     0        0      0       0         106             1399
     5:40 PM     7      50      0     0         0      19      7    0     1       0      1      0     0        0      0       0          85             1370
     5:45 PM     3      51      0     0         0      38      5    0     5       0      5      0     0        0      0       0         107             1381
     5:50 PM     5      60      0     0         0      27      4    0     5       0      5      0     0        0      0       0         106             1354
     5:55 PM     5      60      0     0         0      31      5    0     5       0      5      0     0        0      0       0         111             1353
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                    Southbound                 Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                Total
  Flowrates    Left    Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right       U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles 136     776      0     0         0     484     48    0    32       0     32      0     0        0      0       0                 1508
 Heavy Trucks   12      24      0               0      36      4          4       0      4            0        0      0                          84
  Pedestrians            0                              4                         0                            0                                  4
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 7/6/2010 5:19 PM                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Deer Island -- West                                                                                                  QC JOB #: 10517602
 CITY/STATE: St Helens, OR                                                                                                      DATE: 5/4/2010
                       95 0.62 112                                 Peak-Hour: 4:30 PM -- 5:30 PM                                 1.1       0.0

                           4    0     91
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 1.1

       58      4                           108    162
                                                                                                                    1.7   0.0                      0.0      0.6
        0.79   69              0.82         54   0.89
                                                                                                                          0.0                      1.9
       73      0                             0    160
                                                                                                                    0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.6

                           0    0     0
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                           0   0.00   0
                                                                                                                                 0.0       0.0



                                5




               4                             3




                                0




 5-Min Count                    Deer Island                     Deer Island                 West                         West
     Period                    (Northbound)                    (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     4:00 PM          0           0       0    0          7       0       0   0     0      7      0      0     0        2     11       0          27
     4:05 PM          0           0       0    0          7       0       0   0     1      7      0      0     0        4      2       0          21
     4:10 PM          0           0       0    0          7       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     0        4      9       0          23
     4:15 PM          0           0       0    0          6       0       0   0     0      5      0      0     0        4      6       0          21
     4:20 PM          0           0       0    0          3       0       0   0     1      6      0      0     0        3      9       0          22
     4:25 PM          0           0       0    0          4       0       0   0     1      0      0      0     0        4      4       0          13
     4:30 PM          0           0       0    0         10       0       0   0     0     11      0      0     0        5      7       0          33
     4:35 PM          0           0       0    0          8       0       2   0     0      4      0      0     0        5     12       0          31
     4:40 PM          0           0       0    0          3       0       0   0     2      6      0      0     0        4      8       0          23
     4:45 PM          0           0       0    0          5       0       0   0     1      6      0      0     0        3      4       0          19
     4:50 PM          0           0       0    0          5       0       0   0     0      6      0      0     0        7      4       0          22
     4:55 PM          0           0       0    0          3       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     0        5      8       0          19              274
     5:00 PM          0           0       0    0          5       0       0   0     0      7      0      0     0        3     13       0          28              275
     5:05 PM          0           0       0    0          6       0       1   0     0      5      0      0     0        5     13       0          30              284
     5:10 PM          0           0       0    0          8       0       1   0     0      3      0      0     0        5      7       0          24              285
     5:15 PM          0           0       0    0          8       0       0   0     1      4      0      0     0        6      8       0          27              291
     5:20 PM          0           0       0    0         15       0       0   0     0      7      0      0     0        3     11       0          36              305
     5:25 PM          0           0       0    0         15       0       0   0     0      7      0      0     0        3     13       0          38              330
     5:30 PM          0           0       0    0         13       0       0   0     0      4      0      0     0        5     10       0          32              329
     5:35 PM          0           0       0    0         11       0       2   0     0      4      0      0     0        1     11       0          29              327
     5:40 PM          0           0       0    0          5       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        8      9       0          24              328
     5:45 PM          0           0       0    0          6       0       0   0     0      3      0      0     0        2      7       0          18              327
     5:50 PM          0           0       0    0          5       0       0   0     0      1      0      0     0        3      6       0          15              320
     5:55 PM          0           0       0    0          5       0       0   0     0      2      0      0     0        2     11       0          20              321
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                     Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        0           0       0    0        152       0       0   0     4     72      0      0     0       48   128        0                 404
 Heavy Trucks         0           0       0               0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                          0
  Pedestrians                     0                               4                        0                            0                                 4
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 7/6/2010 5:19 PM                                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: North 6th -- West                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10517601
 CITY/STATE: St Helens, OR                                                                                                  DATE: 5/4/2010
                       39 0.68 57                              Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                 0.0       0.0

                       22    15    2
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

       158     26                        3     68
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
        0.75   42           0.82        57   0.66
                                                                                                                      0.0                      0.0
       126     58                        8     69
                                                                                                                0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                       79    28    25
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                       81 0.69 132
                                                                                                                             0.0       0.0



                             5




               0                         5




                             0




 5-Min Count                  North 6th                      North 6th                  West                         West
     Period                 (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                    Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     4:00 PM          6        2       1    0         0       0      2    0     3      4      3      0     2        3      0       0          26
     4:05 PM          5        3       1    0         0       2      0    0     3      5     10      0     0        1      0       0          30
     4:10 PM          8        1       5    0         0       4      1    0     1      2      8      0     1        6      0       0          37
     4:15 PM          5        1       1    0         0       1      2    0     2      4      2      0     0        2      0       0          20
     4:20 PM          5        6       2    0         0       2      2    0     0      6      3      0     1        4      0       0          31
     4:25 PM          2        2       2    0         0       0      0    0     0      3      2      0     4        4      0       0          19
     4:30 PM          8        5       0    0         0       2      1    0     6      4      7      0     1        5      0       0          39
     4:35 PM          9        1       0    0         0       2      0    0     1      5      6      0     0        6      0       0          30
     4:40 PM          7        4       1    0         1       0      2    0     3      1      3      0     0        4      0       0          26
     4:45 PM          0        2       1    0         0       0      1    0     1      6      3      0     1        4      0       0          19
     4:50 PM          5        2       0    0         0       1      0    0     1      5      2      0     0        4      1       0          21
     4:55 PM          3        1       3    0         0       3      3    0     0      2      1      0     0        6      0       0          22              320
     5:00 PM          9        1       2    0         0       0      3    0     2      1      5      0     0        3      0       0          26              320
     5:05 PM         16        2       4    0         0       1      1    0     2      4      6      0     0        3      0       0          39              329
     5:10 PM          5        5       2    0         0       1      1    0     2      4      3      0     0        6      0       0          29              321
     5:15 PM          7        5       2    0         0       0      1    0     1      3      2      0     2        6      0       0          29              330
     5:20 PM          3        5       2    0         0       5      5    0     4      6      8      0     0        2      0       0          40              339
     5:25 PM          5        0       2    0         0       1      2    0     3      7      9      0     2       10      1       0          42              362
     5:30 PM          6        2       1    0         0       0      2    0     2      3      8      0     0        4      1       0          29              352
     5:35 PM          5        2       1    0         0       3      1    0     3      6      6      0     1        7      0       0          35              357
     5:40 PM          9        0       2    0         1       1      3    0     2      2      3      0     2        3      0       0          28              359
     5:45 PM          4        2       3    0         0       0      1    0     1      3      2      0     0        3      0       0          19              359
     5:50 PM          5        4       3    0         0       2      0    0     2      1      4      0     1        4      0       0          26              364
     5:55 PM          5        0       1    0         1       1      2    0     2      2      2      0     0        6      1       0          23              365
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates         Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       60       40      24    0         0      24     32    0    32     64     76      0    16       72      4       0                 444
 Heavy Trucks         0        0       0              0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                          0
  Pedestrians                  0                             12                        0                           12                                24
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 7/6/2010 5:19 PM                                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Columbia Blvd -- Gable Rd                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10517610
 CITY/STATE: St Helens, OR                                                                                                  DATE: 5/4/2010
                       82 0.79 121                            Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                                  0.0       3.3

                       39    0     43
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

       220     61                        60    241
                                                                                                                0.0   4.9                      1.7      0.4
        0.87   85           0.89        181   0.87
                                                                                                                      1.2                      0.0
       146     0                          0    128
                                                                                                                2.7   0.0                      0.0      0.8

                       0     0     0
                                                                                                                             0.0 0.0 0.0

                       0    0.00   0
                                                                                                                             0.0       0.0



                             0




               0                          0




                             0




 5-Min Count             Columbia Blvd                    Columbia Blvd               Gable Rd                     Gable Rd
     Period              (Northbound)                     (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                 Total
                    Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right       U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     4:00 PM          0     0      0     0             3     0      2    0     4       8      0      0     0        7      2       0          26
     4:05 PM          0     0      0     0             4     0      7    0     4       4      0      0     0       14      1       0          34
     4:10 PM          0     0      0     0             1     0      5    0     7       5      0      0     0        9      6       0          33
     4:15 PM          0     0      0     0             4     0      4    0     1       5      0      0     0        8      5       0          27
     4:20 PM          0     0      0     0             5     0      2    0     5       5      0      0     0        8      7       0          32
     4:25 PM          0     0      0     0             1     0      2    0     7       6      0      0     0       11      7       0          34
     4:30 PM          0     0      0     0             0     0      6    0     5       4      0      0     0        7      7       0          29
     4:35 PM          0     0      0     0             3     0      4    0     6       4      0      0     0        7      5       0          29
     4:40 PM          0     0      0     0             2     0      2    0     7       5      0      0     0       18      7       0          41
     4:45 PM          0     0      0     0             6     0      1    0     3       9      0      0     0       14      7       0          40
     4:50 PM          0     0      0     0             2     0      4    0     5       6      0      0     0       14      3       0          34
     4:55 PM          0     0      0     0             5     0      2    0     3       5      0      0     0       14      1       0          30              389
     5:00 PM          0     0      0     0             3     0      2    0     1     12       0      0     0       15      2       0          35              398
     5:05 PM          0     0      0     0             2     0      6    0     7       6      0      0     0       15      2       0          38              402
     5:10 PM          0     0      0     0             3     0      3    0     4     10       0      0     0       16      6       0          42              411
     5:15 PM          0     0      0     0             3     0      7    0     6       7      0      0     0       13      6       0          42              426
     5:20 PM          0     0      0     0             2     0      2    0     8       8      0      0     0       15      6       0          41              435
     5:25 PM          0     0      0     0             9     0      3    0     3       5      0      0     0       19     10       0          49              450
     5:30 PM          0     0      0     0             2     0      3    0     9       6      0      0     0       12      5       0          37              458
     5:35 PM          0     0      0     0             4     0      4    0     5       6      0      0     0       16      5       0          40              469
     5:40 PM          0     0      0     0             3     0      1    0     5       8      0      0     0        9      6       0          32              460
     5:45 PM          0     0      0     0             3     0      3    0     2       9      0      0     0       10      4       0          31              451
     5:50 PM          0     0      0     0             3     0      3    0     3     11       0      0     0       15      6       0          41              458
     5:55 PM          0     0      0     0             3     0      4    0     2       5      0      0     0       13     10       0          37              465
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                      Southbound                 Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                     Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right       U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        0     0      0     0            56     0     48    0    68     80       0      0     0      188     88       0                 528
 Heavy Trucks         0     0      0                   0     0      0          4       0      0            0        0      0                          4
  Pedestrians               0                                0                         0                            0                                 0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 7/6/2010 5:19 PM                                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
