                    September 2011



       OR HIGHWAY 126
CORRIDOR FACILITY PLAN
           CROOK COUNTY, OREGON



             TECHNICAL APPENDIX


                   DRAFT
Technical Appendix A    Technical Memorandum:
                       Project Purpose and Need
                                      Statement
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM
Purpose and Need, Project Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Framework



Date:            November 2, 2010                                                 Project #: 11168

Prepared by:     Marc Butorac, PE, PTOE
                 Joe Bessman, PE, PTOE
                 Casey Bergh, PE



A.      MEMORANDUM PURPOSE

This memorandum presents three preliminary products intended to help guide the
development of the OR 126 Corridor Facility Plan:

     1. Draft Purpose and Need,

     2. Goals and Objectives, and

     3. Corridor Alternatives Evaluation Criteria.

Collectively, these products will be used to establish the Facility Plan’s policy direction and to
identify a preferred alternative(s), which will comprise the recommended actions for the Plan’s
key elements.

B.      PROJECT PURPOSE AND NEED

The Purpose and Need Statement sets the stage for consideration of alternatives. The “Purpose”
defines the transportation problem to be solved and outlines goals and objectives that should be
included as part of a successful solution to the problem. The “Need” provides the basis or
reason to support the problem statement (Purpose). The Purpose and Need Statement is
intended to clarify the expected outcome of public expenditure and to justify that expenditure
— what are you trying to accomplish and why you think it is necessary. As such, it should be
the first step in the project development process. It will be used to guide the development of a
reasonable range of alternatives to be studied. Also, it will be used as a fundamental element
when developing criteria for selection between alternatives.
Purpose and Need, Project Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Framework         Technical Memorandum
November 2, 2010                                                                             Page 2


Background

OR 126 is a statewide highway which is also classified as an Expressway within the Oregon
Highway Plan (OHP) from the Crook County boundary east to downtown Prineville. As
specified in the OHP, expressways are intended to provide “safe and efficient high speed and
high volume traffic movements.” However, within the study segment of the corridor there are
two school crossings, an industrial park, irrigated agricultural lands, and a rural commercial
center. Agricultural lands within the Powell Butte community are actively utilized, and there is
a need to travel on, and cross the highway with farming equipment.

In addition to the current land use issues, projections for the corridor indicate a high rate of
future growth from regional trips between Redmond and Prineville, recreational trips, and trips
to approved destination resorts. There are industrial and employment centers in western
Prineville that also provide growth potential. Some of this development has already begun to
occur, as evidenced by the recent development of the Facebook facility.

Currently OR 126 lacks the capacity to serve future traffic demand created by anticipated
growth, and operational and safety concerns are being addressed through interim and partial
solutions. Short, medium, and long-term plans are needed for OR 126 to ensure that the
highway will be able to continue to serve as a statewide facility which also services local and
regional mobility needs. Due to environmental, topographic, and funding constraints it will be
critical to identify facility management strategies that can extend the viability of the corridor
and improve safety prior to long-term grade separation.

Purpose

The purpose of this project is to establish a long-term vision for OR 126 and effectively address
corridor congestion, improve safety, support future development, serve expected population
growth in Crook County and Prineville, and to serve the growing travel demand.

Need

The project purpose is demonstrated with the following Statement of Need:

        Limited alternative routes and modes of travel to Prineville result in reliance on OR 126.
        Inability of the unsignalized intersections to meet State mobility standards coupled with
        the inability to fund grade-separated improvements results in increased congestion and
        reduced roadway safety.
        Conflicting use of the facility by farming equipment and high speed trucks decreases
        mobility and increases potential for crashes.
        Inconsistency between the OHP’s Expressway designation for the corridor and posted
        speed limits, cross-section, access, and roadside character.
Purpose and Need, Project Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Framework          Technical Memorandum
November 2, 2010                                                                              Page 3


C.      GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

A qualitative process will be used to evaluate the corridor concept with respect to the proposed
criteria. These alternatives will consist of a combination of corridor alignment/junctions,
highway cross sectional features, and plan implementation measures. The evaluation criteria
will be used to ensure that each concept is evaluated for consistency with the overall intent of
the community and the plan.

Goals, objectives and evaluation criteria are organized around key Plan elements.



                 Corridor Alignment/Junctions

Goals and Objectives

1. Improve mobility by accommodating through traffic and freight movement.

     a. Protect the function and operation of the corridor as a transportation facility of statewide
        significance.

     b. Provide for freight mobility between Redmond, Bend, and Prineville.

     c. Protect the function and operation of the existing local street network within the study
        area and maintain or improve local circulation.

     d. Connect to recreational opportunities.

2. Ensure that the planning and design of transportation system improvements minimizes
   environmental, cultural and social impacts to the greatest extent possible.

     a. Avoid geographic constraints and sensitive environmental resources, especially rimrock,
        wetlands, and farmland, to the greatest extent possible.

     b. Minimize impacts to community facilities and institutions and minimize property
        takings and displacement of existing businesses and residences.

3. Provide flexibility to respond to changing socio-economic conditions, concurrency of
   development and the opportunities and constraints represented by the various plans of the
   jurisdictions within and adjacent to the corridor.

     a. Coordinate with future land use and transportation plans for the area.

     b. Consider phased development as well as projected ultimate build-out.
Purpose and Need, Project Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Framework       Technical Memorandum
November 2, 2010                                                                           Page 4




                 Highway Cross Sectional Features

Goals and Objectives

4. Identify a roadway cross section that meets highway management goals and safety
   standards.

    a. Promote compatible land uses along the corridor.

    b. Manage access along the corridor.

    c. Balance streetscape features with maintenance considerations.

5. Improve traffic safety for all users.

    a. Provide for appropriate access for emergency vehicles.

    b. Provide appropriate speed management and driver warning measures.

    c. Identify short-, medium-, and long-term improvements to enhance safety along
       segments and at intersections.

    d. Provide for a short-, medium-, and long-term access management plan that minimizes
       the number and frequency of driveway accesses.



                 Plan Implementation

Goals and Objectives

6. Ensure effective plan implementation over time.

    a. Employ “least cost planning” and “range forecasting” techniques to help evaluate costs
       and benefits and to ensure that proposed improvements are correctly sized to maximize
       benefits.

    b. Develop state, regional and local partnerships to fund and implement the OR 126
       Corridor Facility Plan.

    c. Identify phased potential funding options.

    d. Consider staged and/or development-related construction if full funding is not available.

    e. Develop an ongoing monitoring program to assess Plan implementation and to identify
       needed adjustments.
Purpose and Need, Project Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Framework           Technical Memorandum
November 2, 2010                                                                               Page 5


D.      EVALUATION CRITERIA

Evaluation criteria will be used to compare the various OR 126 corridor concepts for the
purpose of screening design concepts that do not achieve the community goals and identifying
the most viable concepts for further development. These criteria reflect the project goals and
objectives as well as practical considerations such as cost and constructability. Because the
solution concepts may consider different combinations of alignments and streetscape options,
the evaluation criteria have been separated into two categories:

        Corridor Alignment/Junction Criteria, and
        Highway Cross Sectional Feature Criteria.
The following identifies the evaluation criteria.

Corridor Alignment/Junction Evaluation Criteria

Mobility - This criterion assesses the quality of flow for traffic along the OR 126 corridor.
Local Access - This criterion evaluates whether the concept maintains and/or enhances
vehicular access to the neighborhoods, businesses, and public facilities along the corridor.

Safety - This criterion considers the degree to which the concept enhances safety for all users
within the study area. Specific measures to be considered may include:

        Traffic safety,
        Farm equipment safety, and
        Emergency vehicle access.

Impacts to Natural Environment - This criterion addresses the environmental impacts of the
concept, including the impact to streams, wetlands, riparian areas, wildlife habitats, cultural,
historical, or scenic resources, open spaces, and other natural resources.

Impacts to Built Environment - This criterion considers the impact of the concept on existing
and future development in the study area, including property acquisition requirements, socio-
economic impacts, noise/air impacts, cultural resources, and hazardous waste sites.

Land Use Compatibility - This criterion assesses the concept’s consistency with the plans and
standards of Crook County and the City of Prineville. It also considers how the concept
supports or impacts future economic development opportunities.

Flexibility of Implementation - This criterion considers the feasibility of constructing the
concept in phases in order to preserve the function of the existing infrastructure and optimize
capital improvement budgets. It also considers the feasibility of expanding the corridor concept
to accommodate changes in future development and traffic patterns.

Cost Effectiveness - This criterion qualitatively evaluates the relative overall magnitude of
design and construction costs, including roadway construction, structures, right-of-way,
Purpose and Need, Project Goals, Objectives, and Evaluation Framework         Technical Memorandum
November 2, 2010                                                                             Page 6


environmental mitigations, and maintenance of traffic. It also qualitatively assesses the
economic benefits to gauge the overall relative value of the concept.

Highway Cross Sectional Evaluation Criteria

Aesthetic Enhancement - This criterion assesses the highway cross sectional feature concept’s
enhancement potential to the visual character of the corridor, including elements such as
landscaping and preservation of the rural character.

Environmental Features - This criterion considers the environmental impact of the concept’s
footprint as well as the degree to which the concept provides green street features.

Maintenance - This criterion considers the issues and requirements related to ongoing
maintenance and upkeep, including drainage system maintenance, pavement maintenance, and
landscape maintenance.

Functionality - This criterion considers the effectiveness and efficiency for the facility to serve
as an expressway and to serve all travel modes including passenger cars, trucks, emergency
vehicles, and farm equipment.
Technical Appendix B   Technical Memorandum #1:
                           Plan and Policy Review
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM #1
Plan and Policy Review
 

Date:                       December 31, 2010                                                                                             Project #: 11168 

Prepared by:                Darci Rudzinski, Angelo Planning Group 



I.          Purpose
This memorandum presents a review of state and local documents that provide the policy and
regulatory framework for transportation planning in the Study Area, defined as the OR 126 corridor
from the Crook County boundary east to downtown Prineville. The memorandum is the deliverable
for Task 3, Plans and Policies Review in the project scope of work. This review focuses on policies,
standards, and practices related to transportation planning for OR 126, with particular attention paid
to access management and highway design (including cross-section design and roadside character).
The following documents are reviewed in Section II for policies and regulations applicable to this
planning process.

     STATE OF OREGON/ODOT ............................................................................................................................. 2 
Oregon Transportation Plan (2006)............................................................................................................................ 2 
Oregon Highway Plan (1999, last amended 2006) ................................................................................................... 2 
Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan (1995).............................................................................................................. 7 
Access Management Rule (OAR 734-051) ............................................................................................................... 8 
Freight Moves the Oregon Economy (1999).............................................................................................................. 9 
Oregon Aviation Plan (2007)....................................................................................................................................... 9 
ODOT Highway Design Manual (2003, last revised 2008) ..................................................................................... 11 
State Transportation Improvement Program (2000-present).................................................................................. 11 

     LOCAL PLANS AND ORDINANCES .............................................................................................................. 12 
Crook County Comprehensive Plan (Last Amended 2002).................................................................................... 12 
Crook County Transportation System Plan (2005).................................................................................................. 13 
Crook County Coordinated Transportation Plan (2007).......................................................................................... 18 
Crook County Development Code ........................................................................................................................... 18 
City of Prineville Urban Area Comprehensive Plan (2007) ..................................................................................... 19 
City of Prineville Transportation System Plan (2005) .............................................................................................. 20 
City of Prineville Land Use Code .............................................................................................................................. 24 
Airport Layout Plan Report (2003) ............................................................................................................................ 25 
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                             Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                           Page 2



II.      Plan and Policy Review

STATE OF OREGON/ODOT

Oregon Transportation Plan (2006)
Originally adopted in 1992, the Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) is a policy document
developed by ODOT in response to federal and state mandates for systematic planning for the
future of Oregon's transportation system. The OTP is intended to meet statutory requirements
from ORS 184.618(1) to develop a state transportation policy and comprehensive long-range plan
for a multi-modal transportation system that addresses economic efficiency, orderly economic
development, safety, and environmental quality.

The 2006 OTP builds on the policy objectives of the 1992 plan, with an emphasis on maintaining
assets in place, optimizing existing system performance through technology and better system
integration, creating sustainable funding, and investing in strategic capacity enhancements.1
Goals in the OTP include: Mobility and Accessibility; Management of the System; Economic
Vitality; Sustainability; Safety and Security; Funding the Transportation System; and Coordination,
Communication and Cooperation. Policies and strategies under many of these goals emphasize
increasing coordination and cooperation among federal and state agencies, regional and local
governments and private entities to achieve these goals.

The Implementation Framework section of the OTP describes how state modal and facility plans and
local TSPs are expected to refine the OTP’s broad policies and investment levels. The result of this
planning process will be a corridor facility plan for OR 126. The State Agency Coordination Program
defines a facility plan as: “a plan for individual transportation facilities that includes identification of
needs for using the facility, an overall plan for improving the system and policies for operating
the facility.” Facility plans must be developed with public involvement, are intended to implement
the OTP and the applicable modal/topic plan goals, policies, implementation strategies, and
broad investment scenario, and, ultimately, must be adopted by the Oregon Transportation
Commission (OTC).

Oregon Highway Plan (1999)2
The Oregon Highway Plan (OHP), an element and modal plan of the state’s comprehensive
transportation plan (OTP), guides the planning, operations, and financing of ODOT’s Highway
Division. Policies in the OHP emphasize the efficient management of the highway system to
increase safety and to extend highway capacity, partnerships with other agencies and local
governments, and the use of new techniques to improve road safety and capacity. These policies
also link land use and transportation, set standards for highway performance and access
management, and emphasize the relationship between state highways and local road, bicycle,
pedestrian, transit, rail, and air systems.


1
  The OTP defines “asset management” as a “systematic process of maintaining, upgrading and operating physical
assets cost-effectively. It combines engineering principles with sound business practices and economic theory, and it
provides tools to facilitate a more organized, logical approach to decision-making. Asset management provides a
framework for handling both short- and long-range planning.”
2
  Current version available online (at http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/orhwyplan.shtml) includes amendments
covering November 1999 through January 2006)
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                  Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                Page 3
The policies found within the OHP that apply to planning in the OR 126 corridor include:

Policy 1A: State Highway Classification System;
Policy 1B: Land Use and Transportation;
Policy 1C: State Highway Freight System;
Policy 1F: Highway Mobility Standards;
Policy 1G: Major Improvements;
Policy 2B: Off-System Improvements;
Policy 2E: Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS);
Policy 2F: Traffic Safety;
Policy 3A: Classification and Spacing Standards;
Policy 3B: Medians;
Policy 3D: Deviations;
Policy 4A: Efficiency of Freight Movement;
Policy 4B: Alternative Passenger Modes;
Policy 4D: Transportation Demand Management;
Policy 4E: Park-and-Ride Facilities; and
Policy 5A: Environmental Resources.

Policy 1A: State Highway Classification System. The state highway classification system includes five
classifications: Interstate, Statewide, Regional, District, and Local Interest Roads. In addition, there
are four special purpose categories that overlay the basic classifications: special land use areas,
statewide freight routes, scenic byways, and lifeline routes. These special designations supplement
the highway classification system and are used to guide management, needs analysis, and
investment decisions on the highway system.

OR 126 in Crook County is classified as a Statewide Highway and a Freight Route, and is considered
a part of the National Highway System. The federal Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act
of 1991 required the establishment of a National Highway System to provide an interconnected
system of principal arterial routes that will serve “interstate and inter-regional travel.” ODOT has an
obligation to ensure that the National Highway System in Oregon adequately performs this function of
serving a larger geographic area.

According to Policy 1A, Statewide Highways (NHS):

    “…typically provide inter-urban and inter-regional mobility and provide connections to
    larger urban areas, ports, and major recreation areas that are not directly served by
    Interstate Highways. A secondary function is to provide connections for intra-urban and
    intra-regional trips. The management objective is to provide safe and efficient, high-
    speed, continuous-flow operation. In constrained and urban areas, interruptions to flow
    should be minimal. Inside Special Transportation Areas (STAs), local access may also
    be a priority.”
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                            Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                          Page 4
OR 126 is also classified as an Expressway within the OHP from the western Crook County
boundary (milepost 3.58) east to O’Neil Highway (milepost 17.92) in Prineville. As defined in the
OHP, expressways are intended to provide “safe and efficient high speed and high volume traffic
movements.” The primary function of an expressway is to provide for interurban travel and
connections to ports and major recreation areas with minimal interruptions; a secondary function is to
provide for long distance intra-urban travel in metropolitan areas. The OHP makes a distinction
between urban and rural areas, with speeds on expressways moderate to high in urban areas and
high speeds in rural areas, where there are typically no pedestrian facilities and bikeways may be
separated from the roadway.

Policy 1B: Land Use and Transportation. This policy recognizes the role of both the State and local
governments related to the state highway system and calls for a coordinated approach to land use
and transportation planning. This coordination must support highway mobility and safety as well as
local comprehensive plans, compact development, transportation options, economic vitality, and
overall livability for the communities through which state roads travel. This policy also recognizes that
state highways serve as the main streets of many communities and strives to maintain a balance
between serving local communities (accessibility) and the through traveler (mobility).3

Policy 1C: State Highway Freight System. This policy recognizes the need for the efficient movement
of freight through the state and principally applies to designated Freight Routes such as OR 126
within the Study Area. This policy recognizes that improving and maintaining the efficiency of
highway operations requires balancing the needs of freight movement with the needs of other users
of the highway system. Highways included in this designation have higher highway mobility
standards than other Statewide Highways (see Policy 1F).

Policy 1F: Highway Mobility Standards. This policy addresses state highway performance
expectations when planning for state facilities or implementing a facility plan, and provides guidance
for managing access and traffic control systems. Action 1F.1 states that highway mobility standards
apply to all state highway sections. For OR 126, a Freight Route and Statewide Highway, the
maximum volume to capacity (v/c) ratios for peak hour operating conditions are 0.75 for sections
inside the UGB where posted speeds are less than 45 mph, and 0.70 for posted speeds of 45 mph
and greater.4 Outside the UGB, the v/c ratio for peak hour operation conditions is 0.70.5 (See Table
1-1 in this memorandum.)




3
 Outside of the Study Area, there is a Special Transportation Area designation on OR 126 within the City of
Prineville, from Locust Street to Knowledge Street. The STA designation recognizes areas of compact
development located on a state highway within an urban growth boundary where the need for appropriate
local access outweighs the considerations of highway mobility. This designation modifies access
standards for the highway and raises the maximum volume-to-capacity ratio permitted at intersections in
this area, allowing a greater level of congestion before improvements would be required.
4
  In areas where it is designated an Expressway; from O’Neil Highway to the US 26 “Y” it is only a Statewide
Highway and a Freight Route, and the maximum v/c is 0.80 where the posted speed is less than 45 mph. See Table
4-6.
5
  The Crook County Transportation System Plan notes that for statewide highways on the NHS system such as US
26, the applicable mobility v/c standard is 0.75 in unincorporated communities and 0.70 along rural lands (p. 4-1).
 OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review   Technical Memorandum #1
 December 31, 2010                                                                 Page 5
Table 1-1 Mobility Standards for Highways Outside the Portland Metropolitan Area UGB




 Source: 1999 Oregon Highway Plan (OHP). For the purposes of this policy, the peak hour shall be the 30th
 highest annual hour. This approximates weekday peak hour traffic in larger urban areas.
 Interstates and Expressways shall not be identified as Special Transportation Areas.

 Where the volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratio within a corridor is worse than the identified standards in the
 OHP, and identified transportation improvements cannot bring performance to standard within the
 planning horizon, the performance standard for the highway will need to improve performance as
 much as feasible and to avoid further degradation of performance (Action1F.5.) The policy allows for
 the adoption of alternative highway mobility standards in cases such as metropolitan areas trying to
 strictly manage their growth, STA’s, and in areas with unique environmental and land use constraints.

 Policy 1G: Major Improvements. This policy requires maintaining performance and improving safety
 by improving efficiency and management before adding capacity.

 Policy 2B: Off-System Improvements. This policy recognizes that the state may provide financial
 assistance to local jurisdictions to make improvements to local transportation systems if the
 improvements would provide a cost-effective means of improving the operations of the state highway
 system.

 Policy 2E: Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). This policy seeks to improve the safety and
 efficiency of transportation facilities, and to generally maximize operations in a cost-effective way.
 The policy requires coordination with the Oregon Intelligent Transportation Systems Strategic Plan.

 Policy 2F: Traffic Safety. This policy emphasizes the state’s efforts to improve safety for all users of
 the highway system. Action 2F.4 addresses the development and implementation of the Safety
 Management System to target resources to sites with the most significant safety issues.

 Policy 3A: Classification and Spacing Standards. This policy addresses the location, spacing, and
 type of road and street intersections and approach roads on state highways. The primary function of
 Expressways is to provide connections to larger urban areas, ports and major recreation areas with
 minimal interruptions. Consistent with this function, the access management objectives for Statewide
 Highways that are also expressways include:
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                   Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                 Page 6
    •    Provide for safe and efficient high speed and high volume traffic movements.
    •    Discourage private access.
    •    Eliminate, over time, existing approach roads as opportunities occur or alternate
         access becomes available.
    •    Purchase access rights and develop a local road network consistent with the function
         of the roadway.
    •    Control and appropriately space public road connections.
    •    Future grade separations (interchanges) may be considered.
    •    Include necessary compatible land use actions in local comprehensive plans.
    •    Discourage traffic signals
    •    Prohibit parking
    •    Construct nonreversible medians in the modernization of all multi-lane Expressways
         that have traversible medians.

The policy includes standards for each highway classification. The adopted standards can be found
in Appendix C of the OHP; generally, the minimum access spacing distance increases as either the
highway’s classification or posted speed increases. The access management spacing standards
established in the OHP are implemented by OAR 734, Division 51, which is addressed later in this
report.

Policy 3B: Medians. This policy establishes the state’s criteria for the placement of medians in order
to “enhance the efficiency and safety of the highways, and influence and support land use
development patterns that are consistent with approved transportation system plans.” Action 3B.1
directs the state to plan for a level of median that is consistent with the classification of the highway
and specifies that corridor plans shall identify planned medians. Action 3B.2 directs the state to
design and construct non-traversable medians for modernization of all rural, multi-lane Expressways,
including Statewide (NHS), Regional and District highways.

Policy 3D: Deviations. This policy provides the foundation for requests for state highway approach
permits that require deviation(s) from access management standards. Procedures for requesting
deviations are included in OAR 734-051. Action 3D.5 identifies conditions to consider in evaluating
requests for deviations: queuing that increases delays and unsafe operations, pedestrian and bicycle
circulation, traffic controls, local road system requirements, improving connectivity to adjacent
properties or local road system, potential use of channelization, or potential use of nontraversible
medians.

Policy 4A: Efficiency of Freight Movement. This policy emphasizes the need to maintain and improve
the efficiency of freight movement on the state highway system. Action 4A.3 generally supports
Intelligent Transportation System Commercial Vehicle Operation technology in facilitating efficient
freight movement.

Policy 4B: Alternative Passenger Modes. This policy encourages the development of alternative
passenger services and systems as part of broader corridor strategies and promotes the
development of alternative passenger transportation services located off the highway system to help
preserve the performance and function of the state highway system.

Policy 4D: Transportation Demand Management. This policy establishes the state’s interest in
supporting demand management strategies that reduce peak period single occupant vehicle travel,
thereby improving the flow of traffic on the state highway system.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                    Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                  Page 7
Policy 4E: Park and Ride Facilities. Through this policy the state seeks to maximize the existing
transportation system and passenger capacity by supporting and developing park-and-ride facilities.
The Crook County TSP identifies an area near Les Schwab in the vicinity of OR 126 and Millican
Road as a possible future park and ride location (Section 6.9 Future Park and Ride Locations).

Policy 5A: Environmental Resources. This policy intends to protect the natural and built environment
– including air quality, fish and wildlife habitat, migration routes, vegetation, and water resources from
impacts from state highways and ODOT facilities. Impacts to identified natural resources must be
avoided or mitigated by any proposed construction or reconstruction projects on OR 126.

Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan (1995)
As a modal element of the Oregon Transportation Plan, the Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan
provides guidance for planning, design, and operation of bicycle and pedestrian facilities and
contains the standards and designs used on state highway projects for these facilities. The 1995
plan is comprised of the Policy and Action Plan (Part 1) and a Planning, Design, Maintenance, and
Safety section (Part 2). The policy section provides background information, including relevant state
and federal laws, and contains the goals, actions, and implementation strategies proposed by ODOT
to improve bicycle and pedestrian transportation. The plan states that bikeway and walkway systems
will be established on rural highways by widening shoulders as part of modernization projects, as well
as on many preservation overlay projects, where warranted. For urban highways, implementation
may take place:

     •      As part of modernization projects (bike lanes and sidewalks will be included);
     •      As part of preservation projects, where minor upgrades can be made;
     •      By restriping roads with bike lanes;
     •      With minor improvement projects, such as completing short missing segments of
            sidewalks;
     •      As bikeway or walkway modernization projects;
     •      By developers as part of permit conditions, where warranted.

Part Two addresses maintenance and construction issues, and establishes facility design standards
for the following bicycle and pedestrian facilities: on-road bikeways (pp. 66-70), restriping existing
roads with bike lanes (p. 86), walkways (pp. 91-92), multi-use paths (p. 117), signing and marking
(starting p. 143), and street crossings and intersections (crosswalks, raised crosswalks and raised
intersections, p. 111-112; intersections pp. 134-135). The plan section on street crossings (Section
II.5) includes standards and guidance for crosswalks, intersections, medians, and islands and
refuges.

Standard widths for bike lanes and walkways are six feet. Minimum widths are five feet for bike lanes
and walkways, when bike lanes are adjacent to curbs or parking lanes, and four feet for bike lanes
when they are on uncurbed shoulders or in other severely constrained areas. For shoulder
bikeways, recommended for rural highways, the plan refers to Highway Design Manual standards.
Widths should be six feet for roadways with ADT of 400-2000 and eight feet for roadways with ADT
greater than 2000.

The Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan is in the process of being updated. While many new pedestrian and
bicycle treatments have been developed and incorporated into the update, ODOT program staff
reports that few design standards for bike and pedestrian facilities will change. However, staff
indicates that standards for rumble strips may change, potentially making the strips “friendlier” to
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                             Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                           Page 8
bikes.6 Once adopted, the updated Oregon Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan Design Standards and
Guidelines will be referenced where bicycle or pedestrian facilities are planned as part of
improvements to OR 126.

Access Management Rule (OAR 734-051)
Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 734-051 defines the State’s role in managing access to highway
facilities in order to maintain functional use and safety and to preserve public investment. The
provisions in the OAR apply to the roadways under state jurisdiction. The access management rules
include spacing standards for various types of state roadways.7 These spacing standards are also
presented in a series of tables in Appendix C of the OHP.

Tables 12, 13, 18, and 19 in the OHP address spacing for interchanges and intersections on
Statewide Highways (NHS) in urban areas. A design exception is required to change these planning
standards. OHP Table 13 provides the spacing requirements between unsignalized intersections on
Statewide Highways. As shown in Table 1-2, the spacing standard for urban expressways is 2,640
feet; the spacing standard for rural expressways is 5,280 feet.

       Table 1-2      Access Management Spacing Standards for Statewide Highways




Source: 1999 Oregon Highway Plan (OHP).

From O’Neil Highway (milepost 17.92) east through Prineville, OR 126 is not classified as an
expressway and, outside of the STA, the spacing standards in Table 1-3 apply.

    Table 1-3   Spacing Standards for Unsignalized Intersections on OR 126 in Prineville
                                    (Outside of STA)

                                Posted Speed (mph)                 Spacing (feet)

                                         30-35                           720

                                         40-45                           990

                                           50                           1,100

                                          55+                           1,320



6
  Note: This information was obtained from ODOT as part of a 2009 document review for the South US 97 Corridor
Plan. Staff indicated that new standards were expected to reflect updated standards in AASHTO’s Guide for the
Development of Bicycle Facilities, and that these national standards were slated for update in 2009. (The 1999
edition of the Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities is available at AASHTO’s online bookstore.)
ODOT’s 2009 Traffic Manual states that: “The Department of Transportation has adopted the AASHTO publication,
Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, to establish bikeway design and construction standards, to establish
traffic control devices guidelines for bikeways, and recommend illumination standards (6.3 Bicycle Facilities).”
7
  "Spacing Standards" mean Access Management Spacing Standards as set forth in OAR 734-051-0115 and
specified in Tables 2, 3, and 4, which were adopted and made a part of Division 51 rules.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                   Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                 Page 9

Tables 18 and 19 of the OHP present the spacing standards for interchanges and cross-roads on
Expressways in urban areas. In general, 2,640 feet is required between the start and end of taper
sections for interchanges and cross-road intersections. One mile is required between an at-grade
intersection and ramp terminal intersection or the start or end of a taper section.

The access management rule also provides criteria for granting right of access and approach
locations onto state highway facilities (OAR 734-051-0080) and for potential deviations from spacing
standards (OAR 734-051-0135).

Recent legislation related to Access Management was included in Senate Bill 1024. A summary of
the bill is provided below.

         Senate Bill 1024
         Implementation Plan Manager: Harold Lasley, Highway, 503-986-4216
         Effective Date: March 4, 2010

         Access management is used to balance access to developed land from highways, roads and
         streets with the safe and efficient movement of traffic. Access management regulates the
         physical connections to streets, roads and highways from public roads and private driveways.
         ODOT has the statutory responsibility to control access to state highways (ORS 374.305).
         Senate Bill 1024 will change access permit requirements so that businesses can have
         greater increases in traffic volumes at existing highway accesses without obtaining a new
         permit. Currently, new permits are required for traffic increases that could result from a minor
         building expansion or remodel. ODOT will also develop access standards that allow closer
         access spacing on highways that are traveled by less than 5,000 vehicles per day.

         SB 1024 directs the department to work with stakeholders to develop proposed legislation to
         codify, clarify and bring consistency to issuance of access permits. The department must
         report to the Legislature prior to January 2011 on the proposed legislation.


Freight Moves the Oregon Economy (1999)
This report summarizes a variety of information about issues and needs surrounding the transport of
freight by roads, rail lines, waterways, aircraft, and pipelines. The document’s stated purpose is to
demonstrate the importance of freight to the Oregon economy and identify concerns and needs
regarding the maintenance and enhancement of current and future mobility within the state. Oregon
is also in the process of developing a Statewide Freight Plan, which would build off of this document.

The report describes the federal National Highway System (NHS), a classification system that
identifies the most significant highways for moving people and freight. OR 126 is part of the NHS and
included in the OHP’s State Highway Freight System. The report describes the State Highway
Freight System as including all of the state’s interstate highways and selected other highways
important to moving freight. The importance of freight movement will be a consideration during the
development of the OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan as it pertains to access to OR 126 and
balancing freight mobility needs with other highway functions.

Oregon Aviation Plan (2007)
The 2007 Oregon Aviation Plan (OAP) defines policies and investment strategies for Oregon’s public
use aviation system for the next 20 years. It further refines the goals and policies of the Oregon
Transportation Plan and is part of the OTP. The plan assesses the condition of the existing aviation
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                           Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                        Page 10
infrastructure, the economic benefit of the aviation industry, and the national importance and state
significance of each airport. It also provides an overview of the airports in the system and the
jurisdictional responsibilities at all levels of government for the management, maintenance, operation,
and funding of Oregon’s airports. The plan contains policies and recommended actions to be
implemented by Oregon Department of Aviation in coordination with other state and local agencies
and the Federal Aviation Administration.

The Policy Elements of the OAP recognizes that increasing connectivity between transportation
modes is an “important component for local jurisdictions when decisions are made to increase
capacity at an airport, whether the increase is to expand an existing airport or to develop new
facilities. Through the OAP, the State acknowledges that many surface transportation connections
accessing airports cross local jurisdictional boundaries and that it is “essential to foster and maintain
good intergovernmental communication and coordination (p. 1-14).”

The OAP categorizes airports based on functional role and service criteria. The Prineville Airport is
classified as a Category IV local general aviation airport. These airports support local air
transportation needs and special use aviation activities and primarily serve single-engine general
aviation aircraft, but are capable of accommodating smaller twin-engine general aviation aircraft.

Information about the Prineville Airport can be found in the Individual Airport Reports that are part of
the OAP. The Prineville Airport Individual Report describes the location of the airport and states that
“access to the Airport is provided by State Route 126, which serves as a critical transportation link
from central Oregon to the rest of the state (p. 17-34).” The airport is included in the National Plan of
Integrated Airport Systems (NPIAS), which makes it eligible for federal funding. Based on survey
data (Section 3.4), airport users are local businesses, recreational users, out-of-town business,
agriculture, and tourism. Surrounding communities rely on the Airport for fire protection.8

Regarding future growth, the importance of aviation for growth from an economic perspective is
ranked moderately low in survey results, although respondents noted that airport upgrades would
increase economic growth for the surrounding communities. Respondents were unsure if the city of
Prineville and Crook County would be supportive of a funding mechanism to finance future airport
developments, such as improving terminal amenities. Expanded services at the airport may impact
the volume of travelers. The report notes that the feasibility of a state operated and subsidized air
shuttle service is being investigated. Air shuttle service would link various communities within the
state, with the intent to facilitate commuting between smaller local communities. Survey respondents
noted that some form of an air shuttle service would fulfill a community need and would likely
promote economic growth for communities (p. 25-34).




8
  Prineville residents and businesses are also served by two other airports: the Bend Municipal Airport
(approximately 25 miles from Prineville) and the Roberts Field-Redmond Municipal Airport (approximately 16
miles from Prineville). The Bend Municipal Airport is classified as a Category II – Urban General Aviation airpot
by the Oregon Department of Aviation and has a single paved runway. The airport is uses for recreation, local
business, out-of-town business, tourism, and agriculture (Oregon Aviation Plan, 2007, Individual Airport Report).
The following is from the City of Redmond’s website: “Roberts Field-Redmond Municipal Airport (RDM) is owned
and operated by the City of Redmond for the tri-county area. It is the fourth largest commercial service airport in
Oregon serving all of Central Oregon. Commercial service is provided by Horizon Air (part of the Alaska Air
Group); United Express and Delta Connection (provided by SkyWest Airlines); and Allegiant Air. These carriers
offer approximately 46 arriving and departing flights daily to and from Denver, Las Vegas, Phoenix Mesa, Portland,
Salt Lake City, San Francisco, and Seattle. RDM also serves air cargo and general aviation traffic, including
extensive corporate and business travel. RDM is also home to Butler Air, Lancair, and the U.S.D.A. Forest Service.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                             Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                          Page 11
Chapter 4 of the Individual Airport Report contains a list of Airport Capital Improvement Program
(ACIP) projects, including runway extension, rehabilitating the terminal building, and rehabilitating the
access road.9

ODOT Highway Design Manual (2003, last revised 2008)
The Highway Design Manual includes ODOT standards and procedures for the location and design
of new construction, major reconstruction, and resurfacing, restoration or rehabilitation (3R) projects.
The Highway Design Manual is used for all projects that are located on state highways. The
following list of elements from the manual is not exhaustive, but provides examples of what will be
referenced in developing projects or any implementation measures in the Highway 126 Corridor Plan.

    •    Chapter 4 (Right-of-Way) – procedures for land acquisition, easements, and access control;
    •    Chapter 5 (General Design Standards) – design speed, sight distance, vertical and horizontal
         alignment, roadbed cross-sections including shoulders, travel lanes, and medians, non-
         freeway median design, clearance, guardrail and concrete barriers, and access
         management;
    •    Chapter 7 (Rural Non-Freeway) – design standards for Rural Arterial Highways Design (for
         highway segments that are not designed to look and function like an Expressway);
    •    Chapter 8 (Urban Highways) – expressways, design speed, OHP designations, lane widths,
         pedestrian and bike facilities, medians, access management;
    •    Chapter 9 (Intersection and Interchange Design) – general design considerations, signalized
         and unsignalized intersections, roundabouts;
    •    Chapter 10 (Special Design Elements) - hydraulics and geotechnical design, environmental
         studies, transportation analysis, permit types; and
    •    Chapter 11 (Pedestrian and Bicycle) - general guidance for facilities on rural and urban
         highways, reference to the Oregon Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan.

The design standards in the manual will be integrated into the detailed design and engineering that
will occur for projects once they are adopted in the Corridor Plan, incorporated into the local TSPs by
reference, and are programmed as part of the City’s and County’s Capital Improvement Program
(CIP) for transportation.

State Transportation Improvement Program (2000-present)
The State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) is the programming and funding document
for transportation projects and programs statewide. The projects and programs undergo a selection
process managed by ODOT Regions or ODOT central offices. The document covers a period of four
years and is updated every two years.

The Approved 2008-2011 STIP identified two projects within the study corridor, as summarized in
Table 1-4. The Draft 2010-2013 STIP has been released for public review and identifies one project
within the study corridor, which was also included in the 2008-2011 STIP. The final project list and
details are subject to the STIP adoption process.




9
 The Individual Airport Report for the Prineville Airport provides no further information or details about what
improvements are necessary to the “access road.”
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review   Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                Page 12
 Table 1-4 Draft and Approved STIP Projects within the OR 126 Facility Plan Corridor



                                  Total                                                        Year
            Section               Cost                 Description               Status       (FFY)

                                          2008-2011 - Approved

                                             Environmental Assessment
 OR126 @ Powell Butte Hwy EA    $750,000     Funded by Developer                  Plan         2010

 2ND St Egress to OR126/3RD                  One block of new street
 ST (Prineville)                $298,000     construction                         Final        2009

                                           2010-2013 - Draft

 2ND St Egress to OR126/3RD                  One block of new street
 ST (Prineville)                $298,000     construction                     Construction     2009




House Bill 3379 Administrative Rule Background

House Bill (HB) 3379, passed during the 2009 legislative session, directed the Oregon Transportation
Commission (OTC) to adopt an administrative rule to establish an application process that local
governments may use for economic development projects if they are not able to meet the funding or
timing requirements of the Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) related to state highways. The
administrative rule describes how a local jurisdiction may work with the OTC and ODOT to do one of
the following:

   •   Apply for a time extension to meet TPR requirements;
   •   Submit a plan proposing alternative methods of funding that will meet the standards adopted
       by the OTC;
   •   Apply to adjust traffic performance measures during an interim period prior to completion of
       construction of the proposed development; or
   •   Apply to allow various types of traffic performance measures other than volume to capacity
       ratios (v/c).

The OTC adopted the Administrative Rule in December 2010 and now provisions pertaining to the
above can be found in OAR 731-017-005 through -0055.

LOCAL PLANS AND ORDINANCES

Crook County Comprehensive Plan (Last Amended 2002)
The Comprehensive Plan is a statement of public policy for the guidance of growth, development,
and conservation of resources within the County. There is little background information in the
Comprehensive Plan related to OR 126 and there are no policies that directly relate to the function or
design of the highway. However, policies related to growth and transportation planning are relevant
to future planning for OR 126.

The Comprehensive Plan describes the dynamic tension between rural and urban land uses and the
County’s role in providing a planning framework that both preserves agricultural land and provides for
the smooth transition of rural to urban use. At the heart of this challenge are the valley areas to the
west of Prineville, where the most productive croplands within the county are concentrated, and the
Powell Butte area. The Comprehensive Plan details a number of amendments in the late 1990’s that
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                     Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                  Page 13
allowed rural residential development to occur south of Highway 126 and generally north of Powell
Butte and west of Stillman Road. Growth in these areas has put pressure on OR 126.

The policy framework set out in Chapter I is related to the urban growth boundary (UGB) and
urbanization. These policies relate to the timing, location, and funding of public facilities. Pertinent to
the Highway 126 Corridor Plan planning process, policies specifically address the role of
transportation facilities in supporting or restricting growth. Chapter I includes the following
implementation guidelines:

         1. The type, location and phasing of public facilities and services are factors which
            should be utilized to direct urban expansion.
         2. The type, design, phasing and location of major public transportation facilities (i.e.
            all modes: air, rail, mass transit, highways, bicycle and pedestrian) and
            improvements thereto are factors which should be utilized to support urban
            expansion into urbanizable areas and restrict it from rural areas.
         3. Financial incentives should be provided to assist in maintaining the use and
            character of lands adjacent to urbanizable areas.
         4. Local land use controls and ordinances should be mutually supporting, adopted
            and enforced to integrate the type, timing and location of public facilities and
            services in a manner to accommodate increased public demands as urbanizable
            lands become more urbanized.

Whether or not an area is served by transportation is part of two “urban development priority factors.”
Urban development criteria require that development take into account the costs of providing
transportation, provide for the efficient extension of the system, and have access to an existing
improved arterial or collector (Factors 4. and 6., p. 12).
Other policies related to future growth and impacts to OR 126 include those addressing employment
land. The first policy under the Industry Chapter is to “protect existing industrial development and
establish the Airport and Railroad Industrial Sites as a high priority for industrial expansion.” The
second policy is to direct growth to the “airport vicinity between Houston Lake Road and the
Redmond Highway (c).”
The following Air, Water and Land Resource policy also relates to the transportation system, and
may possibly influence the design of future OR 126 improvements:
         6. Provide for bicycling and walking as viable transportation alternatives and provide
            facilities for such (Transportation Element, Chapter IV ).
The Recreation chapter supports this policy with a statement that there is a need in the greater
Prineville area for bicycle paths; the Transportation chapter includes several policies relating to the
City of Prineville’s objective to encourage pedestrian and bicycle movement as a safe, feasible
alternative to the automobile for the metro area.

Crook County Transportation System Plan (2005)
The Crook County Transportation System Plan (County TSP) addresses the County’s anticipated
transportation needs through the year 2025. The long-range plan is intended to serve as a guide for
managing existing County transportation facilities and developing transportation facilities to meet
existing and future needs.

Transportation Goals and Policies are found in Section 2.0. County policies describe four phases of
transportation improvements along OR 126, address Prineville Airport access onto OR 126, and
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                             Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                          Page 14
reference the County’s IGA with ODOT regarding the Powell Butte jurisdictional transfer and
associated improvements along OR 126. The following policies are found under Goal 1 – Mobility:

         1.11. Future transportation improvements along OR 126 shall occur by a four phase
         process. These phases are: 1) passing lanes every 3-5 miles; 2) continuous four
         lane section; 3) grade separate the higher volume road intersections with
         interchanges and/or overpasses; 4) full access control with median barriers, frontage
         roads. Depending on the intersection, some elements of Phase 3 and Phase 4 can
         be intermixed.

         1.12. Any transporting changes near the Prineville Airport must consider the current
         Prineville Airport Layout Plan when considering such changes. Crook County does
         not necessarily support the conclusions of the 1998 City of Prineville Transportation
         System Plan in regard to their preferred option to improve the airport industrial area
         access to OR 126. The City of Prineville is in the process of updating their
         transportation system plan and should closely coordinate the airport industrial area
         access issues to OR 126 with Crook County since part of the affected facility and
         traffic is on county roads. The ultimate solution should adequately connect Tom
         McCall Road and Millican Road together in an efficient manner with one interchange
         connection to OR 126.

         1.13. Crook County recognizes that the IGA agreements with ODOT in regard to the
         Powell Butte jurisdictional transfer and the improvements along OR 126 provide the
         framework to implement the transportation improvements along those corridors.
         Specifically, the IGA addresses the planning and funding of the Powell Butte Highway
         interchange with OR 126 and the eventual four-lane widening of OR 126 from
         Redmond to Prineville. In addition, the IGA addresses the process to develop the
         Tom McCall Road/Millican Road interchange with OR 126.

It should be noted that the ultimate recommendations of the corridor facility plan may be inconsistent
with these adopted policies. For example, if roundabouts adequately address issues at the “higher
volume road intersections,” and become part of the preferred design for the facility, grade separation
at these intersections will not be necessary (Policy 1.11 above). Recommendations for specific
policy amendments will be developed as part of the implementation phase of the corridor facility plan
planning process. Similarly, the IGA between ODOT and the County addressing the planning and
funding issues in Powell Butte will need to be revisited and possibly revised, based on the outcomes
of the corridor facility plan.

The Existing Conditions section of the TSP lists OR 126 as one of the five state highways that form
the “backbone of Crook County’s street system (p. 3-6).” The TSP describes the facility as follows:

         Oregon 126 is an east-west highway that connects Crook County to Deschutes
         County and eventually to the Oregon Coast. The highway is classified as a statewide
         highway and is a principal arterial. The highway is a two-lane facility with a 55 mph
         speed limit. There are five to six foot shoulders that exist along Oregon 126 in the
         Crook County section of highway (p. 3-7).10



10
  Crook County staff questioned the accuracy of this description as it relates to existing shoulders along OR 126 in
a December 15, 2010 Planning Project Management Team meeting. Ultimately, a recommendation to revise this
TSP section may be an outcome of the OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan process.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                           Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                        Page 15
Table 3-1, Roadway Inventory, provides the posted speeds and roadway design for six specific
segments of OR 126, from Prinevillle to the County line.

Section 4.0 Existing Conditions and Deficiencies includes a level of service and v/c analysis for the
30th highest hour A.M. and P.M. weekday peak hours for highway intersections in unincorporated
Crook County. OR 126 intersections are included in Table 4-2, Existing Levels of Service; the
analysis found that traffic operations at the major intersections are all acceptable.

Subsection 4.3, High Crash Locations, examines the safety of County highways. Based on crash
data obtained from the Oregon Department of Transportation for the period between January 1, 2000
and December 31, 2002 and reasonable of evaluating the rate of crashes, no intersections on OR
126 were considered high crash locations and none met traffic signal warrants.11 Four fatalities
occurred along Oregon 126 within the two year period, but the analysis conducted for the County
TSP concluded that there does not appear to be a pattern.

Finally in the Existing Conditions and Deficiencies section, bicycle and pedestrian facilities are
examined. Section 4.8 points out that shoulders exist sporadically along the state highway system
throughout unincorporated Crook County and identifies OR 126 for future consideration for shoulder
widening projects to accommodate pedestrians and bicyclists. Bicyclists can also use O’Neil Highway
between Prineville and Redmond, which has lower vehicular volumes.

Section 5.0, 2025 Travel Demand Forecast and Future Deficiencies, includes the County’s future
traffic volume projections (Section 5.4). The 2025 traffic volumes were forecasted based on annual
historical growth factors along the state highways in Crook County. Table 5-7 summarizes the
historical traffic counts and annual growth factors used to forecast the 2025 traffic volumes for the
study area intersections. Based on the 2025 traffic volumes, levels of service and volume-to-capacity
(v/c) ratios were calculated for the study area intersections. Both the A.M. and P.M. peak hours were
analyzed for the 2025 condition. The levels of service and v/c ratio analyses are summarized in
Table 5-9. The following three OR 126 intersections are projected to operate beyond the maximum
V/C standard for unsignalized intersections:

         • OR 126/Powell Butte Highway – In the 2025 A.M. and P.M. peak hours, the
         northbound and southbound approaches are projected to operate above a v/c ratio of
         1.00. The v/c ratio standard is 0.70 on OR 126 and 0.75 on Powell Butte Highway.
         The poor v/c ratio at the northbound and southbound approaches is primarily due to
         heavy through movement traffic volumes on OR 126 conflicting with turning
         movements on the side street approaches. In addition, in the P.M. peak hour, the
         westbound left turn from OR 126 to Powell Butte Highway is projected to operate at
         v/c ratio of 0.95.

         • OR 126/Stillman Road SW – In the 2025 A.M. and P.M. peak hours, the northbound
         approach is projected to operate with a v/c ratio of over 1.00. These v/c ratios are well
         above the maximum v/c standard of 0.80 for the side street, Stillman Road. The poor
         v/c ratio is primarily due to heavy through movement traffic volumes on OR 126
         conflicting with turning movements on the side street approach.

         • OR 126/Millican Road SW – In the 2025 A.M. peak hour, the southbound approach
         is projected to operate with a v/c ratio of over 1.00. In the 2025 P.M. peak hour, the
         northbound and southbound approaches are projected to operate with a v/c ratio of

11
  If an unsignalized intersection has five or more crashes per year, the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD) allows the intersection for consideration of signalization.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                          Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                       Page 16
         over 1.00. These v/c ratios are well above the maximum v/c standard of 0.85 for the
         side street, Millican Road. The poor v/c ratio is primarily due to heavy through
         movement traffic volumes on OR 126 conflicting with turning movements on the side
         street approach.

Based on the v/c ratio analysis and level of service (Table 5-9) the TSP concludes that these three
ODOT intersections will need future improvements. The TSP also anticipates that additional travel
lanes on OR 126 may be necessary, based on the 2025 projected daily traffic volumes. Information
in Section 5.5, Future Intersection and Roadway Capacity Deficiencies, reiterates the County’s intent
that transportation improvements along OR 126 occur in four phases (see Policy 1.11, cited above).
The stated goal of this four-phase approach is “to incrementally improve an existing two-lane rural
highway, culminating in a four-lane facility with grade-separated interchanges and frontage roads.
The timing of improvements may be tied to volume-capacity (v/c) ratios, levels of service, crash rates
per million vehicle miles, reducing types of crashes, or other performance standards. It is anticipated
that a refinement study will need to be conducted along OR 126 to address the specific timing,
phasing, and configuration of the improvements (p. 5-13).”

Section 5.7 summarizes improvement recommendations from the 1995 Crook County OR 126 Study
for areas outside of Prineville’s UGB. This section characterizes OR 126 as principally a rural
corridor in the County, where side street approaches are typically stop-sign controlled and several
major intersections are in need of turning lanes. Recommendations from the OR 126 Study and
other improvements identified by local agencies are outlined in Table 1-5.12

Improving access to OR 126 in order to adequately serve the transportation needs of the airport
industrial area is the one future deficiency identified from the City of Prineville’s 1998 TSP (Section
5.8). The County TSP also cautions that the growth rates used to develop the 2025 traffic volumes
are conservative and may not account for “accelerated traffic growth” due to residential growth in the
County or destination resort sitings. The TSP states that traffic volumes should be monitored at least
every three years in high growth areas such as Powell Butte, Juniper Canyon, OR 126 corridor, and
the airport industrial area. (Section 5.9).

Section 6.0, Transportation System Alternatives Analysis, describes scheduled STIP projects in the
County, including replacing the Crooked River Bridge along OR 126 in Prineville (2005) and passing
lanes along OR 126 from Milepost 4.00 to Milepost 6.00 (2006) (Table 7-4 Roadway Capital
Improvement List and Cost). This section also explores the options in the 1998 City of Prineville TSP
for improving the OR 126 access to the Airport Industrial Area, noting that this was the one roadway
improvement in the UGB that would have an impact to the County roadway system. The Millican
Road intersection, along with the Powell Butte Highway intersection, is projected to operate below an
acceptable level or service and/or v/c ratio and therefore is a candidate for a grade-separated rural
interchange. The County’s TSP recommends working with the City during their (2005) TSP update in
defining a preferred alternative that “meets the airport’s needs as well as the airport industrial area
vehicle access needs to OR 126 (p 6-6).”

The TSP calls for a refinement study to develop interchange configurations for the OR 126/Powell
Butte Highway intersection. The IGA agreement between Crook County and ODOT that transferred
Powell Butte Highway to Crook County recognizes that ODOT will secure funding for the OR
126/Powell Butte Highway interchange. Other improvements called for in the County TSP include
widening OR 126 (noting that there is an IGA agreement between the County and ODOT that

12
  In email correspondence dated December 28, 2010, the County has provided additional information regarding
access locations to be considered for closure at the following locations: Wiley Road, Minson Road, DA Yates Road,
Bozarth Road, Kissler Road, and Copley Road.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                              Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                           Page 17
recognizes the need to provide four lanes along OR 126) and improving Millican Road from OR 126
to OR 20 to meet ODOTs standards for a Truck Route.

                  Table 1-5        State and Local Agency Identified Improvements

    Reference        Improvement                 Description                 Source                Status
                         Type                   (Timeframe)

        1         Right-turn Lane          Eastbound OR 126 at         Crook County OR        Completed
                                           Powell Butte Highway        126 Study (1995)
                                           (2005)

        2         Reconstruct              Add lane to provide a       Crook County OR        Completed
                  Approach                 left-turn and shared        126 Study (1995)
                                           through-right lane
                                           northbound on Powell
                                           Butte Highway at OR
                                           126 (2016)

        3         Left-turn Lane           Westbound OR 126 at         Crook County OR        Not Completed
                                           Stillman Road (2010-        126 Study (1995)
                                           2015)

        4         Major Street Left-       Undefined locations to      Crook County OR        Not Completed
                  Turn Lanes1              be determined, as-          126 Study (1995)
                                           needed, to reduce
                                           crashes

        5         Access                   Serve transportation        City of Prineville     Not Completed
                  Improvements             needs of airport            TSP (1998)
                                           industrial area

        6         Bridge                   Crooked River Bridge        Statewide              Completed
                  Replacement              (2005)                      Transportation
                                                                       Improvement
                                                                       Program (STIP)

        7         Passing Lanes            From milepost 4.00 to       Statewide              Completed
                                           6.00 (2006)                 Transportation
                                                                       Improvement
                                                                       Program (STIP)

        8         OR 126 Widening          Provide 4-lanes of travel   County TSP (2005)      Not Completed

        9         Millican Road            Modifications from OR       County TSP (2005)      Not Completed
                  Improvements             125 to OR 20 to meet
                                           ODOT Standards for
                                           Truck Route

       10         Refinement Study         Develop Alternatives for    County TSP (2005)      Not Completed
                                           OR 126/ Powell Butte
                                           Highway Interchange

       11         ITS Project              OR 126 Parrish and          County TSP (2005)      Unknown
                                           Minson System – VMS
                                           Powell Butte Highway
       12         ITS Project                                          County TSP (2005)      Unknown
                                           and
                                           OR 126 System – ATR &
                                           RWIS & CCTV
1
  These are considered a temporary solution and would eventually be eliminated as grade separated facilities were
created as part of the four phase improvement process. “A consideration in the left turn warrant process should be
the four phase improvement process to eventually build OR 126 into a four-lane, controlled access facility.
Consideration for access control, consolidation of accesses onto OR 126, development of frontage roads, and other
access management measures should be considered prior to and in conjunction with installing left turn lanes onto
OR 126 (p. 5-15).”
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                             Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                          Page 18
Section 6.6 includes a list of ITS projects the Crook County Road Department plans to deploy in the
County. ITS projects that include OR 126 include:
       • OR 126 Parrish and Minson – System – VMS
       • Powell Butte Highway and OR 126 – System – ATR & RWIS & CCTV
Modernization and operation projects are listed in Table 6-1.

Crook County Coordinated Transportation Plan (2007)
The Crook County Coordinated Transportation Plan (Coordinated Transportation Plan) is the
County’s coordinated human services transportation plan. The purpose of the Coordinated
Transportation Plan is to improve transportation services for the disabled, seniors, and individuals
with lower incomes by identifying opportunities to coordinate existing resources; providing a strategy
to guide the investment of financial resources; and guiding the acquisition of future grants (p. 3). In
order for a public transportation project to be eligible for Special Transportation Fund (STF)13 and/or
Pubic Transit Division Discretionary Grant programs, it must come from, or be consistent with, the
Coordinated Transportation Plan priorities. The plan’s priorities will be used by the Crook County
STF Committee and the ODOT Public Transit Division to review and recommend public
transportation funding applications submitted by transportation providers and organizations.14 There
are seven “High Priority” strategies for addressing the gaps and barriers to providing public
transportation to the targeted populations. Of these, the following has implications for future trips on
OR 126:

     •   Expand public transportation service hours of operation, weekends and weekday
         Evenings
     •   Expand Dial-A-Ride service boundaries beyond current 8-mile radius from downtown
         Prineville
     •   Increase the availability of inter-community services to Bend, Redmond, Madras

While the Coordinated Transportation Plan does not provide policy direction regarding future
improvements on OR 126, meeting the unmet transportation needs and improving services for
special populations may have implications for travel patterns on the highway.

Crook County Development Code
In addition to recommendations related to facility design and function, the corridor facility plan will
include recommendations for modifications to local land use or land development ordinances that
support the long-term operation of OR 126. Title 18 of the County Code is the Crook County zoning
ordinance. Existing County zoning in the corridor is shown in Figure 2-2 in Technical Memorandum
#2. The code does not explicitly permit transportation improvements outright in these zones.15

13
   As noted in the Coordinated Transportation Plan, “the STF for Elderly and Disabled was established by the
legislature in 1985, and is administered by the Public Transit Division of the Oregon Department of Transportation.
Revenues come from two sources – a tax on cigarettes and the General Fund budget. Three quarters of the STF
(75%) is distributed by formula to each county. The remaining 25% of STF funds are administered by ODOT
through a competitive statewide grant program known as the discretionary application process. Funds can be used
for the purchase or replacement of vehicles and other capital equipment, operations, planning and development. The
amount of formula funds allocated to each county is based on population. (p. 7)”
14
   A list of transportation providers in the county can be found under Subsection 3.2, Transportation Infrastructure.
Included are private, public, and non-profit providers. Providers include bus and cab companies.
15
   EFU-JA (Juniper Acres) permits outright the “minor betterment of existing public roads and highway-related
facilities (Section 18.112.010)”; roadway improvements within the public right-of-way are permitted conditionally
in the F-1 Forest Zone.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                              Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                           Page 19

Adopted County road standards that govern development along OR 126 include requiring approval
from ODOT where a subdivision requires an access approach to the highway (Section 17.36.020.14,
Chapter 17.36, Design Standards). This requirement is reiterated in the County’s final plat
requirements, which states that the “necessary access permits shall be obtained prior to final plat
approval” where access is requested to a state highway (Section 17.20.060.9). The Development
Code does not require traffic impact analysis as part of legislative amendment approval or
development review.

Where a subdivision abuts an existing or proposed arterial street, the County Planning Commission
can require as part of subdivision approval “marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots with
suitable depth, screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear of side property
line, or other treatment necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic (Section 17.36.020.11). Standards for road construction refer
to American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials guidelines and ODOT
Standard Specifications for construction (Section 17.36.020.15).

City of Prineville Urban Area Comprehensive Plan (2007)
The Prineville Urban Area Comprehensive Plan (Plan) “anticipates community planning needs for all
aspects of the urban environment” and serves as the City’s policy guide for directing and managing
growth within the Urban Growth Boundary (UGB). The Plan has few policies directly associated with
planning on OR 126. However Chapter 5, Economy, contains demographic and background
information related to employment that will have an impact on the transportation system, and OR 126
specifically. Chapter 5 includes the “recent development” of the Millican Highway connection from
Highway 20 (Burns) to OR 126 at the industrial park” in a description of the City’s locational
advantages. It states that the addition of truck stop services near the intersection of the Millican
Highway and OR 126 will help to serve the industry while reducing the negative impact of the truck
traffic upon the rest of the community at the City center. The Les Schwab distribution plant is also
located off of Millican.16

Existing conditions information includes the statement that car commuting in the County is higher
than other places in Central Oregon due to the rural setting and distances from employment areas in
Bend and Redmond. The Plan clearly states a desire to provide jobs in the community and reduce
daily commuting to other cities. In addition, current lack of desirable industrial land in Bend and
Redmond and the City’s 2004 UGB expansion, which added over 540 acres of industrial land to the
UGB, may influence commuting patterns and reduce traffic on OR 126 (p. 74, p. 78).
Chapter 5 identifies the Prineville Airport as a major industrial area and a top local priority for
infrastructure planning and economic expansion incentives. This area includes the Tom McCall
Industrial Park, over 100 acres owned by the County and private developers, the Prineville Industrial
Park (Tom McCall Expansion), 118 acres of privately owned land, and the Prineville Airport
Business/Industrial Park, which has sites available for industrial and commercial development (lease
only). The economic analysis concludes that there is a need for additional industrial lands that are
situated near the airport, which will require a future UGB expansion.17 The Plan includes the policy
that “adequate public facilities must be planned, funded, and installed to serve industrial sites and
commercial areas (p. 89).”

16
   Prineville has the highest per capita of manufacturing jobs in the state, due in part to Les Schwab, which accounts
for 50% of the City’s private sector jobs (Comprehensive Plan, p.69).
17
   Removing constrained land and land that has been identified for rezoning from industrial to other uses the Plan
now estimates the long term industrial need at 1,393 acres (p. 84). It does not specify how much of this need should
be accommodated near the airport.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                         Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                      Page 20
Chapter 6, Transportation and Circulation, acknowledges the importance of the highway system to
the City through Goal # 1 and a few of its associated policies:
          •      Create a functional transportation system to maximize and extend the life of
                 transportation facilities and improve livability throughout the Prineville community.
          •      The highway systems contribute to the local economy and bring goods and
                 services into the community bolstering local commerce and tourism.
          •      The Prineville community desires to balance the highway needs of regional users
                 with the local users in order to avoid creating highway improvements that sacrifice
                 local values and damage economic interests.
          •      Innovative intersection designs such as roundabouts can reduce cost and
                 improve livability.
The Transportation chapter also describes operations and planned improvements at the Prineville
Airport (p. 101). There are approximately 500 take-offs and landings per month with over 20,000
people per year using the Crook County airport. There are two runways and improved taxiway,
which is sufficient to handle corporate jets and general use aviation aircraft. Most of Crook County’s
large business, commercial and heavy industrial firms use the airport. The Plan states that airport
development and expansion is important for Crook County’s overall economic growth and that the
airport is in the process of expanding, consistent with the adopted Airport Expansion Plan.18

City of Prineville Transportation System Plan (2005)
The City of Prineville Transportation System Plan (TSP) serves as a guide for the management of
existing transportation facilities and the design and implementation of future facilities within the City.
Chapter 1 provides a review of the OHP, which includes the mobility standards for highways within
the UGB. The information below is from Table 1-1 Mobility Standards for Prineville UGB Area –
Volume-to-Capacity Ratios for State Highways.

Table 1-6: Mobility Standards for OR 126 in Prineville
                                                     Volume-to-Capacity Ratios
                                                                                    Highway
                                                         Posted TravelSpeed
     Highway                                                                        Category
     Route No.          From             To           < 45 mph     > = 45 mph

                      Prineville                                                     State /
      OR 126                         O’Neil Hwy          0.70          0.70
                        UGB                                                        Expressway

      OR 126         O’Neil Hwy.    US 26 (“Y”)          0.80          0.75        State / NHS
Table 3-1 of the TSP, State Highway Classification, identifies Ochoco Highway as having a
Statewide highway classification and describes the facility as:

          Highway 126 to the west of Prineville and Highway 26 through and east of Prineville.
          It is the focus of the downtown commercial development and carries the greatest
          amount of traffic in the city.

Along with Highway 26, OR 126 is cited as the most important highway in Prineville (p. 13). Goals
and objectives related to corridor planning along OR 126 include:



18
  The Comprehensive Plan notes that the Airport Expansion Plan is in the Appendix; however, the Appendix is not
included in the document that is posted on the City’s website.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                     Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                  Page 21
         GOAL: Reduce congestion, improve circulation, and provide safe side-street access
         along Highway 126, Third Street, and Main Street.

         Objectives
         A. Develop a safe and efficient arterial and collector system which maintains the
            integrity of the downtown business district and minimizes the impact on street-
            side parking.
         B. Develop parallel, local streets to state highways to reduce conflict points on the
            highway system.
         C. Improve intersection operations by enhancing traffic signal operations, installing
            new traffic signals (where warranted), actuating and coordinating traffic signals,
            and/or increasing sight distance as needed.
         D. Provide signage directing vehicles to business, industrial, and recreational
            centers.

         GOAL: Preserve the function, capacity, level of service and safety of the
         transportation system.

         Objectives
         A. Adopt access management standards, level of service policies and street design
            standards (including new standards for “local” streets) which balance the need for
            access with the need for automobile, pedestrian and bicycle safety and with the
            need for efficient movement of through traffic and which are consistent and
            compatible with those standards adopted by ODOT (1999 Oregon Highway Plan)
            and Crook County.
         B. Work with ODOT to support airport facility improvements (including access
            to/from the airport and industrial areas) identified in the current airport master plan
            for Prineville Municipal Airport. (Note: from the Interim Corridor Strategy for
            Highway 126.)

The inventory of existing transportation facilities (Chapter 3) describes the City’s arterial network,
which includes OR 126. US 26 and OR 126 merge on the west side of the City to form a single
roadway bisecting Prineville from east to west. Named Third Street within city limits, US 26 has a
major arterial street designation and is described in the TSP as the primary corridor of commercial
development.

Chapter 3 includes a description of the Prineville Municipal Airport. Annexed in 1995, the airport is
located west of the city, north of OR 126. It is a general aviation airport with two paved runways that
is used by most of the large local business, commercial, and heavy industrial firms in the area, as
well as the United States Forest Service. It is served by one fixed-base operator and there were
approximately 30 general aviation aircraft based at the airport in 1994. At that time, there were an
estimated 4,500 operations at the airport, which utilized approximately 4% of the airport’s capacity.

Existing (2005) traffic conditions are found in Chapter 4. The 2005 two-way, p.m. peak hour traffic
volumes reveal that the highest volumes occur on Third Street, with about 1,680 vehicles entering
and exiting from the "Y" intersection of US 26 and OR 126. The analysis of existing conditions shows
that the OR 126 / O’Neil Highway (eastbound left-turns at stopped approach to OR 126) and the OR
126 / US 26 (southbound left-turns at stopped approach within “Y”) intersections exceed their
respective V/C standard (Table 4-3). The “Y” intersection is described as follows:

         The western entrance to Prineville at the junction of US 26 and OR 126 will become
         more congested with growing traffic conditions. Higher levels of truck traffic through
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                       Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                    Page 22
         the “Y” configuration, controlled by two separate stop signs and yield indicators with
         single-lane merging at critical points is already problematic. Alternatives to easing
         traffic demand and better facilitation of through, truck traffic should be identified and
         evaluated in the Alternatives Analysis, including the option of a new roundabout to
         replace the existing “Y” configuration.

Chapter 5, Growth and Travel Forecasts, records that the annual traffic growth is expected to be 1.81
percent along state highways. This average growth rate reflects the historic growth in traffic due to
new land developments within the UGB and greater Crook County, as well as growth in inter-city
travel (p.5-2). Growth rates along OR 126, by mile point within the UGB are found in Table 5-1.
Future 2025 traffic volumes are expected to be highest on Third Street between the “Y” connection
(US 26/OR 126) and Juniper Street (Figure 5-2). Conditions at the intersections on OR 126 at O’Neil
Highway and US 26, already exceeding mobility standards in 2005, are expected to significantly
worsen by year 2025. In addition, by 2025 the OR 126/Tom McCall intersection will also exceed the
mobility standards (p. 5-5). The 2025 traffic conditions on OR 126 in the airport area will warrant
traffic signals at both Millican Road and Tom McCall Road (see Table 6-3).

Chapter 6 of the TSP summarizes the future transportation system alternatives the City explored to
help alleviate the levels of traffic congestion expected by year 2025. Improvements to OR 126 are
examined in the “build alternatives” as part of two sub-areas: Subarea 1 – Improvements to junction
of OR 126 and US 26 (safety, access and capacity) and Subarea 2 - Improvements to OR 126
access in the Prineville Airport and industrial area (safety, access and capacity). Because it was
assumed that a fully grade-separated interchange would be “extremely costly and perhaps
unwarranted within the 20-year planning horizon,” the TSP focused on two types of intersection traffic
control measures at the “Y” junction to increase capacity and multi-modal access at the junction:
traffic signal and roundabout. The analysis of future traffic conditions indicates that a new traffic
signal at the junction, even with additional turn lanes, would result in future traffic conditions that
exceed the OHP mobility standard by 2025 (Figure 6-2). The TSP indicates that a roundabout
design with slip lanes is the preferred alternative, but recommends that the City and ODOT pursue
both roundabout concept options examined, and narrow the analysis to a final, recommended design
for eventual construction (p. 6-4). The optimal improvement for Subarea 2 was determined to be an
interchange at Tom McCall. The Tom McCall interchange option (Option #1) was found to be “the
most desirable interchange option that optimized OR 126 operations, provided improved access and
safety to the industrial area, and minimized the impact to the airport area operations (Figure 6-3).”

The street system alternatives analysis in Chapter 6 also includes an examination of how to improve
access across Crooked River (Subarea 5). The intent is to provide alternate route connections to OR
126 (3rd Street), improve safety on OR 126, and potentially relieve future traffic congestion in the
downtown Prineville area. The recommendations (p. 6-30) include:

         a. Extend Crestview Road to the Crooked River Highway to add second river
            crossing and provide partial median control of OR 126 at Rimrock Road.
         b. Re-align and extend O’Neil Highway across the Crooked River to US 26 at 9th
            Street and provide full median control at the existing intersection of OR 126 and
            O’ Neil Highway.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                        Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                     Page 23
The City’s transportation policies and street system plan are found in Chapter 7. The following
policies are relevant to planning on OR 126:

         Intergovernmental Coordination and Consistency
         17. The City of Prineville should coordinate their transportation planning and
         construction efforts with those of the Crook County, the State of Oregon
         Department of Transportation, and other affected agencies as appropriate.
         Local transportation plans will be consistent with those developed at the regional
         and state level.

         Arterial and Collector Street Intersections
         4. Left-turn pockets should be incorporated into the design of all intersections of
         arterial streets with other arterial and collector streets, as well as collector streets with
         other arterial and collector streets.

         Access Management
         11. On State highways within the Prineville UGB, new direct access points should
         conform to Division 51 of the Oregon Administrative Rules. Alternatives to direct
         access including, but not limited to, shared driveways, frontage roads, side street or
         alley access, should be utilized where possible.

         Development and Adoption of Access Management Standards
         h.) All new access to State highways within the Prineville UGB should conform to
         Division 51 of the OAR.

         Bicycle System Policies
         4. The City of Prineville should actively work with ODOT to improve bicycling on State
         Highways within Prineville.

         G. Freight Movement Policies:
         Access to Streets and Highways
         1. The City of Prineville shall create a street and highway system that provides direct
         and efficient access to, and between, Prineville Urban Area industrial and commercial
         centers and statewide transport corridors.

The City’s Street Functional Classification map and policies identify state highways as arterials (p.7-
15, Figure 7-1). However, it is expected that state highways will follow the guidelines of the OHP (p.
7-27). Table 7-3 includes the access management spacing standards for state highways and the
designations for highway segments in Prineville.

The OR 126-related street improvements include:

         [7] WYE Junction Roundabout: Complete project engineering and construct
         roundabout at the junction of US 26 and OR 126. This project provides significant
         long-term highway capacity, serves as a “gateway” feature and entrance to downtown
         Prineville, and helps manage access to OR 126 while providing sufficient access
         enhancements to local businesses [short-term].

         [8] OR 126/McCall Road Interchange Improvement: Construct McCall Road
         interchange at OR 126 to improve access in the Prineville Airport Industrial Area
         [long-term].
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                       Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                    Page 24
         [12] O’Neil Highway Re-alignment: Complete engineering and study then construct
         realignment of O’Neil Highway to intersect with US 26 at about Ninth Street. This
         project may require a minor re-alignment of Ninth Street to complete the major, four-
         legged intersection rather than an off-set of O’Neil Highway and Ninth Street
         (Northern Arterial) at US 26. This project provides significant relief to traffic congestion
         and enhances safety at the intersection of OR 126 and O’Neil Highway [long-term].

These identified improvements may change as a result of the evaluations conducted as part of the
OR 126 Highway Corridor Facility Plan. The implementation section (p. 7-43) notes that none of the
projects that involve state facilities are currently included in the STIP.

The Air Service Element of the TSP notes that the Prineville Airport is part of the Oregon Aviation
System Plan (OASP) and is owned and operated by Crook County and the City of Prineville. The
2003 Prineville Airport Layout Plan and Airport Layout Plan Report are referenced, but not included
as part of the TSP (see review of this report in this memorandum). The TSP summarizes the
“concerns” addressed in the study, including land use planning for the airport and surrounding areas;
encroachment of commercial enterprises onto airport environs; location of airport access road;
location of terminal building; utilization of terminal and airport industrial area; and, location of
additional aircraft hangar area (p. 7-41).

City of Prineville Land Use Code
The City of Prineville’s Land Use Code implements the goals, policies, and objectives expressed in
the City’s Comprehensive Plan. Sections 153.045 through 153.064 (Use Zones) specify the allowed
uses and associated regulations for each zoning district in the City. Nine different zoning
designations are found along the OR 126 right-of-way within City limits, including various airport
zones and Industrial Park zoning near the airport; Park Reserve around the State Park just west of
downtown; General Residential southwest of downtown; Limited Industrial on the north side of the
highway just west of downtown; and General Commercial on the south side of the road where it
reaches downtown. Existing City zoning in the corridor is shown in Figure 2-2 in Technical
Memorandum #2. City of Prineville zoning designations are shown on the following map.

Existing land uses and associated development requirements are explored in depth in Technical
Memorandum #2 Existing Conditions. Transportation facilities are identified specifically in each zone
as permitted and/or conditional uses. All the City zoning districts that OR 126 passes through allow
maintenance and repair of existing roadways, as well as the construction of new facilities, if identified
in an adopted transportation plan. In addition, a wide range of highway improvement activities are
permitted outright in all zones and are exempt from local permit requirements, including the
installation of additional lanes and pedestrian and/or bikeways within a highway right-of-way (Section
153.122).

Section 153.195 provides guidelines for access management, including specific guidelines for OR
126 (500 feet between driveways and/or streets and ¼ mile between street intersections). The
standards are presented as “guidelines” that the reviewing authority “shall consider” in the review and
approval of new development. This section also identifies other techniques and considerations for
restricting access to arterials and collectors, but does not include any requirements for their use.

Additional requirements for access management are provided in some of the zones. Several of the
zones along the OR 126 corridor (Airport Commercial, Airport Development, General Commercial,
Limited Industrial, and Park Reserve) include a requirement that new development be designed so
that traffic does not have to back onto a public street right-of-way to enter or leave the site. In the
Airport Business-Industrial zone, the use of existing or future lower order roads for access is required,
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                            Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                         Page 25
rather than the state highway, and uses may be required to provide for shared access or frontage
roads. In the Park Reserve zone, there is a general requirement that access points from public
streets must be located to “minimize traffic congestion, noise and dust pollution and to protect scenic
views and vistas”. In the Limited Industrial zone, there is a similar standard for access to “minimize
traffic congestion, noise and dust pollution, and … avoid directing traffic onto residential streets or
onto streets passing directly through residential, school, hospital or other noise sensitive use areas
and safety zones”.

Other requirements that apply to development within zones in the corridor that may have bearing on
OR 126 design or operations include off-street parking requirements (Section 153.085), design and
improvement standards for off-street parking and loading areas (including shared parking and
minimum driveway widths, Section 153.086), landscaping requirements (Section 153.087). Street
Cross-Sections are listed in Section 153.194, subsection (F). Highway 126 is classified as a major
arterial in the City’s TSP; as part of this planning process and as necessary, highway design
standards and local arterial requirements should be reconciled for this facility. Notably absent from
the Land Use Code are development requirements related to traffic impact analysis (TIA); TIA
requirements are found in Appendix A to the 2005 TSP.19

Airport Layout Plan Report (2003)
The Airport Layout Plan Report (Report) was developed jointly by the City of Prineville and Crook
County, with the support of the Oregon Department of Aviation (ODA), so that the Prineville Airport
could continue to qualify for federal Airport Improvement Program (AIP) grants for eligible facility
improvement projects.20 The Report verifies that this general aviation airport plays a significant role
in providing access to the statewide transportation system, as well as both direct (i.e., employment)
and indirect economic activity within the local community and region. The Report also points to the
airport’s role in the joint effort by the City and County to attract new, large employers to the area,
noting that the County owns most of the available undeveloped industrial land adjacent to the airport
and that expanding a diversified industrial base within the county is a primary component of the
region’s economic development strategy (p. 1-2). Report conclusions, starting on p. 1- 3, include the
following, which have a bearing on land use and traffic in the vicinity of the airport:

         11. The existing zoning associated with Prineville Airport does not fully comply with
         ORS Ch. 836.600 et. Seq (see Chapter Six for detailed discussion of existing zoning).

         12. The east side of the airport currently accommodates all landside facilities. It is
         anticipated that this area will not have sufficient landside capacity to accommodate
         projected facility demands without redevelopment and/or reconfiguration of existing
         facilities. If existing facility configurations are maintained, expansion to the north side
         of Runway 10/28 will be required during the current planning period.21

         13. The planned expansion of landside facilities into undeveloped areas of the airport
         will require the extension of utility service (water, electrical, telephone, sanitary sewer,
         etc.) and airport access roads. Utility improvements are not eligible for FAA funding,
         therefore will require local funding. Access roads that serve aviation developments
         are generally eligible for FAA funding.


19
   The exception is the requirement for specific conditional uses, such as hospitals and churches, to show the
“probable effect on the traffic volumes and patterns of abutting and nearby streets (Section 153.143).”
20
   The Airport Layout Plan Report was funded with the support of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
FAA’s approval of the updated Airport Layout Plan will enable AIP grant eligibility.
21
   The Airport Layout Plan Report addresses a twenty-year planning period.
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                              Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                                           Page 26
The Report’s recommendations (p. 1-5) include upgrading and widening runways, adding taxiways,
adding floodlighting to the existing terminal area and other existing landside areas (hangars, aircraft
parking, etc.), and fencing along the airport’s boundary. Transportation recommendations relevant to
OR 126 facility planning include:

         7. Any future improvements to Highway 126 in the vicinity of the airport should be
         designed to avoid creating obstructions to the approach surfaces of Runway 28 and
         33, as depicted on the updated airspace drawings contained in this report.22

         20. Any planned improvements to Highway 126 in the vicinity of the airport should be
         designed to avoid any obstruction to the Prineville Airport’s FAR Part 77 imaginary
         surfaces. In addition, any lighting associated with the highway in the vicinity of the
         airport should be designed to avoid producing excessive upward light emissions that
         could create a hazard for aircraft operating at the airport.

Chapter 2, Inventory and Forecasts, identifies the location of the airport as approximately
three miles southwest of Prineville’s city center, just north and west of State Route 126. This
Chapter documents that currently all landside developments (hangars, aircraft parking,
services, etc.) are located at the east end of the airport and are served by an access road
that connects to OR 126. Citing information provided by the local chamber of commerce,
Chapter 2 reports that the airport has three industrial parks nearby with more than 100 acres
of land zoned for heavy industry (p. 2-7). The background information on the airport lists the
patrons as a “variety of general aviation users, including business, commercial, and
government aviation,” as well as the United States Forest Service (USFS) and the Bureau of
Land Management (BLM).

Under “Land Use Planning and Zoning,” the Report states that the airport is located entirely
within the City’s UGB and city limits. Land is zoned- Airport Operations (A-O); Airport
Development (A-D); Airport Business – Industrial (A-M); and Airport Commercial (A-C). City
and/or County industrial zoning is located to the southeast, east, and north of the site, with
the remaining areas in Crook County Exclusive Farm Use (EFU3) Zoning (p. 2-20).

The remainder of Chapter 2 deals with the methodology of updating the forecasts of aviation
activity and translating future activity into gross facility needs for the 20-year planning period.
Air traffic at the airport is predominately general aviation with a small amount of government
activity, where business jet activity currently accounts for more than 12% of annual
operations and is expected to increase in the future (p. 2-27). More than 430 aircraft are
located within Prineville’s airport service area (Table 2-17); Prineville currently accounts for
about 17 percent of the area’s aircraft, with Bend and Redmond accounting for more than 60
percent. The Report concludes that competition among airports (services and facilities) will
continue being a primary factor affecting aviation activity at all airports within the local service
area. The Report looked at national general aviation trends, as well as local population to
predict future airport usage, and concludes that aviation activity at the airport has generally
outpaced population growth in recent years. Long-term forecasts of Crook County population
reflect a moderate increase (1.6 percent annual average growth) over the next twenty to forty
years and airport activity is expected to increase at a slightly higher rate than County
population. An annual average growth rate of 3.1 percent was used to project area-based

22
  The Report notes that OR 126 crosses through the runway protection zones (RPZ) for Runway 33 and Runway
28 and that airport property extends south of the highway. The Report also states that it appears vehicles traveling on
the highway remain below the runway approach surfaces and do not create an obstruction to the approaches. (p. 2-
17, p. 3-19).
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan - Plan and Policy Review                  Technical Memorandum #1
December 31, 2010                                                                               Page 27
aircraft through the twenty-year planning period to provide a more aggressive projection.
Aircraft operations are projected to increase at an average annual rate of 4.5 percent. The
higher rate of growth in operations is based on the assumption that the average aircraft
utilization at the airport will gradually increase from its current 120 operations per based
aircraft to 160, which is equal to the airport’s long-term historic average (p. 2-37).

Chapter 4 describes a preferred alternative for the airport layout, a refinement of an earlier
concept (“Concept A”) that involves the redevelopment of the existing east-side facilities
located between the ends of Runways 28 and 33, Highway 126 and the main access
taxiway. The aim of Concept A was to eliminate the “patchwork pattern of development” by
maximizing the efficiency of existing developed areas (east landside area) to address facility
needs before proceeding with the development of other parts of the airport (4-2). The
preferred alternative supports redevelopment of east side facilities where feasible and
designates large development areas and development reserves on the north side of Runway
10/28 for general aviation, agricultural, military and government aviation use. A previously-
planned realignment of the main airport access road allows for the development of aviation-
related facilities east of the existing access road, which currently cannot be accessed by
aircraft without taxiing across the roadway. This new north airport access road would extend
from an existing service point on Highway 126 and is described in the Airport Layout Plan (p.
4-15) as follows:

         The existing airport access road will be realigned to accommodate a
         combination of aviation and aviation-related developments between Highway
         126 and existing east landside development. The existing access road will be
         gated at the north and south ends of the development area to provided limited
         vehicle access. The area will be developed to accommodate aircraft hangars
         on both sides of the existing access road and hangar taxilanes will be
         extended to serve hangars located on the east side of the existing road.

In addition, the Airport Layout Plan calls for the following:

         A location for an emergency services building is identified near the southeast
         corner of the airport. This facility is envisioned to provide emergency
         response services on the airport and to adjacent areas through direct access
         to Highway 126.
Technical Appendix C   Technical Memorandum #2:
                       Existing Conditions Analysis
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM #2
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan

Date:              December 31, 2010                                                     Project #: 11168 
To:                PPMT and PAC Members 
From:              Marc Butorac, PE, PTOE; Joe Bessman, PE, PTOE, and Casey Bergh, PE 
Subject:           Existing Conditions Analysis 

INTRODUCTION

The purpose of the existing conditions analysis is to document the following characteristics of 
OR 126 that may impact future highways users and local residents:  

      •   roadway characteristics and surrounding land use;  

      •   highway access type and location;  

      •   roadway safety; and,  

      •   operational performance.  

This technical memorandum will provide context on the purpose of this segment of the OR 126 
corridor, identify the range and acuity of existing system needs, and will be used to prioritize 
future highway and non‐highway improvements. 

This corridor study will assess an approximately 15‐mile segment of OR 126 (ODOT Highway 
41: Ochoco Highway) from the Crook County line (milepost 3.58) east through the Prineville “Y” 
junction with US  26 (ODOT Hwy  360:  Madras‐Prineville  Highway,  milepost  18.24), as shown  in 
Figure 2‐1. 

ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION AND MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES

OR 126 in Crook County is classified as a Statewide Highway, a Freight Route, a Truck Route, and 
is considered a part of the National Highway System (NHS). ODOT has an obligation to ensure 
that  OR  126  adequately  serves  inter‐regional  travel  as  part  of  the  interconnected  system  of 
principal arterial routes that makes up the NHS system in Oregon.  OR 126 is also classified as 
an Expressway  from the  Crook  County  boundary east  to  the  O’Neil  Highway  (milepost  17.92).  
Expressways  are  intended  to  carry  a  high  volume  of  traffic,  at  high  speeds,  safely  and 
efficiently.  Given  its  Freight  Route  designation,  recommended  future  improvements  to  OR  126 
should  improve  the  efficiency  of  operations  to  facilitate  the  movement  of  goods,  while  at  the 
same time be balanced against the needs of other users of the highway.   
                                                                  OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  December 2010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TENNESSEE
                                                                                               CH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PINE
                                                                                            AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MCDONALD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                      AND R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    u




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SUGA
                                                                                                                                      LEXIE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LON SM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        26                                                                     APOLLO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CENTURY
                                                                                OVERL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PINECREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ROCKY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ON                          REATA                        PETERS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ITH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PEAC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RIMROCK ACRES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MCDANIEL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OCK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ER                                                                         BIN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LISA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      'N                                                                 DN                                                                      RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EI                                                          R                    LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L                                                     GA                   HA                                                               SUNRISE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AR                                                                                                             SEE                                                LOPER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CED




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HARWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10TH 10TH                       OCHOCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MEYERS BUTTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             370                                                                         7TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DEER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LARK MEADOWS                                                                                                                                                                                                 ROSEWOOD                                                                                                                                                                                              HL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5 1/2                          IN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CORNETT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4TH                          4TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WESTWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 u 2ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LANDFILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3                                   26




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ELM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COURT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IVY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EWEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L ES
                                                                                                                                                                                            T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HOUSTON LAKE




                                                                                                                                                                                        BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RIMROCK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PARK                                                                     6TH 6TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ELM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LYNN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TOM MCCALL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       K




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E     R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WAMPLER
                                                                                                                                                                                   TWIN LAKES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Prineville




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BALDWIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                         N RANCH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AV
                                                                            Deschutes County




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WILLIAMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AYRES                                  JL RANCH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AIR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                      REMINGTO
                                                                                                    Crook County




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUNTER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U   27


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MINSON




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EW
                                                                                                                                                                                                      HACKER                                                                               FLEMING




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  126




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PARRISH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DIXON                                                                                                                                             WILEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                REIF
                                                                                                                                                                                                  BRIAR




                                                                                                                                                                                                BOZARTH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GEORGE MILLICAN
                                                                                                                                  MT SAINT HELE
                                                                                                                                                             NS
                                                                                                                    MT BACHELOR




                                                                                                                                                  MT BAKER




                                                                                                                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                                                                                                                             V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HIGHWAY 126




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                             126                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AKINS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VALLEY VIEW
                                                                                                                                   MT HOOD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3 SPRINGS RANCH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     STEFFEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     STILLMAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HIGHLAND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GH
                                                                                                                                                                                                 KISSLER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UA
                                                                                                                                              MT ADAMS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              JOSH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SC
                                                                                                                                                                         POWELL BUTTE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   YATES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NICOLE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          COPLEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DAVIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MULE D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RIGGS



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RIDGE
H:\projfile\11168 - OR 126 Powell Butte Corridor Evaluation\gis




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POKEGAMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    YAHOOSKIN




                                                                                                                                                                                                WEIGAND                                                                                            RED CLOUD
                                                                                               CAV
                                                                                                  A LR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LO D
                                                                                                      Y




                                                                                                                                                                  CRONIN                                                                                                     I

                                                                                                                                                                                                           UMBARGER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DAVIS
                                                                                                                   MCCAFFERTY
                                                                  LEGEND

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Miles
                                                                                               Study Corridor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0           0.5                           1                                                   2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FIGURE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   STUDY AREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CROOK COUNTY, OREGON                                   2-1
                                                                        Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
                                                                        transportation engineering / planning
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                Technical Memorandum #2
December 31, 2010


OR 126 is part of the arterial roadway system that provides a vital route between Prineville and 
the  Redmond/Bend  area  and  access  to  the  rural  residential  areas  in  the  western  part  of  the 
County.  While  the  City  has  established  economic  development  goals  to  provide  employment 
within the City for residents, many will continue to find employment in Bend or Redmond and 
will rely on OR 126.   

The US 26/OR 126 junction, the western “gateway” to Prineville, is also very important for the 
City  of  Prineville.  The  “Y”  junction  is  currently  controlled  by  two  stop  signs  and  yield 
indicators  and  is  congested;  the  congestion  is  exacerbated  by  truck  traffic.  While  the  “Y” 
junction is the eastern end of the study area, the corridor planning project will need to account 
for  the  functional  transition  of  this  facility  ‐  from  mobility  and  safety  in  traffic  movements  of 
two  highways  intersecting  to  the  movement  of local  traffic  as  OR  126  becomes  Third  Street,  a 
primary  commercial  corridor  and  designated  Special  Transportation  Area  (STA)1  through 
Prineville. 

SURROUNDING LAND USES

OR  126  provides  direct  access  to  the  land  around  the  Prineville  Airport,  which  is  one  of  the 
region’s major industrial employment areas. The Prineville Airport is a general aviation airport 
with two paved runways and is used by the United States Forest Service and most of the large 
local business, commercial, and heavy industrial firms in the area. This area includes: the Tom 
McCall  Industrial  Park;  over  100  acres  owned  by  the  County  and  private  developers;  the 
Prineville Industrial Park (also known as the Tom McCall Expansion, which comprises 118 acres 
of privately‐owned land); and, the Prineville Airport Business/Industrial Park,  which has sites 
available for industrial and commercial development (lease only).  

Development around the airport is a top local priority for infrastructure planning and economic 
expansion incentives. As such, the Tom McCall Industrial Park has been certified by the State of 
Oregon as a shovel‐ready site. A second certified shovel‐ready site is currently being developed 
by  Vitesse,  LLC  for  Facebook.  The  City’s  economic  analysis  concludes  that  there  is  a  need  for 
additional  industrial  lands  that  are  situated  near  the  airport,  which  in  turn  will  require  that 
adequate public facilities be planned, funded, and installed to serve employment areas.2 

OR 126 also is the main transportation route that enables residents of the Powell Butte area and 
other rural residential areas south of the highway to reach goods, services, and employment in 
Prineville and the Bend/Redmond area.  

Five approved destination resorts are located within Crook and Deschutes County, surrounding 
the corridor, and will affect the Powell Butte Highway traffic volumes as well as those along OR 
126.  These  resorts  include  Remington  Ranch,  Brasada,  Pronghorn,  Hidden  Canyon,  and 
Crossing Trails. At this time Remington Ranch has basic infrastructure in place but limited on‐
site development, Pronghorn has roads and utilities installed with several units occupied, and 

                                                      

1 Third Street from Locust Street to Knowledge Street is a designated STA. 
2 See Chapter 5, Economy, of the City of Prineville Urban Area Comprehensive Plan (2007).  
                                                                                                         Page 3
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                Technical Memorandum #2
December 31, 2010


the remaining sites have not yet begun to develop. Full build‐out of these resorts could create 
approximately 7,000 residential units throughout the area, but are not likely to fully build out 
for over 20 years.  

The City of Prineville’s Land Use Code implements the goals, policies, and objectives expressed 
in  the  City’s  Comprehensive  Plan.    Sections  153.045  through  153.064  (Use  Zones)  specify  the 
allowed  uses  and  associated  regulations  for  each  zoning  district  in  the  City.    Nine  different 
zoning  designations  are  found  along  the  OR  126  right‐of‐way  within  City  limits,  including 
various airport zones and Industrial Park zoning near the airport; Park Reserve around the State 
Park  just  west  of  downtown;  General  Residential  southwest  of  downtown;  Limited  Industrial 
on the north side of the highway just west of downtown; and General Commercial on the south 
side of the road where it reaches downtown. 

The majority of the property adjacent to OR 126 from the Crook County/Deschutes County line 
to  the  City  of  Prineville  is  zoned  EFU‐3,  as  shown  in  Figure  2‐2.  Farm  parcels  are  required  to 
contain more than 160 acres within this area. Crook County code allows a parcel less than 160 
acres but larger than 80 acres to be approved as a farm unit. The Powell Butte area is also zoned 
EFU‐3, with R‐5 (five‐acre residential parcels) and R‐10 (ten‐acre residential parcels) to the south 
of Powell Butte. In the far western part of the County a portion of land is zoned Powell Butte 
rural  residential,  PBR‐20.  The  minimum  lot  size  in  the  PBR‐20  zone  is  20  acres  and  uses  are 
limited  to  residential  homes,  farm  uses,  and  public  parks  and  recreational  facilities  (allowed 
conditionally). 

EXISTING TRANSPORTATION INVENTORY

The  existing  transportation  inventory  provides  a  detailed  description  of  all  transportation 
facilities  and  travel  modes  within  the  study  corridor.  In  addition,  the  inventory  identifies  the 
current  operational,  traffic  control,  and  geometric  characteristics  of  roadways  and  other 
transportation facilities.  

STUDY ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS

The  location  and  alignment  of  the  study  area  roadways  are  illustrated  in  Error!  Reference 
source not found.. Table 2‐1 provides a summary of state‐owned roadway facilities within the 
study corridor influence area.  




                                                                                                        Page 4
                                                                  OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    December 2010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TENNESSEE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PINE
                                                                                                                                         H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N




                                                                                                                                        ANC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LON SM
                                                                                                                                                                                LEXIE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SUGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           APOLLO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CENTURY
                                                                                                                                       DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LA

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M




                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ON                   REATA




                                                                                                                                RLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ROCKY                                                                                                                                                                                             26                                                                            PETERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PEAC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ITH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                            OVE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MCDANIEL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OCK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T                                                                                                            ER                                                             IN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ES                                     'N                                                                       DN                                                        RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CR                                                   EI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L                                               GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NE                                                                                                                       SEE 12TH                                LOPER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10TH             OCHOCO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MEYERS BUTTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LARK MEADOWS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7TH          7TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    370




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CORNETT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WESTWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3RD                        4TH            4TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LANDFILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ELM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IVY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DEER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HOUSTON LAKE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5TH                  5TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PARK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ELM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TOM MCCALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LYNN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WIC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VIE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               K




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WAMPLER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TWIN LAKES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BALDWIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WILLIAMS
                                                                                                                    Deschutes County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AYRES                                   JL RANCH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MAIN
                                                                                                                                              Crook County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HUNTER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                CH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MINSON




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HACKER




                                                                                                                                                                                                             RAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FLEMING




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PARRISH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                             TON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DIXON                                                                                                                                                                               126
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WILEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                      REM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       REIF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BRIAR
                                                                                                                                       U
                                                                                                                                       V
                                                                                                                                       126
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BOZARTH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GEORGE MILLICAN
                                                                                                                                                                            MT SAINT HELE
                                                                                                                                                                                         NS
                                                                                                                                                              MT BACHELOR




                                                                                                                                                                                           MT BAKER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HIGHWAY 126




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VALLEY VIEW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DR
                                                                                                                                                                             MT HOOD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AKINS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3 SPRINGS RANCH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              STEFFEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              STILLMAN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COPLEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HIGHLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KISSLER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CE
                                                                                                                                                                                        MT ADAMS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     POWELL BUTTE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JOSHUA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            YATES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MULE D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RIGGS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RIDGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POKEGAMA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            YAHOOSKIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WEIGAND                                                                                                    RED CLOUD
                                                                                                                                            CAV
                                                                                                                                               A LR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LO D
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CRONIN                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                                   Y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UMBARGER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DAVIS
                                                                   Legend
H:\projfile\11168 - OR 126 Powell Butte Corridor Evaluation\gis




                                                                                                                                                             MCCAFFERTY
                                                                   Zone Description                             Exclusive Farm use - Juniper Acres                                                                 Industrial Park                                                                         Powell Butte Rural Residential                                                                                                Rural Residential

                                                                              Airport Approach Overlay          Forest                                                                                             Light Industrial                                                                        Professional Commercial                                                                                                       Rural Service Center

                                                                              Airport Business-Industrial       Forest Recreation                                                                                  Limited Commercial                                                                      Recreational Commercial                                                                                                       Suburban Residential

                                                                              Airport Commercial                General Commercial                                                                                 Limited Industrial                                                                      Recreational Residential

                                                                              Airport Development               General Industrial                                                                                 Limited Residential                                                                     Residential Redevelopment

                                                                              Central Commercial                General Residential                                                                                Neighborhood Commercial                                                                 Residential Woodlot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FIGURE
                                                                              Exclusive Farm Use                Heavy Industrial                                                                                   Park Reserve                                                                            Rural Aviation Community                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EXISTING ZONING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CROOK COUNTY, OREGON                                                                            2-2
                                                                        Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
                                                                        transportation engineering / planning
                                                                  OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             December 2010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CENTURY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LON SMIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N




                                                                                                                                       LEXIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TERRACE




                                                                                              H
                                                                                            NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROCKY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M                             REATA

                                                                                          RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ON


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                u




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H
                                                                                  D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PONDEROSA                                          TA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PEAC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GARDNER
                                                                               AN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      26
                                                                            RL



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RIMROCK ACRES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OCK
                                                                          E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MCDANIEL
                                                                       OV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BE      O                                                                                   TEAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   'N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y               EI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ALE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CRESC                                  L


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E        NT RIM                                                                                               EH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WESTVIEW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       370                                                                                                 10TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MEYERS BUTTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N                   9TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D                                         7TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LARK MEADOWS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DEER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4TH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CORNETT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WESTWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LANDFILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1ST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IVY
                                                                                                                                                                                                            T




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BELKNAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BE N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EWEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LESTER WICK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HOUSTON LAKE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RIMROCK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PARK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TOM MCCALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EMPIRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E        R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Prineville




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WAMPLER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SE
                                                                       Deschutes County




                                                                                                                                                                                          TWIN LAKES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DE
                                                                                                   Crook County




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HI



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BALDWIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IAT



                                                                                                                                                                           N RANCH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AYRES                                                  JL RANCH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RP
                                                                                                                                                                       REMINGTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HUNTER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                            HACKER                                                                                             FLEMING




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                126




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PARRISH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MINSON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DIXON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WILEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     REIF
                                                                                                                                                                                                   BRIAR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WILLIAMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                BOZARTH

                                                                                                                                   MT SAINT HELENS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GEORGE MILLICAN
                                                                                                                     MT BACHELOR




                                                                                                                                                 MT BAKER




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HIGHWAY 126

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OLD WEST




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VALLEY VIEW
                                                                                                                                     MT HOOD
                                                                                                                                                                           POWELL BUTTE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             STEFFEY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3 SPRINGS RANCH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STILLMAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HIGHLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                  KISSLER




                                                                  Legend                                          SISTERS                      MT ADAMS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             JOSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DESERT SAGE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 YATES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COPLEY




                                                                                            State Highway

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NICOLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RIGGS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MCDONALD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RED CLOUD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OM
                                                                                            Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LA                               POKEGAMA
H:\projfile\11168 - OR 126 Powell Butte Corridor Evaluation\gis




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RIDGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KO



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         YAHOOSKIN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                WEIGAND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                            Collector




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D
                                                                                             CAV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           KE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OO
                                                                                                AL R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CR
                                                                                                    Y




                                                                                            County Road                                                           CRONIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LODI

                                                                                                                                                                                                                UMBARGER

                                                                                            Local Route
                                                                                            Other Road              MCCAFFERTY
                                                                                                                                                   POWELL BUTTE



                                                                                            Urban Growth Boundary
                                                                                            City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FIGURE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION
                                                                                            County Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CROOK COUNTY, OREGON                                        2-3
                                                                        Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
                                                                         transportation engineering / planning
 OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                      Technical Memorandum #2
 December 31, 2010


                             Table 2-1      Key Study Area Roadway Characteristics

                                    Speed       Sidewalks/                Freight    Truck     Scenic     Special
      Highway     Classification    (mph)       Bike Lanes         NHS     Route     Route     Byway    Designation

OR 126
                     Statewide
(Ochoco Hwy                           551           None           Yes      Yes       Yes        No     Expressway1
                     Highway
041)
OR 370                District
                                       55           None           No       No         No        No          -
(O’Neil 370)         Highway
US 26 (West
of OR 126)
                     Regional
(Madras-                               55           None           No       Yes       Yes        No          -
                     Highway
Prineville Hwy
360)
US 26 (East
of OR 126)           Statewide                                                                                   2
                                       30           None           No       No         No        No        STA
(Ochoco Hwy          Highway
041)
 1 Posted speed varies along length of corridor, see Figure 2‐4 
 2 Expressway from milepost 1.37 (Veteran’s Way) to 17.92 (O’Neil Highway) 
 3 Special Transportation Area (STA) from milepost 18.24 (Locust Street) to 19.38 (Knowledge Street) 



 None of the roadways contain  sidewalks  or  bicycle  lanes  with  the  exception  of OR  126 across 
 the Crooked River Bridge and the new 2nd Street connection to OR 126 immediately west of the 
 “Y”. Table 2‐2 summarizes roadway classification and characteristics of City and County roads 
 that intersect with OR 126 within the study corridor. 




                                                                                                             Page 7
      OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                  Technical Memorandum #2
      December 31, 2010


                                  Table 2-2    County and City Roadway Characteristics

     Roadway (County #)                Classification             Cross-Section                         Comments

                                                          Paved 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No       Long-Term Access Location
Bozarth Road (208)                      County Road
                                                            Bicycle Lanes, No Shoulder            for Remington Ranch
                                       Major Collector/   Paved 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No
Reif Road (349)
                                        County Road         Bicycle Lanes, No Shoulder
                                                          Paved 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No         Within the Powell Butte
Williams Road (206)                     County Road
                                                            Bicycle Lanes, No Shoulder        Community and a School Zone
                                                          Paved 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No
Copley Road (210)                       County Road
                                                            Bicycle Lanes, No Shoulder
                                                          Paved 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No
Minson Road (104)                      Minor Collector
                                                            Bicycle Lanes, No Shoulder
                                                          Paved 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No        COID Irrigation Crossing
                                                            Bicycle Lanes, No Shoulder        Bridge (mp 3.08) near Powell
Parrish Lane (204)                      County Road
                                                                                              Butte has weight restrictions –
                                                                                                   all trucks 3 ton limit.
                                                          Paved north of OR 126, gravel to
Stillman Road (319)                    Major Collector    south. 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No
                                                            Bicycle Lanes, No Shoulder
                                                          Paved 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No
George Millican Road (305)             Major Collector
                                                           Bicycle Lanes, Narrow Shoulder
                                                          Paved 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No
Aviation/Airport Way (115)             Major Collector
                                                           Bicycle Lanes, Narrow Shoulder
                                                          Paved 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No        County facility to the south,
Tom McCall Road (356)                  Major Collector
                                                           Bicycle Lanes, Narrow Shoulder        City facility to the north
                                                          Paved 2-Lanes, No Sidewalks No           Intersection recently
Rimrock Road (City of Prineville)        Local Route        Bicycle Lanes, No Shoulder         reconstructed as part of the
                                                                                               Crooked River Bridge project
                                                          Paved 2-Lanes with bicycle lanes    Recently connected to OR 126
2nd Street (City of Prineville)           Collector               and sidewalks                  as an eastbound-only
                                                                                                       connection

       

      Highway Alignment

      OR 126 transitions throughout the study area, but primarily includes a two‐lane section with a 
      posted speed of 55 miles per hour. Passing lanes are provided in the eastbound and westbound 
      directions west of the Powell Butte Highway and west of the Prineville Airport. Reduced speeds 
      (45 miles per hour) and a school zone exist within the Powell Butte Community near Williams 
      Road, and a reduced speed is provided along the grade into Prineville eventually transitioning 
      to  a  posted  speed  of  20  miles  per  hour  at  Meadow  Lakes  Drive.  Information  on  the  posted 
      speeds, alignment, and school zones are illustrated in Figure 2‐4. 

      Raised medians are not present along the corridor, and guardrails exist only along the descent 
      down the grade into the City of Prineville, ending beyond the Crooked River Bridge. Roadway 
      illumination  is  not  provided  with  exception  of  decorative  luminaires  that  were  recently 
      installed as part of the Crooked River Bridge reconstruction project. 

                                                                                                                  Page 8
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                Technical Memorandum #2
December 31, 2010


The  alignment  of  OR  126  is  mostly 
straight  and  follows  an  east‐west 
orientation  from  the  western  Crook 
County boundary  through  the Powell 
Butte  Community.  Near  Milepost  11 
(east  of  Stillman  Road)  the  highway 
transitions  to  a  northeasterly  align‐
ment  to  the  junction  with  US  26.  As 
illustrated  in  Figure  2‐4  vertical 
curvature is present along the eastern 
and  western  sections  of  the  study 
                                                Exhibit 2-1. Vertical curvature along western portion of OR 126.
segment.  West  of  Powell  Butte 
Highway  the  vertical  curvature 
results in reduced sight distance and limits the allowable passing areas. East of Milepost 16 the 
vertical  curvature  on  the  eastern  corridor  segment  provides  a  consistent  downgrade  toward 
Prineville;  passing  lanes  are  present  in  the  westbound  (uphill)  direction  to  allow  motorists  to 
pass slow‐moving vehicles.  

Pedestrian and bicyclist facilities are not available along the corridor, with exception of limited 
sidewalks along the recently reconstructed Crooked River Bridge. While redeveloped portions 
of the highway tend to contain wider shoulders, the shoulder width along the western portion 
of the corridor is narrow, with further limitations provided by bridge structures narrowing the 
shoulder to two feet in areas.  

Highway Right-of-Way

Right‐of‐way  for  OR  126  from  the 
Deschutes/Crook  County  line  to  the  City 
of  Prineville  varies  from  60  feet  to  in 
excess  of  330  feet.  The  as‐built 
construction  plans  for  the  original 
construction  of  the  highway  shows  a 
fairly  consistent  60‐foot  right‐of‐way 
width.  Additional  right‐of‐way  has  been 
acquired  over  time  with  highway 
improvements,  including  the  new 
passing  lanes  near  the  western  county 
line,  the  new  passing  lanes  west  of  the 
airport,  the  new  left‐turn  lane  for  the 
Remington         Ranch       resort,      and 
                                                    Exhibit 2-2. Limited highway right-of-way approaching the
improvements  along  the  grade  into  the          Powell Butte Community.
City  of  Prineville.  Figure  2‐4  illustrates 
the  existing  right‐of‐way  widths 
throughout the study segment. 

 
                                                                                                        Page 9
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                      Technical Memorandum #2
December 31, 2010


There are limited structures located close to the OR 126 right of way as most of the surrounding 
land uses are agricultural uses with structures set back from the highway. Notable exceptions 
occur along the highway segment surrounding Powell Butte, as illustrated in Figure 2‐2. Within 
sections  containing  only  a  60‐foot  right‐of‐way  width  additional  land  would  be  required  to 
accommodate typical capacity improvements. 

Pavement Condition

The  pavement  condition  along  OR  126  was  reviewed  to  identify  deficient  pavement  sections 
that  could  create  safety  concerns.  Pavement  ratings  were  reviewed  to  identify  areas  of  the 
highway that are deficient. ODOT monitors the pavement condition of state highways through 
the Pavement Management System, which determines whether the pavement is in Very Good, 
Good,  Fair,  Poor,  or  Very  Poor  condition.  The  most  recent  pavement  ratings  for  OR  126  were 
compiled  in  2008,  and  field  observations  along  the  corridor  confirm  that  the  ratings  are 
appropriate based on current conditions. Generally, the pavement is rated as “Fair” to “Good” 
with  exception  of  the grade,  which  is  rated  as “Poor.”  Beyond  the  grade  within  the  Prineville 
core  the  pavement  is  rated  as  “Good.”  Figure  2‐4  illustrates  the  pavement  ratings  along  the 
corridor, and Exhibit 2‐3 illustrates the longitudinal pavement cracking along the grade.  




                                                                                                                       
Exhibit 2-3. The existing longitudinal cracks along the Prineville grade. Pavement conditions along this portion of the
OR 126 corridor are rated as “Poor”. 



Highway Shoulders

The purpose of highway shoulders is to provide an area for motorists to safely pull out of the 
travel lanes  in the event of breakdowns, to provide buffer  area for evasive maneuvers, and to 
increase the pavement strength of the travel lanes by minimizing driving on the pavement edge. 
Along  OR  126  the  shoulders  are  also  used  to  accommodate  over‐dimension  and  slow‐moving 
vehicles (especially farm vehicles), as well as provide an area for mail carriers to pull out of the 
travel way. 

Highway shoulder widths were reviewed from available ODOT GIS data, which is based on the 
available paved, or “hard shoulder” dimensions.  Highway shoulders are rated on a scale from 
Very‐Poor  to  Very  Good  based  on  the  width,  with  0  feet  rated  as  very  poor  and  12  feet  and 
larger rated as very good. Along the study segment OR 126 shoulder widths range between 2 
and 6 feet in width, for a rating that ranges from Poor to Good. The ratings along the corridor 
are summarized in Figure 2‐4. Along portions of the corridor a soft shoulder (gravel) clear zone 
                                                                                                              Page 12
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                   Technical Memorandum #2
December 31, 2010


is  provided,  though  this  clear  zone  is  not  consistent  and  in  portions  of  the  corridor  contains 
utility poles, rock outcroppings, fences, or guardrails, as illustrated in Exhibit 2‐4. 




                                                                                                                    
Exhibit 2-4. Existing shoulder along OR 126 highlighting the hard shoulder width, gravel soft shoulder, and presence
of rock outcroppings, utility poles, and guardrail within the clear zone. 



HIGHWAY ACCESS

The  Oregon  Highway  Plan  (OHP)  includes  access  management  standards  based  on  roadway 
classification (Reference 1). Policy 3A of the OHP specifies that rural expressways (as OR 126 is 
classified)  are  intended  to  provide  safe  and  efficient  high‐speed  and  volume  movements.  To 
achieve  this  goal  private  access  is  discouraged  and  elimination  of  existing  approaches  is 
encouraged through long‐term planning efforts. Public accesses are to be highly controlled and 
spaced in accordance with current standards. 

To evaluate existing access all public and private accesses were inventoried along the corridor. 
The inventory included existing access spacing and approach permits issued by ODOT.  

Access Standards for OR 126

Access management can include limiting the number of accesses and/or the type of access. For 
example  where  two  access  points  serve  an  existing  business  access  management  may  involve 
maintaining  one  full‐access  driveway  and  limiting  the  second  driveway  to  right‐in/right‐out 
movements.  

ODOT maintains access spacing standards to limit the number of unsignalized access points on 
Statewide Highways, as outlined in Appendix  C, Table 13 of the 1999 OHP. The  unsignalized 
access  spacing  standards  for  OR  126  from  the  Crook  County  line  to  milepost  17.92  (O’Neil 
Highway), designated a Rural Expressway, are 5,280 feet. 
                                                                                                           Page 13
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                      Technical Memorandum #2
December 31, 2010


From O’Neil Highway east to Meadow Lakes Road OR 126 is not designated as an expressway; 
therefore, the spacing standard is 770 feet. 

Access Inventory

There  are  a  total  of  27  public  and  56  private  access  points  within  the  OR  126  study  segment, 
corresponding to an average of 5.7 access points per mile3. Figure 2‐5 illustrates the locations of 
existing public and private access points along the corridor.  

Within  the  Powell  Butte  Rural  Service  Center  several  access  points  exist  that  have  undefined 
widths. These highway access points are within 500 feet of the intersection with Williams Road 
and serve the fuel station on the north side of OR 126 and a school, and residential driveway on 
the south side of OR 126, as shown in Exhibit 2‐5. At the OR 126/US 26 junction in  Prineville, 
access  to  local  businesses  on  the  south  side  of  the  highway  is  continuous  and  undefined,  as 
shown in Exhibit 2‐6. 




                                                          
Exhibit 2-5. Parking directly off of OR 126 within the       Exhibit 2-6. Undefined access along the Prineville “Y”
Powell Butte community 

Compared to the spacing standards for Rural Expressways, 82 of the 83 accesses along OR 126 
do not meet the 5,280 foot standard. Access #60 (mp 14.4) which provides access to a quarry, is 
the only access point that meets the standard.  

When  future  improvements  are  planned  on  OR  126  and/or  adjacent  properties  are 
developed/redeveloped,  consolidation  and  shared  access  should  be  considered  to  reduce  the 
number of accesses along the highway and achieve the ODOT spacing of 5,280 feet.   

Permitted Access

ODOT maintains three databases that track permitted access points along state highways. Based 
on a review of two of the three databases, 23 of the 56 private accesses (41 percent) have current 
permits  on  record  with  ODOT.  Additional  research  will  be  conducted  to  identify  if  any 
                                                      

3  Private  access  points  include  driveways  and  private  streets;  public  access  points  include  public  street 
crossings (e.g., Minson Road) 
                                                                                                               Page 14
OR Highway 126 Corridor Facility Plan                                                 Technical Memorandum #2
December 31, 2010


additional  accesses  are  permitted  and  maintained  within  the  third  and  oldest  database 
maintained by ODOT. A full summary of accesses inventoried, including a record of those accesses that 
have current permits on file with ODOT, is provided in Attachment “A”. 

TRUCK ROUTES

OR 126 is designated as a Freight Route and Truck Route in the 1999 OHP. Based on route maps 
provided  for  reference  by  the  ODOT  Motor  Carrier  Transportation  Division  (MCTD),  the  OR 
126 corridor can accommodate a variety of loads. The general limitations for truck travel on OR 
126 are shown in Error! Reference source not found.. This information is provided to assist in 
the selection of “design vehicles” for the OR 126 corridor. 

                               Table 2-3     OR 126 Truck Route Limitations

                       Vehicle                    Length Limit           Width Limit (feet)

              Truck-tractor and single
                                                       None                      14
              semitrailer
              Truck-tractor and double
                                                     40’ trailer                 14
              semitrailer
              Pickup Truck and Trailer            70’ (53’ trailer)              *14
              Mobile Homes or Modular
                                                     No Limit                    14
              Units*
              “Triples” Combinations                   None                       -

             *Under Authority of Special Transportation Permits

PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION

Public  transit was reviewed to identify  alternative  modes  that  are  available  to  serve  commute 
trips  between  Prineville  and  surrounding  cities.  Cascades  East  Transit  (CET)  provides  a 
Community Connector shuttle service on a reservation basis from Prineville to/from Redmond. 
From  Redmond  passengers  can  connect  to  Bend,  Sisters,  Madras,  and  La  Pine  and  Warm 
Springs. Community Connector trips must be scheduled in advance to use this service, and one‐
way  fares  are  $6.25  for  a  day  pass  (with  free  transfer  to  the  Bend  Area  Transit  system),  and 
discounts are available for seniors and disabled riders. 

The shuttle runs Monday through Friday with the first pick‐up in Prineville at 5:00 a.m. and last 
drop‐off at 7:40 p.m. Two shuttle stop locations are within the study corridor:  
    1. Prineville “Y” Park & Ride Lot –  Located in the northwest corner of the US 26/OR 126 
       junction. 
    2. Powell  Butte  Community  Church  –  Located  in  the  northeast  corner  of  the  OR 
       126/Williams Road intersection. 

 




                                                                                                      Page 15
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 126 -- S Rimrock Rd                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10547512
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: 10/20/2010
                      456 0.91 602                             Peak-Hour: 3:30 PM -- 4:30 PM                                  10.7       6.6

                          0   406 50
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 3:40 PM -- 3:55 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 11.1 8.0

       0       0                        33     35
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                       9.1      8.6
        0.00   0              0.93       0   0.72
                                                                                                                       0.0                       0.0
       0       0                         2     60
                                                                                                                 0.0   0.0                       0.0      6.7

                          0   569 10
                                                                                                                              0.0 6.5 0.0

                      408 0.90 579
                                                                                                                              11.0       6.4



                               0                                                                                               0     0   0


                                                                                                                       0                          0

               0                         0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                       0                          0


                               0                                                                                               0     0   0




 5-Min Count                     OR 126                       OR 126                 S Rimrock Rd                S Rimrock Rd
     Period                   (Northbound)                 (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                   Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right         U                     Totals
     3:00 PM         0          43      0     0       6      24      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      3         0          76
     3:05 PM         0          37      0     0       5      25      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      1         0          68
     3:10 PM         0          40      0     0       4      26      0    0     0       0      0      0     1       0      3         0          74
     3:15 PM         0          43      1     0       1      40      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      3         0          88
     3:20 PM         0          33      0     0       9      45      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      3         0          90
     3:25 PM         0          47      0     0       2      21      0    0     0       0      0      0     1       0      4         0          75
     3:30 PM         0          42      0     0       3      37      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      3         0          85
     3:35 PM         0          52      0     0       4      30      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      4         0          90
     3:40 PM         0          55      0     0       3      34      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      3         0          95
     3:45 PM         0          54      0     0       2      31      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      0         0          87
     3:50 PM         0          50      1     0       4      49      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      2         0         106
     3:55 PM         0          46      1     0       3      26      0    0     0       0      0      0     1       0      3         0          80             1014
     4:00 PM         0          43      1     0       4      28      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      3         0          79             1017
     4:05 PM         0          34      1     0       4      33      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      2         0          74             1023
     4:10 PM         0          51      2     0       6      41      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      3         0         103             1052
     4:15 PM         0          44      2     0       6      38      0    0     0       0      0      0     1       0      4         0          95             1059
     4:20 PM         0          52      0     0       2      27      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      3         0          84             1053
     4:25 PM         0          46      2     0       9      32      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      3         0          92             1070
     4:30 PM         0          43      0     0       2      32      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      1         0          78             1063
     4:35 PM         0          41      0     0       5      31      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      1         0          78             1051
     4:40 PM         0          52      1     0       6      33      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      4         0          96             1052
     4:45 PM         0          34      1     0       6      38      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      2         0          81             1046
     4:50 PM         0          39      0     0       4      25      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0      4         0          72             1012
     4:55 PM         0          45      1     0       5      35      0    0     0       0      0      0     1       0      5         0          92             1024
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                  Southbound                 Eastbound                   Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates        Left        Thru Right     U     Left    Thru Right    U   Left    Thru Right      U   Left    Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       0         636      4     0      36     456      0    0     0       0      0      0     0       0     20         0                 1152
 Heavy Trucks        0          48      0             4      64      0          0       0      0            0       0      4                            120
  Pedestrians                    0                            0                         0                           0                                    0
   Bicycles          0           0      0             0       0      0          0       0      0            0       0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:36 PM                                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Bozarth Rd -- Ochoco Hwy                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10547501
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: 10/19/2010
                       0    0.38   7                           Peak-Hour: 3:25 PM -- 4:25 PM                                  0.0       28.6

                       0     0     0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 3:40 PM -- 3:55 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

       304     5                           1    396
                                                                                                                8.9   20.0                       0.0      8.1
        0.89   352          0.85         268   0.85
                                                                                                                      6.8                        9.0
       403     46                        127    503
                                                                                                                7.4   10.9                       6.3      5.6

                       36    1     151
                                                                                                                              8.3 100.02.6

                      173 0.88 188
                                                                                                                              7.5       4.3



                             0                                                                                                0     0    0


                                                                                                                      0                           0

               0                           0                                                                          0                           0

                                                                                                                      0                           0


                             0                                                                                                0     0    0




 5-Min Count            SW Bozarth Rd                     SW Bozarth Rd              Ochoco Hwy                  Ochoco Hwy
     Period              (Northbound)                      (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                    Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                      Totals
     2:55 PM          3     0       5    0              0     0     0     0     0     33      2      0     7       18      0        0           68          700
     3:00 PM          2     0       7    0              0     0     1     0     0     20      5      0    13       17      0        0           65          713
     3:05 PM          1     0      12    0              0     0     0     0     0     26      4      0     9       19      0        0           71          727
     3:10 PM          1     0       6    0              0     0     0     0     0     23      2      0    10        9      0        0           51          738
     3:15 PM          1     1       9    0              0     0     0     0     1     20      3      0    12       14      0        0           61          727
     3:20 PM          0     0      14    0              0     0     0     0     0     17      4      0    14       23      0        0           72          746
     3:25 PM          0     0      19    0              0     0     0     0     0     30      2      0    14       19      0        0           84          763
     3:30 PM          6     0      15    0              0     0     0     0     3     26      4      0    12       19      0        0           85          794
     3:35 PM          3     0       9    0              0     0     0     0     0     32      5      0    12       20      0        0           81          792
     3:40 PM          4     0      14    0              0     0     0     0     1     34      7      0     6       30      0        0           96          835
     3:45 PM          3     0      10    0              0     0     0     0     0     32      3      0    16       27      0        0           91          879
     3:50 PM          4     1      18    0              0     0     0     0     0     37      2      0    19       20      1        0          102          927
     3:55 PM          2     0      10    0              0     0     0     0     0     17      6      0     6       21      0        0           62          921
     4:00 PM          3     0      11    0              0     0     0     0     0     24      2      0     8       19      0        0           67          923
     4:05 PM          0     0       9    0              0     0     0     0     0     25      3      0     8       26      0        0           71          923
     4:10 PM          3     0      14    0              0     0     0     0     1     27      3      0     4       25      0        0           77          949
     4:15 PM          6     0      11    0              0     0     0     0     0     39      4      0     7       29      0        0           96          984
     4:20 PM          2     0      11    0              0     0     0     0     0     29      5      0    15       13      0        0           75          987
     4:25 PM          2     0       7    0              1     0     0     0     1     35      5      0     3       20      0        0           74          977
     4:30 PM          1     0      14    0              0     0     0     0     0     32      2      0    12       15      0        0           76          968
     4:35 PM          2     0      13    0              0     0     0     0     0     39      3      0    13       12      0        0           82          969
     4:40 PM          4     0      11    0              0     0     0     0     0     25      2      0    11       22      0        0           75          948
     4:45 PM          2     0       9    0              0     0     1     0     0     23      6      0    14       19      0        0           74          931
     4:50 PM          3     0      12    0              0     0     0     0     0     29      2      0    10       16      0        0           72          901
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                       Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right      U            Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles       44     4    168     0              0     0     0     0     4    412     48      0   164      308      4        0                  1156
 Heavy Trucks         4     4       0                   0     0     0           0     40     12            8       40      0                            108
  Pedestrians               0                                 0                        0                            0                                    0
   Bicycles           0     0       0                   0     0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:35 PM                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Williams Rd -- Ochoco Hwy                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10547502
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                        DATE: 10/19/2010
                          38 0.65 33                                Peak-Hour: 3:35 PM -- 4:35 PM                                   18.4       15.2

                          25    0     13
                                                                   Peak 15-Min: 3:35 PM -- 3:50 PM
                                                                                                                                    12.0 0.0 30.8

       380     23                            9    362
                                                                                                                     10.8   13.0                       22.2     11.0
        0.87   449             0.84        353   0.81
                                                                                                                            4.9                        10.8
       473     1                             0    462
                                                                                                                     5.3    0.0                         0.0      5.6

                           2    1     0
                                                                                                                                    0.0 0.0 0.0

                           1   0.41   3
                                                                                                                                    0.0        0.0



                                1                                                                                                    0     0    0


                                                                                                                            0                            0

               0                             0                                                                              0                            0

                                                                                                                            0                            0


                                0                                                                                                    0     0    0




 5-Min Count               SW Williams Rd                      SW Williams Rd             Ochoco Hwy                  Ochoco Hwy
     Period                 (Northbound)                        (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                          Total
                    Left     Thru Right     U           Left     Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right          U                      Totals
     3:05 PM          0        0      1     0             1        0      4    0     1     28      0      0     0       24      1          0           60          733
     3:10 PM          0        0      0     0             0        0      2    0     1     30      0      0     0       18      0          0           51          733
     3:15 PM          0        1      0     0             1        0      1    0     0     32      0      0     0       26      0          0           61          743
     3:20 PM          0        0      0     0             1        0      4    0     1     21      0      0     0       33      1          0           61          749
     3:25 PM          0        0      1     0             0        0      1    0     1     42      0      0     0       29      0          0           74          759
     3:30 PM          0        0      0     0             0        0      2    0     2     42      0      0     0       14      1          0           61          770
     3:35 PM          0        0      0     0             1        0      5    0     1     38      0      0     0       37      2          0           84          784
     3:40 PM          0        0      0     0             2        0      0    0     1     37      0      0     0       43      0          0           83          801
     3:45 PM          0        0      0     0             1        0      4    0     1     51      1      0     0       33      2          0           93          831
     3:50 PM          0        0      0     0             0        0      2    0     3     37      0      0     0       34      1          0           77          851
     3:55 PM          0        0      0     0             1        0      4    0     2     25      0      0     0       22      1          0           55          825
     4:00 PM          0        0      0     0             2        0      1    0     5     29      0      0     0       27      0          0           64          824
     4:05 PM          0        0      0     0             2        0      1    0     2     29      0      0     0       25      1          0           60          824
     4:10 PM          0        0      0     0             0        0      3    0     0     38      0      0     0       35      1          0           77          850
     4:15 PM          0        0      0     0             0        0      0    0     6     48      0      0     0       31      1          0           86          875
     4:20 PM          1        1      0     0             1        0      2    0     0     29      0      0     0       21      0          0           55          869
     4:25 PM          0        0      0     0             1        0      2    0     1     46      0      0     0       24      0          0           74          869
     4:30 PM          1        0      0     0             2        0      1    0     1     42      0      0     0       21      0          0           68          876
     4:35 PM          0        1      0     0             0        0      3    0     3     45      0      0     0       25      0          0           77          869
     4:40 PM          1        0      0     0             0        0      3    0     0     34      0      0     0       29      3          0           70          856
     4:45 PM          0        0      0     0             1        0      5    0     1     33      0      0     0       26      1          0           67          830
     4:50 PM          0        0      0     0             0        0      5    0     0     27      0      0     0       26      1          0           59          812
     4:55 PM          0        0      0     0             0        0      3    0     2     37      0      0     0       14      0          0           56          813
     5:00 PM          0        0      0     0             1        0      3    0     2     32      0      0     0       23      1          0           62          811
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                         Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                              Total
  Flowrates         Left     Thru Right     U           Left     Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right          U
  All Vehicles        0        0      0     0            16        0     36    0    12    504      4      0     0      452     16          0                  1040
 Heavy Trucks         0        0      0                   4        0      8          0     52      0            0       56      4                              124
  Pedestrians                  0                                   0                        0                            0                                      0
   Bicycles           0        0      0                   0        0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:35 PM                                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Airport Rd -- Ochoco Hwy                                                                                      QC JOB #: 10547503
 CITY/STATE: Prinveville, OR                                                                                                DATE: 10/19/2010
                       10 0.48     6                          Peak-Hour: 3:30 PM -- 4:30 PM                                  30.0       50.0

                       5     2     3
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 3:30 PM -- 3:45 PM
                                                                                                                             20.0 50.0 33.3

       373     3                          3    396
                                                                                                               6.7   33.3                       66.7      8.6
        0.88   438          0.83        356   0.88
                                                                                                                     4.1                         6.2
       452     11                        37    511
                                                                                                               4.6   18.2                       27.0      5.9

                       12    0     69
                                                                                                                             16.7 0.0 15.9

                       49 0.47 81
                                                                                                                             26.5       16.0



                             0                                                                                                0     0    0


                                                                                                                     0                            0

               0                          0                                                                          0                            0

                                                                                                                     0                            0


                             0                                                                                                0     0    0




 5-Min Count             SW Airport Rd                    SW Airport Rd             Ochoco Hwy                  Ochoco Hwy
     Period              (Northbound)                     (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                   Total
                    Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                      Totals
     3:00 PM          0     0       9    0             1     0      0    0     2     40      1      0     0       17      1         0           71          653
     3:05 PM          0     0       2    0             0     0      0    0     0     30      0      0     5       25      0         0           62          666
     3:10 PM          1     0       0    0             1     0      1    0     0     26      4      0     2       30      0         0           65          689
     3:15 PM          1     0       2    0             0     0      0    0     0     40      0      0     1       31      0         0           75          709
     3:20 PM          1     0       2    0             0     0      0    0     1     23      0      0     2       31      0         0           60          729
     3:25 PM          1     0       1    0             0     0      1    0     0     32      1      0     3       28      0         0           67          726
     3:30 PM          2     0       9    0             2     0      0    0     0     21      0      0     4       41      1         0           80          752
     3:35 PM          4     0      22    0             0     0      0    0     0     48      3      0     1       34      0         1          113          817
     3:40 PM          2     0       6    0             0     0      0    0     0     41      0      0     3       37      1         0           90          848
     3:45 PM          1     0       5    0             0     1      0    0     1     36      2      0     4       24      0         0           74          858
     3:50 PM          0     0       9    0             1     0      0    0     1     40      1      0     5       21      0         0           78          883
     3:55 PM          0     0       2    0             0     1      0    0     0     41      1      0     3       31      1         0           80          915
     4:00 PM          1     0       4    0             0     0      2    0     0     41      1      0     1       31      0         0           81          925
     4:05 PM          0     0       0    0             0     0      0    0     0     23      0      0     3       31      0         0           57          920
     4:10 PM          1     0       1    0             0     0      2    0     0     33      1      0     3       24      0         0           65          920
     4:15 PM          0     0       2    0             0     0      1    0     0     38      1      0     3       24      0         0           69          914
     4:20 PM          1     0       6    0             0     0      0    0     0     25      0      0     3       29      0         0           64          918
     4:25 PM          0     0       3    0             0     0      0    0     1     51      1      0     3       29      0         0           88          939
     4:30 PM          1     0       3    0             0     0      0    0     0     28      1      0     6       23      1         0           63          922
     4:35 PM          0     0       1    0             0     0      4    0     1     34      2      0     4       33      2         0           81          890
     4:40 PM          0     0       7    0             0     0      0    0     0     39      0      0     1       27      0         0           74          874
     4:45 PM          1     0       2    0             0     0      0    0     0     50      1      0     2       25      0         0           81          881
     4:50 PM          0     0       3    0             0     0      0    0     0     21      2      0     2       25      0         0           53          856
     4:55 PM          0     0       4    0             0     0      0    0     1     34      0      0     3       31      0         0           73          849
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                      Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                       Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       32     0    148     0             8     0      0    0     0    440     12      0    32      448      8         4                  1132
 Heavy Trucks         4     0       0                  4     0      0          0     20      0            8       40      8                             84
  Pedestrians               0                                0                        0                            0                                     0
   Bicycles           0     0       0                  0     0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                              0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:35 PM                                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Tom McCall Rd -- Ochoco Hwy                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10547504
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: 10/19/2010
                      117 0.38 59                             Peak-Hour: 3:05 PM -- 4:05 PM                                   12.8       15.3

                       44    7     66
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 3:30 PM -- 3:45 PM
                                                                                                                              6.8 14.3 16.7

       406     12                        38    410
                                                                                                               10.1   16.7                       10.5     11.0
        0.80   473          0.79        348   0.86
                                                                                                                      6.3                        10.6
       486     1                         24    611
                                                                                                               6.8    100.0                      16.7      7.9

                       14    9     72
                                                                                                                              7.1 33.3 9.7

                       32 0.54 95
                                                                                                                              18.8       11.6



                             0                                                                                                 0     0    0


                                                                                                                      0                            0

               0                          0                                                                           0                            0

                                                                                                                      0                            0


                             0                                                                                                 0     0    0




 5-Min Count            Tom McCall Rd                    Tom McCall Rd              Ochoco Hwy                  Ochoco Hwy
     Period              (Northbound)                     (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right          U                      Totals
     2:35 PM          0     1       6    0             1     0     1     0     0     28      2      0     1       17      1          0           58          710
     2:40 PM          2     0       2    0             4     0     1     0     0     32      1      0     2       15      3          0           62          720
     2:45 PM          2     0       1    0             2     0     2     0     1     43      1      0     1       21      3          0           77          749
     2:50 PM          0     0       4    0             4     0     4     0     0     27      1      0     2       18      2          0           62          739
     2:55 PM          2     0       1    0             4     1     0     0     0     17      1      0     6       29      1          0           62          742
     3:00 PM          0     0       1    0             2     0     1     0     3     41      1      0     1       14      3          0           67          753
     3:05 PM          2     1       2    0             8     1     2     0     3     36      0      0     1       28      2          0           86          787
     3:10 PM          2     0       4    0             5     0     1     0     0     27      0      0     3       29      6          0           77          809
     3:15 PM          0     1       4    0             0     1     1     0     2     36      0      0     1       30      3          0           79          828
     3:20 PM          3     1       7    0             5     0     2     0     0     28      0      0     2       28      3          0           79          846
     3:25 PM          2     0       3    0             6     0     1     0     0     32      0      0     2       31      1          0           78          854
     3:30 PM          0     0      11    0             3     1    10     0     0     33      1      0     2       36      2          0           99          886
     3:35 PM          3     1      15    0             5     2     3     0     0     65      0      0     6       27      1          0          128          956
     3:40 PM          0     2      13    0            15     1    15     0     3     48      0      0     0       24      2          0          123         1017
     3:45 PM          0     1       3    0             7     0     2     0     1     38      0      0     2       26      4          0           84         1024
     3:50 PM          1     0       2    0             2     0     3     0     1     47      0      0     1       26      4          0           87         1049
     3:55 PM          1     1       5    0             6     0     2     0     0     40      0      0     1       32      5          0           93         1080
     4:00 PM          0     1       3    0             4     1     2     0     2     43      0      0     3       31      5          0           95         1108
     4:05 PM          3     1       3    0             2     2     3     0     1     22      0      0     1       29      3          0           70         1092
     4:10 PM          0     1       3    0             0     0     3     0     0     33      0      0     0       22      7          0           69         1084
     4:15 PM          0     0       0    0             4     0     1     0     1     38      0      0     1       30      6          0           81         1086
     4:20 PM          2     0       2    0             3     0     0     0     1     26      1      0     0       29      8          0           72         1079
     4:25 PM          0     0       5    0             9     0     3     0     2     51      1      0     1       27      1          0          100         1101
     4:30 PM          1     0       1    0            10     0     2     0     0     31      1      0     2       31      1          0           80         1082
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                      Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right      U           Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right          U
  All Vehicles       12    12    156     0            92    16   112     0    12    584      4      0    32      348     20          0                  1400
 Heavy Trucks         0     4       4                  8     0     8           4     16      4            4       48      0                              100
  Pedestrians               0                                0                        0                            0                                      0
   Bicycles           0     0       0                  0     0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                               0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:36 PM                                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                         Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Ochoco Hwy -- NW Oneil Hwy                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10547505
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                             DATE: 10/20/2010
                       576 0.83 655                            Peak-Hour: 4:20 PM -- 5:20 PM                             8.9        6.1

                       122 454     0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                         4.1 10.1 0.0

       133     80                      0        0
                                                                                                            6.8   5.0                       0.0      0.0
        0.86   0            0.91       0   0.00
                                                                                                                  0.0                       0.0
       86      6                       0        0
                                                                                                            4.7   0.0                       0.0      0.0

                          11 575   0
                                                                                                                         36.4 6.3 0.0

                       460 0.87 586
                                                                                                                         10.0       6.8



                              0                                                                                           0     0   0


                                                                                                                  0                          0

               0                       0                                                                          0                          0

                                                                                                                  0                          0


                              0                                                                                           0     0   0




 5-Min Count                Ochoco Hwy                      Ochoco Hwy             NW Oneil Hwy              NW Oneil Hwy
     Period                 (Northbound)                   (Southbound)             (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                              Total
                    Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                     Totals
     3:50 PM          4       50      0     0         0      53     8     0     3     0      0      0     0    0       0        0         118         1164
     3:55 PM          2       46      0     0         0      26     8     0    10     0      1      0     0    0       0        0          93         1154
     4:00 PM          2       43      0     0         0      32    12     0     5     0      1      0     0    0       0        0          95         1165
     4:05 PM          1       38      0     0         0      37    13     0     7     0      0      0     0    0       0        0          96         1182
     4:10 PM          1       55      0     0         0      50     5     0     6     0      0      0     0    0       0        0         117         1207
     4:15 PM          0       43      0     0         0      38     7     0     6     0      0      0     0    0       0        0          94         1200
     4:20 PM          3       52      0     0         0      29    10     0     8     0      0      0     0    0       0        0         102         1209
     4:25 PM          0       55      0     0         0      41    14     0     8     0      1      0     0    0       0        0         119         1243
     4:30 PM          2       40      0     0         0      30     7     0     6     0      0      0     0    0       0        0          85         1227
     4:35 PM          0       40      0     0         0      39    11     0     7     0      0      0     0    0       0        0          97         1229
     4:40 PM          1       54      0     0         0      35     5     0     5     0      0      0     0    0       0        0         100         1220
     4:45 PM          0       36      0     0         0      40     6     0     7     0      2      0     0    0       0        0          91         1207
     4:50 PM          1       60      0     0         0      38     5     0     8     0      1      0     0    0       0        0         113         1202
     4:55 PM          2       47      0     0         0      41    13     0    10     0      1      0     0    0       0        0         114         1223
     5:00 PM          1       39      0     0         0      35     4     0     4     0      0      0     0    0       0        0          83         1211
     5:05 PM          1       46      0     0         0      40    18     0     9     0      1      0     0    0       0        0         115         1230
     5:10 PM          0       46      0     0         0      47    14     0     5     0      0      0     0    0       0        0         112         1225
     5:15 PM          0       60      0     0         0      39    15     0     3     0      0      0     0    0       0        0         117         1248
     5:20 PM          0       41      0     0         0      21     6     0     7     0      2      0     0    0       0        0          77         1223
     5:25 PM          0       71      0     0         0      34     5     0     4     0      0      0     0    0       0        0         114         1218
     5:30 PM          0       38      0     0         0      34    11     0     5     0      2      0     0    0       0        0          90         1223
     5:35 PM          2       69      0     0         0      29     9     0     9     0      1      0     0    0       0        0         119         1245
     5:40 PM          1       54      0     0         0      22     6     0    10     0      0      0     0    0       0        0          93         1238
     5:45 PM          0       48      0     0         0      33     5     0     6     0      1      0     0    0       0        0          93         1240
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                    Southbound               Eastbound                Westbound
                                                                                                                                                  Total
  Flowrates         Left     Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles        4      608      0     0         0     504   188     0    68     0      4      0     0    0       0        0                 1376
 Heavy Trucks         0       52      0               0      40     4           0     0      0            0    0       0                           96
  Pedestrians                  0                              0                       0                        0                                    0
   Bicycles           0        0      0               0       0     0           0     0      0            0    0       0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:36 PM                                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                          Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: OR 126 -- OR 26                                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10547506
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                  DATE: 10/27/2010
                      0   0.00    1                            Peak-Hour: 4:40 PM -- 5:40 PM                                  0.0       0.0

                      0    0      0
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 4:55 PM -- 5:10 PM
                                                                                                                              0.0 0.0 0.0

       264    0                          0    571
                                                                                                                9.8   0.0                       0.0      4.6
       0.88   98          0.94         133   0.91
                                                                                                                      4.1                       4.5
       192    94                       438    696
                                                                                                                7.3   10.6                      4.6      2.2

                   131     1     598
                                                                                                                              15.3 0.0 1.8

                   532 0.89 730
                                                                                                                              5.6       4.2



                           0                                                                                                   0    0   0


                                                                                                                      0                          0

              0                          0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                      0                          0


                           0                                                                                                   0    0   0




 5-Min Count                 OR 126                           OR 126                    OR 26                       OR 26
     Period               (Northbound)                     (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At Left                                                                                                                             Total
                           Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                     Totals
     4:10 PM     8           0      48    0           0       0      0    0     0      8      9      0    34       10      0        0         117         1470
     4:15 PM     6           0      42    0           0       0      0    0     0      9      7      0    32       19      0        0         115         1487
     4:20 PM     8           0      58    0           0       0      0    0     0      7     10      0    30        9      0        0         122         1483
     4:25 PM     5           0      45    0           0       0      0    0     0     13      7      0    35       15      0        0         120         1484
     4:30 PM     3           0      59    0           0       0      0    0     0      5      8      0    28       11      0        0         114         1479
     4:35 PM     5           0      44    0           0       0      0    0     0      6     12      0    41       15      0        0         123         1492
     4:40 PM    21           0      59    0           0       0      0    0     0      7      8      0    44       10      0        0         149         1488
     4:45 PM    16           0      47    0           0       0      0    0     0     13      9      0    28       10      0        0         123         1474
     4:50 PM    11           0      36    0           0       0      0    0     0      0      4      0    25       11      0        0          87         1430
     4:55 PM     8           0      51    0           0       0      0    0     0      6      5      0    42       11      0        0         123         1440
     5:00 PM    10           0      55    0           0       0      0    0     0     11     12      0    39       11      0        0         138         1455
     5:05 PM     9           0      39    0           0       0      0    0     0     13     13      0    44       20      0        0         138         1469
     5:10 PM     5           0      41    0           0       0      0    0     0     10      6      0    52        3      0        0         117         1469
     5:15 PM    10           0      40    0           0       0      0    0     0      6     12      0    47        6      0        0         121         1475
     5:20 PM     6           0      60    0           0       0      0    0     0      7      9      0    33       13      0        0         128         1481
     5:25 PM    12           1      54    0           0       0      0    0     0      4      7      0    27       12      0        0         117         1478
     5:30 PM     8           0      58    0           0       0      0    0     0      9      7      0    33        8      0        0         123         1487
     5:35 PM    15           0      58    0           0       0      0    0     0     12      2      0    24       18      0        0         129         1493
     5:40 PM     9           0      62    0           0       0      0    0     0     14      2      0    28       11      0        0         126         1470
     5:45 PM    12           0      44    0           0       0      0    0     0     11      4      0    28       13      0        0         112         1459
     5:50 PM    13           1      42    0           0       0      0    0     0      8      5      0    30        9      0        0         108         1480
     5:55 PM     9           0      53    0           0       0      0    0     0     10      5      0    22        8      0        0         107         1464
     6:00 PM     4           0      47    0           0       0      0    0     0      5      4      0    25        7      0        0          92         1418
     6:05 PM     4           1      32    0           0       0      0    0     0      8      2      0    33       15      0        0          95         1375
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                      Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                      Total
  Flowrates    Left        Thru Right     U         Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles 108           0    580     0           0       0      0    0     0    120    120      0   500      168      0        0                 1596
 Heavy Trucks   28           0      16                0       0      0          0      8      8           28        8      0                           96
  Pedestrians                0                                0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles      0           0       0                0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:36 PM                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Reif Rd -- Ochoco Hwy                                                                                            QC JOB #: 10547507
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                    DATE: 11/3/2010
                          21 0.60 21                              Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                 19.0       9.5

                          16    3     2
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                                12.5 33.3 50.0

       401     14                           6    391
                                                                                                                   7.7   0.0                       33.3      7.7
        0.90   480             0.94       382   0.80
                                                                                                                         5.6                        7.3
       498     4                            3    486
                                                                                                                   5.4   0.0                        0.0      5.8

                           3    1     4
                                                                                                                                33.3 0.0 0.0

                          10 0.63     8
                                                                                                                                10.0       12.5



                                0                                                                                                0     0    0


                                                                                                                         0                           0

               0                            0                                                                            0                           0

                                                                                                                         0                           0


                                0                                                                                                0     0    0




 5-Min Count                    SW Reif Rd                     SW Reif Rd               Ochoco Hwy                  Ochoco Hwy
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                      Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U                        Totals
     4:00 PM          0           0      1     0         0       0      1    0     0     45      0      0     0       27      0        0           74            844
     4:05 PM          0           0      0     0         0       1      1    0     1     35      1      0     0       26      1        0           66            852
     4:10 PM          0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     4     47      0      0     1       18      0        0           71            855
     4:15 PM          0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     2     28      0      0     1       32      0        0           64            855
     4:20 PM          0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     4     41      0      0     0       36      0        0           82            858
     4:25 PM          0           0      1     0         0       0      0    0     0     44      1      0     0       32      0        0           78            861
     4:30 PM          0           1      1     0         0       0      1    0     3     47      0      0     0       23      0        0           76            867
     4:35 PM          0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     5     35      0      0     0       31      1        0           72            889
     4:40 PM          0           0      0     0         2       1      2    0     4     32      1      0     0       19      1        0           62            872
     4:45 PM          0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     1     38      1      0     1       49      0        0           91            876
     4:50 PM          0           0      0     0         0       1      3    0     0     37      0      0     0       33      0        0           74            869
     4:55 PM          0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     45      0      0     0       20      0        0           65            875
     5:00 PM          2           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     1     40      1      0     0       21      0        0           66            867
     5:05 PM          0           0      0     0         0       0      3    0     0     36      0      0     0       21      0        0           60            861
     5:10 PM          1           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     3     44      0      0     0       31      0        0           79            869
     5:15 PM          0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     1     51      0      0     1       28      2        0           84            889
     5:20 PM          0           0      0     0         0       1      1    0     2     36      0      0     0       28      0        0           68            875
     5:25 PM          0           1      1     0         1       0      1    0     4     49      0      0     1       32      1        0           91            888
     5:30 PM          0           0      1     0         1       1      1    0     1     39      1      0     0       29      2        0           76            888
     5:35 PM          0           0      1     0         0       0      2    0     1     32      0      0     0       37      0        0           73            889
     5:40 PM          0           0      1     0         0       0      2    0     0     33      1      0     0       53      1        0           91            918
     5:45 PM          0           0      0     0         1       0      1    0     6     37      0      0     0       38      0        0           83            910
     5:50 PM          0           0      2     0         0       0      0    0     1     42      1      0     0       21      0        0           67            903
     5:55 PM          0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     3     34      1      0     0       12      1        0           52            890
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                          Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right        U
  All Vehicles        0           4      4     0         4       4     12    0    28    544      0      0     8      352     12        0                  972
 Heavy Trucks         0           0      0               4       4      0          0     28      0            0       24      4                           64
  Pedestrians                     0                              0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles           0           0      0               0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:36 PM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: SW Copley Rd -- Ochoco Hwy                                                                                    QC JOB #: 10547508
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                              DATE: 10/20/2010
                       3   0.38   1                         Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                 0.0       0.0

                       1    0     2
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                          0.0 0.0 0.0

       377     1                        0    374
                                                                                                             9.3   0.0                      0.0      9.4
        0.83   459         0.90       371   0.85
                                                                                                                   4.8                      9.4
       476     16                       3    462
                                                                                                             4.6   0.0                      0.0      4.8

                       5    0     1
                                                                                                                          0.0 0.0 0.0

                       19 0.63    6
                                                                                                                          0.0       0.0



                            0                                                                                             0     0   0


                                                                                                                   0                         0

               0                        0                                                                          0                         0

                                                                                                                   0                         0


                            0                                                                                             0     0   0




 5-Min Count             SW Copley Rd                   SW Copley Rd              Ochoco Hwy                  Ochoco Hwy
     Period              (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                              Total
                    Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     4:00 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     36      1      0     0       34      0       0          71            768
     4:05 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     39      1      0     0       23      0       0          63            755
     4:10 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     43      1      0     1       19      0       0          64            778
     4:15 PM          2     0      0     0           0     0     1     0     0     51      1      0     1       32      1       0          89            802
     4:20 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     28      2      0     0       34      0       0          64            821
     4:25 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     28      0      0     0       21      0       0          49            805
     4:30 PM          2     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     41      1      0     0       25      0       0          69            808
     4:35 PM          1     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     40      2      0     0       28      0       0          71            812
     4:40 PM          1     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     33      2      0     1       30      0       0          67            811
     4:45 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     34      0      0     0       34      0       0          68            798
     4:50 PM          1     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     35      3      0     2       17      0       0          58            790
     4:55 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     31      1      0     0       33      0       0          65            798
     5:00 PM          1     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     32      0      0     0       29      0       0          62            789
     5:05 PM          0     0      0     0           1     0     0     0     1     35      0      0     0       33      0       0          70            796
     5:10 PM          2     0      0     0           0     0     1     0     0     36      1      0     0       37      0       0          77            809
     5:15 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     50      1      0     0       28      0       0          79            799
     5:20 PM          1     0      1     0           0     0     0     0     0     37      2      0     0       37      0       0          78            813
     5:25 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     51      2      0     0       29      0       0          82            846
     5:30 PM          0     0      0     0           1     0     0     0     0     40      2      0     1       22      0       0          66            843
     5:35 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     37      1      0     0       34      0       0          72            844
     5:40 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     41      3      0     0       38      0       0          82            859
     5:45 PM          0     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     32      0      0     0       30      0       0          62            853
     5:50 PM          1     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     31      5      0     0       19      0       0          56            851
     5:55 PM          3     0      0     0           0     0     0     0     0     31      3      0     0       20      0       0          57            843
 Peak 15-Min                  Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                  Total
  Flowrates         Left Thru Right      U         Left Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        4     0      4     0           0     0     0     0     0    552     20      0     0      376      0       0                 956
 Heavy Trucks         0     0      0                 0     0     0           0     32      0            0       28      0                         60
  Pedestrians               0                              0                        0                            0                                 0
   Bicycles           0     0      0                 0     0     0           0      0      0            0        0      0                          0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:36 PM                                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Minson Rd -- Ochoco Hwy                                                                                             QC JOB #: 10547509
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                    DATE: 10/20/2010
                          5   0.58   4                           Peak-Hour: 4:50 PM -- 5:50 PM                                  60.0       0.0

                          5    0     0
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                                60.0 0.0 0.0

       376     3                           1    372
                                                                                                                  10.9   0.0                       0.0     10.2
        0.83   451            0.87       371   0.86
                                                                                                                         4.2                      10.2
       454     0                           0    451
                                                                                                                  4.2    0.0                       0.0      4.2

                          0    0     0
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                          0   0.00   0
                                                                                                                                0.0        0.0



                               0                                                                                                 0     0   0


                                                                                                                         0                          0

               0                           0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0


                               0                                                                                                 0     0   0




 5-Min Count                   Minson Rd                       Minson Rd               Ochoco Hwy                  Ochoco Hwy
     Period                   (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                     Total
                   Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                       Totals
     4:00 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     34      0      0     0       27      0         0          61            745
     4:05 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     1     38      0      0     0       17      0         0          56            727
     4:10 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     44      0      0     0       30      0         0          74            757
     4:15 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     1     52      0      0     0       32      0         0          86            779
     4:20 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     1     25      0      0     0       29      0         0          56            790
     4:25 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     27      0      0     0       26      0         0          53            783
     4:30 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     38      0      0     0       17      0         0          55            786
     4:35 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     2     44      0      0     0       31      0         0          77            805
     4:40 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     0     30      0      0     0       35      0         0          66            781
     4:45 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     35      0      0     0       27      0         0          62            780
     4:50 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     31      0      0     0       25      0         0          56            773
     4:55 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      2    0     0     31      0      0     0       27      0         0          60            762
     5:00 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     1     31      0      0     0       29      0         0          61            762
     5:05 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     0     39      0      0     0       35      0         0          75            781
     5:10 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     0     35      0      0     0       31      1         0          68            775
     5:15 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      1    0     1     48      0      0     0       38      0         0          88            777
     5:20 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     36      0      0     0       30      0         0          66            787
     5:25 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     54      0      0     0       30      0         0          84            818
     5:30 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     1     42      0      0     0       18      0         0          61            824
     5:35 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     34      0      0     0       31      0         0          65            812
     5:40 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     38      0      0     0       46      0         0          84            830
     5:45 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     0     32      0      0     0       31      0         0          63            831
     5:50 PM         0           0      0     0         0       0      0    0     1     31      0      0     0       15      0         0          47            822
     5:55 PM         0           0      0     0         1       0      0    0     1     25      0      0     0       17      1         0          45            807
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                         Total
  Flowrates        Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       0           0      0     0         0       0      4    0     4    552      0      0     0      392      0         0                 952
 Heavy Trucks        0           0      0               0       0      0          0     28      0            0       28      0                           56
  Pedestrians                    0                              0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles          0           0      0               0       0      0          0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:36 PM                                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                             Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: S Parrish Ln -- Ochoco Hwy                                                                                           QC JOB #: 10547510
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                     DATE: 10/20/2010
                           9   0.63 13                            Peak-Hour: 4:50 PM -- 5:50 PM                                  11.1       0.0

                           9    0     0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                                 11.1 0.0 0.0

       370     12                           1    362
                                                                                                                   10.3   0.0                       0.0     10.2
        0.82   450             0.90       361   0.86
                                                                                                                          4.7                      10.2
       462     0                            0    450
                                                                                                                   4.5    0.0                       0.0      4.7

                           0    0     0
                                                                                                                                 0.0 0.0 0.0

                           0   0.00   0
                                                                                                                                 0.0        0.0



                                0                                                                                                 0     0   0


                                                                                                                          0                          0

               0                            0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                          0                          0


                                0                                                                                                 0     0   0




 5-Min Count                    S Parrish Ln                   S Parrish Ln             Ochoco Hwy                  Ochoco Hwy
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                      Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                       Totals
     4:00 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     1     30      0      0     0       29      0         0          60            746
     4:05 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     1     34      0      0     0       15      0         0          50            734
     4:10 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       1   0     0     44      0      0     0       29      0         0          74            755
     4:15 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       2   0     0     40      0      0     0       33      0         0          75            780
     4:20 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     1     42      0      0     0       32      1         0          76            797
     4:25 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       1   0     0     20      0      0     0       22      0         0          43            781
     4:30 PM          0           0       0    0         1       0       0   0     0     35      0      0     0       23      0         0          59            787
     4:35 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     1     39      0      0     0       28      0         0          68            794
     4:40 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     1     34      0      0     0       31      0         0          66            768
     4:45 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       1   0     1     25      0      0     0       25      0         0          52            753
     4:50 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       1   0     1     43      0      0     0       24      0         0          69            766
     4:55 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     29      0      0     0       29      0         0          58            750
     5:00 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       1   0     1     31      0      0     0       29      0         0          62            752
     5:05 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     1     35      0      0     0       37      0         0          73            775
     5:10 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       2   0     1     28      0      0     0       27      0         0          58            759
     5:15 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     43      0      0     0       39      0         0          82            766
     5:20 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     0     45      0      0     0       28      0         0          73            763
     5:25 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       3   0     4     38      0      0     0       30      1         0          76            796
     5:30 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     2     52      0      0     0       19      0         0          73            810
     5:35 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       1   0     1     35      0      0     0       34      0         0          71            813
     5:40 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       1   0     0     39      0      0     0       40      0         0          80            827
     5:45 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       0   0     1     32      0      0     0       25      0         0          58            833
     5:50 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       1   0     2     32      0      0     0       16      1         0          52            816
     5:55 PM          0           0       0    0         0       0       1   0     0     30      0      0     0       18      0         0          49            807
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                          Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles        0           0       0    0         0       0      12   0    16    504      0      0     0      388      4         0                 924
 Heavy Trucks         0           0       0              0       0       0         0     28      0            0       28      0                           56
  Pedestrians                     0                              0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles           0           0       0              0       0       0         0      0      0            0        0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:36 PM                                                       SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Stillman Rd -- Ochoco Hwy                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10547511
 CITY/STATE: Prineville, OR                                                                                                       DATE: 10/20/2010
                          0   0.25   2                            Peak-Hour: 4:50 PM -- 5:50 PM                                    0.0       50.0

                          0    0     0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0

       362     2                            0    387
                                                                                                                    10.5   50.0                       0.0     10.1
        0.86   441            0.91        362   0.89
                                                                                                                           3.9                       10.5
       450     7                           25    456
                                                                                                                    4.0    0.0                        4.0      3.9

                          0    0     15
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 6.7

                         32 0.68 15
                                                                                                                                   3.1       6.7



                               0                                                                                                   0     0    0


                                                                                                                           0                           0

               0                            0                                                                              0                           0

                                                                                                                           0                           0


                               0                                                                                                   0     0    0




 5-Min Count                   Stillman Rd                     Stillman Rd               Ochoco Hwy                  Ochoco Hwy
     Period                   (Northbound)                    (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                  Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                        Total
                   Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                        Totals
     4:00 PM         0           0       2    0          0       0       0    0     0     30      0      0     4       31      0         0           67            788
     4:05 PM         0           0       2    0          0       0       0    0     0     40      0      0     3       15      0         0           60            778
     4:10 PM         0           0       0    0          0       0       0    0     0     44      1      0     0       33      0         0           78            806
     4:15 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     47      0      0     1       33      0         0           82            825
     4:20 PM         0           0       2    0          0       0       0    0     0     35      0      0     0       29      0         0           66            835
     4:25 PM         0           0       2    0          0       0       0    0     0     24      0      0     1       19      0         0           46            806
     4:30 PM         0           0       3    0          0       0       0    0     0     44      0      0     2       28      0         0           77            837
     4:35 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     29      0      0     4       29      0         0           63            826
     4:40 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     33      0      0     1       34      0         0           69            812
     4:45 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     30      3      0     3       23      0         0           60            804
     4:50 PM         0           0       0    0          0       0       0    0     1     34      2      0     2       28      0         0           67            807
     4:55 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     29      0      0     1       28      0         0           59            794
     5:00 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     34      1      0     3       37      0         0           76            803
     5:05 PM         0           0       0    0          0       0       0    0     0     32      0      0     3       35      0         0           70            813
     5:10 PM         0           0       2    0          0       0       0    0     0     34      0      0     5       22      0         0           63            798
     5:15 PM         0           0       3    0          0       0       0    0     0     44      1      0     1       44      0         0           93            809
     5:20 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     38      0      0     1       28      0         0           68            811
     5:25 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     48      0      0     0       23      0         0           72            837
     5:30 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     1     39      1      0     2       25      0         0           69            829
     5:35 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     41      1      0     2       39      0         0           84            850
     5:40 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     36      1      0     3       29      0         0           70            851
     5:45 PM         0           0       3    0          0       0       0    0     0     32      0      0     2       24      0         0           61            852
     5:50 PM         0           0       1    0          0       0       0    0     0     24      0      0     4       17      0         0           46            831
     5:55 PM         0           0       0    0          0       0       0    0     0     34      0      0     1       20      0         0           55            827
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                      Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                            Total
  Flowrates        Left        Thru Right     U        Left    Thru Right     U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       0           0      20    0          0       0       0    0     0    520      4      0     8      380      0         0                  932
 Heavy Trucks        0           0       4               0       0       0          0     28      0            0       24      0                            56
  Pedestrians                    0                               0                         0                            0                                    0
   Bicycles          0           0       0               0       0       0          0      0      0            0        0      0                             0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments: Intersection off set, be careful to get both north and south legs of intersection.
Report generated on 11/10/2010 7:36 PM                                                        SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
