The Ridge and Costco
Transportation Impact Analysis

Elk Grove, California




Prepared For:
Costco Wholesale, Inc.



Prepared By:
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.



Project No. 19097


February 2016
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                       February 2016 
                                                                                                        



                                     ENGINEER’S CERTIFICATION 


                                 This traffic analysis was prepared and reviewed by 
                                                        Franklin Cai 
                                Registered Traffic Engineer in the State of California 
                                            A Senior Engineer with the firm of 
                                                Kittelson & Associates, Inc. 




                                                                                             
                                       
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                                                                                                 February 2016
Table of Contents



TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 2

   Analysis Purpose.......................................................................................................................................................................... 2

   Analysis Findings.......................................................................................................................................................................... 2
Existing Transportation Conditions ........................................................................................................ 8
Future Traffic Conditions ..................................................................................................................... 11
Proposed Development Plan ............................................................................................................... 15

   Project Background ................................................................................................................................................................... 15

   Proposed Development Plan ..................................................................................................................................................... 15

   Trip Generation ......................................................................................................................................................................... 15

   Trip Distribution ........................................................................................................................................................................ 19

   Operational Analysis .................................................................................................................................................................. 21

   Queuing Analysis ....................................................................................................................................................................... 22
Transportation Needs .......................................................................................................................... 24

   Elk Grove Boulevard Multi-Use Pathway Design ....................................................................................................................... 31

   Internal Site Circulation ............................................................................................................................................................. 33
Findings and Recommendations .......................................................................................................... 41
Appendices                 ..................................................................................................................................... 42

   Appendix A Manual Turning Movement Counts

   Appendix B Travel Demand Model Outputs and Land Use Assumptions

   Appendix C Dignity Health Elk Grove Medical Campus

   Appendix D Trip Generation Assumptions and Methods

   Appendix E Cordon Area Trip Assignment, Weekday PM Peak Hour

   Appendix F Synchro Analysis Worksheet




                                                                                                     ii                                                            Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
        Section 1
Executive Summary
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                  February 2016
Executive Summary




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

ANALYSIS PURPOSE
The purpose of this Transportation Impact Analysis is to address site access, circulation, trail
considerations, and connections planned as part of the proposed Elk Grove Costco and the overall
Laguna Ridge site. Based on direction and objectives relayed by City staff, this assessment takes a
conservative approach to trip generation to help ensure that site access locations are appropriately
designed and managed to avoid impacts to the public roadway system. This report addresses the
adequacy of the site access locations to serve the overall site, including recommendations on lane
configurations, access restrictions, traffic control, and queue storage lengths. This report also addresses
internal circulation needs and provides recommendations to help provide a more efficient,
interconnected, and accessible site layout.


ANALYSIS FINDINGS
Key findings of this analysis are as follows:

         The proposed development is planned to contain approximately 400,000 square-feet of total
          building area with full buildout.
         The site will be developed in phases as tenants are identified. Costco and the fuel center will be
          constructed as part of the initial site development.
         The overall site is expected to generate approximately 2,641 trips at the driveways (1,599 net
          new regional trips) with full site build-out.
         A new traffic signal will be installed at the intersection of Elk Grove Boulevard/Ginther Drive.
          Additional access will be provided to the overall center from Bruceville Road, Civic Center Drive,
          and through right-in, right-out (RIRO) connections to Elk Grove Boulevard.
         All of the study intersections will operate acceptably with full build-out in the year 2035 during
          the critical weekday p.m. peak hour.
         95th percentile queues during the weekday p.m. peak hour will extend beyond the available
          storage in locations along the site frontage.
         The Elk Grove Boulevard frontage will require modifications within the striped shoulder area.
          This space will be needed for right-turn deceleration lanes to separate through and turning
          traffic.
         The new site access points along Elk Grove Boulevard will create conflicts with the Elk Grove
          Boulevard multi-use pathway that will require mitigating treatments.




                                                        2                                Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                 February 2016
Executive Summary


Recommendations of this analysis are provided below:

         The new signal at the Elk Grove Boulevard/Ginther Drive intersection should be designed to
          maintain right-in, right-out access (with signalization) from the neighborhood to the north. Full
          access should be provided from the retail center. The configuration of this signal will best
          accommodate signal progression, maintain the existing travel patterns through the
          neighborhood, avoid widening adjacent to residences, and provide direct pedestrian
          connectivity between the neighborhood, retail center, and Elk Grove Boulevard multi-use trail
          system.
         Frontage improvements along Elk Grove Boulevard will be required to prevent use of the
          striped area as an acceleration lane.
         Left-turn bay extensions will be required along Elk Grove Boulevard to support the new traffic
          signal at Ginther Drive and to provide more storage to accommodate the development.
         The conceptual design of the Civic Center Drive/Babylon Drive – shared access should be
          modified to increase the available storage while maintaining the same movement restrictions.
          Development of the design will require coordination and approval from Dignity Health and the
          City of Elk Grove.
         A raised median should be installed along Civic Center Drive to restrict the westernmost access
          to right-in, right-out access only.
         New crossings of the Elk Grove Boulevard multi-use pathway should adhere to the treatment
          options identified within this report to provide clear sight lines and improve visibility between
          motorists and pedestrians. The proposed crossings prioritize pedestrian/cyclist use of the
          pathway while providing measures to increase yielding and reduce the potential for conflicts.
         Pedestrian connectivity should be reviewed as part of individual tenant plans for the site to
          ensure direct connections are provided between buildings and to the public sidewalks and Elk
          Grove Boulevard multiuse pathway.

Additional details of the study methodology, findings, and recommendations are provided within this
report.




                                                        3                               Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
 Section 1
Introduction
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                          February 2016 
Introduction 




INTRODUCTION 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
The Ridge and Costco include two separate projects encompassing 41 acres of the Town Center area of 
the Laguna Ridge Specific Plan. The site is located south of Elk Grove Boulevard, east of Bruceville Road, 
north  of  Civic  Center  Drive,  and  is  bordered  to  the  east  by  the  approved  Dignity  Health  Elk  Grove 
Medical Campus. 

The project will be developed in phases, with the first phase containing only the Costco and fuel center. 
Primary  access  to  the  initial  phase  will  be  provided  via  a  new  traffic  signal  on  Elk  Grove  Boulevard 
aligned with Ginther Drive. In addition, a right‐in, right‐out access onto Elk Grove Boulevard will also be 
provided along with two connections to Civic Center Drive. Costco is expected to be fully built‐out and 
occupied by 2017. 

Future  development  phases  will  complete  the  connection  of  the  site  to  Bruceville  Road,  and  are 
expected  to  be  completed  as  building  tenants  are  identified.  It  is  expected  that  the  site  will  be 
developed over the next three to five years. 


SCOPE OF THE REPORT 
This  analysis  determines  the  transportation‐related  impacts  associated  with  the  proposed  The  Ridge 
and Costco development, and was prepared based on scoping direction from City of Elk Grove staff. As 
the overall site was previously assessed through the Laguna Ridge Specific Plan, this effort is focused on 
analysis of the site access intersections to ensure appropriate sizing, queue storage bays, intersection 
control, and safety. The operational analyses were performed at these nearby intersections (referred to 
as study intersections), as illustrated in Figure 1: 

      1. Bruceville Rd/Elk Grove Blvd 
      2. Elk Grove Blvd/Northwest RIRO Access 
      3. Elk Grove Blvd/Ginther Dr (RIRO) ‐ Main Access (Full Access) 
      4. Elk Grove Blvd/East Retail RIRO Access 
      5. Wymark Dr/Elk Grove Blvd 
      6. Wymark Dr/Civic Center Dr 
      7. Civic Center Dr/Babylon Dr – Shared Full Access 
      8. Civic Center Dr/Costco Loading Access 
      9. Civic Center Dr/West Access 
      10. Bruceville Rd/Civic Center Dr 
      11. Bruceville Rd/Main LIRIRO Access 
      12. Bruceville Rd/North RIRO Access 
                                 




                                                            2                                   Kittelson & Associates, Inc. 
     The Ridge and d Costco Transporrtation Impact Ana
                                                     alysis                                                    FFebruary 2016 
     Introduction 




Fiigure 1. Site V
                Vicinity Map. Aerial Sourcee: maps.googlle.com. 

     This  repo
              ort  summarizzes  these  an
                                        nalyses,  findiings,  and  prrovides  recom
                                                                                  mmendation ns  to  ensure  that  the 
     transporttation system
                          m can continu ue to operate safely and  efficiently w  with the prop
                                                                                             posed build‐oout of The 
     Ridge, Coostco, and the
                           e Costco fueling center. 




                                                                   3                              Kittelson & Asssociates, Inc. 
                       Section 2
Existing Transportation Conditions
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                February 2016
Existing Transportation Conditions




EXISTING TRANSPORTATION CONDITIONS
To understand the existing operational characteristics of the transportation system surrounding the Elk
Grove site, the area was visited and inventoried in September 2015 and January 2016. Traffic counts
were collected throughout the study area in September 2015 to understand the number and patterns
of vehicles, pedestrians, cyclists, and trucks throughout the study area. Traffic count worksheets are
provided within the appendices.

Elk Grove Boulevard is an east-west roadway connecting I-5 to the west and Grant Line Road to the
east, with SR 99 intersecting in between. Elk Grove Boulevard is six lanes from I-5 to East Stockton
Boulevard, four lanes as it extends east to Elk Grove-Florin Road, and it becomes two lanes as it extends
further east to Grant Line Road. Elk Grove Boulevard is built to its general plan designation between I-5
and Waterman Road.

Civic Center Drive is a two-lane commercial street with a center turn lane between Bruceville Road and
Laguna Spring Drive. Civic Center Drive is built to its general plan designation.

Bruceville Road is a north-south arterial traversing from Valley Hi Drive near the Kaiser-Permanente
complex in unincorporated Sacramento County to south of Kammerer Road/Elk Grove City limit. Within
the City of Elk Grove and extending southward, Bruceville Road is four lanes from Sheldon Road to
Laguna Boulevard, six lanes to Elk Grove Boulevard, four lanes to Whitelock Parkway, and two lanes
south of Whitelock Parkway. In the general plan, Bruceville Road is designated as a six-lane arterial.

Big Horn Boulevard is a four-lane arterial traversing from Franklin Boulevard to Whitelock Parkway. Big
Horn Boulevard is built to its general plan designation.

Laguna Spring Drive is a four-lane, north-south arterial between Laguna Boulevard and Lotz Parkway.
Laguna Spring Drive is built to its general plan designation.

State Route 99 (SR 99) is a north-south freeway that connects Elk Grove to all the major cities in the
Central Valley – Sacramento, Stockton, Modesto, Merced, Fresno, etc. In the Elk Grove city limits, SR 99
is accessed via interchanges at Grant Line Road, Elk Grove Boulevard, Laguna Boulevard/Bond Road and
Sheldon Road. This stretch of SR 99 has two mainline travel lanes and one high occupancy vehicle (HOV)
lane in each direction; the posted speed limit is 65 mph.

Interstate 5 (I-5) is a north-south freeway that extends through the entire state of California, and it is
also a major national freeway that connects between Mexico and Canada. At its interchange with Elk
Grove Boulevard, I-5 is a four-lane freeway.




                                                      8                                Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                   February 2016
Existing Transportation Conditions


Pedestrian System
The roadways that surround and lead to the proposed project site, Elk Grove Boulevard, Bruceville
Road, Civic Center Drive, Wymark Drive and Big Horn Boulevard are all built to general plan
specifications. Therefore these roadways all provide sidewalks with trees/vegetation buffering between
the sidewalks and the vehicle travel lanes. Crosswalks with ADA compliant ramps are present at nearly
all intersections along these roadways as well in the vicinity of project site. Further there is a multi-use
pathway along the south side of Elk Grove Boulevard that serves both pedestrians and cyclists.


Bicycle System
Class II bike lanes are present along all the roadways surrounding and leading to the proposed project
site: Elk Grove Boulevard, Bruceville Road, Civic Center Drive, Wymark Drive and Big Horn Boulevard.
This is consistent with the adopted City of Elk Grove Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan (July 2004). The
majority of the bike facilities within city limits are Class II bike lanes. Additionally, there is a multi-use
pathway along the south side of Elk Grove Boulevard that serves both pedestrians and bicycles.


Transit System
The City of Elk Grove has its own transit system, e-Tran, satisfying the City’s transit demand. e-tran
includes a neighborhood shuttle service (ez-tran), a limited local transit service and a commuter service
(mostly to downtown Sacramento). The local transit service is provided on weekdays (six routes) and
weekends (three routes). e-Tran provides nine commuter routes that operate mid-week, including two
reverse commuter routes. Transit service is provided along the Elk Grove Boulevard site frontage with
an existing bus pull-out just east of the Bruceville Road intersection.




                                                        9                                 Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
              Section 3
Future Traffic Conditions
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                 February 2016
Future Traffic Conditions




FUTURE TRAFFIC CONDITIONS
Future year 2035 traffic volumes were developed using the regional travel demand model (SACMET
model from SACOG) using Cumulative land use assumptions from the Metropolitan Transportation
Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy (MTP/SCS). Prior population and employment assumptions for
the subject site (including the retail and adjacent medical areas) were removed from the model to
avoid double-counting of trips.

Travel demand model link volumes were calibrated to existing turning movement counts and converted
to turning movements using the Furness method as described in NCHRP Report 255. These traffic
volumes were then balanced throughout the study area network. Additional details on the volume
development are included in the appendices.


Planned Public Projects and Improvements
Based on discussions with staff a long-range plan to connect the Whitelock Parkway with SR 99 was
identified. The City website provides the following description of this project:

          The Whitelock Parkway/SR 99 interchange will reduce the current traffic congestion along Elk
          Grove Boulevard and future congestion on Kammerer Road by offering additional entry and exits
          points on SR 99 and rerouting traffic from nearby interchanges. The Whitelock Parkway/SR 99
          Interchange will complete the eastern extension of the Toby Johnson multiuse trail across SR 99,
          providing safe access for pedestrians and cyclists into the Elk Grove Regional Park and the many
          popular destinations within the park including the sports fields, a fishing lake, walking trails,
          Frisbee golf course, 2.4-acre Elk Grove bike park, 1.2-acre dog park and the Elk Grove Historical
          Hotel.

The Whitelock interchange project is in the planning phase, and complete construction funding has not
yet been secured. While expected to be complete prior to the horizon year, this project was not directly
incorporated into the analysis.


Approved Area Development
The only approved development project within the site vicinity was a Specific Plan Amendment for the
Dignity Health Elk Grove Medical Campus that was approved on June 20, 2013 at 8220 Wymark Drive.
The overall project will be developed in four separate phases encompassing a total of nearly 790,000
square-feet of medical, hospital, structured parking, and utility space. The site is expected to develop
over a twenty-year timeframe.

While general population and employment estimates were used to obtain general growth estimates
throughout the study area, due to the proximal location of the hospital relative to the retail center
specific trip generation estimates were prepared and assigned onto the transportation system.
                                                       11                               Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                           February 2016
Future Traffic Conditions


Additional documentation of the Dignity Health Elk Grove Medical Campus trips is provided within the
project appendices.

Forecast year 2035 traffic volumes without development of The Ridge and Costco are shown in Figure
2. This includes calibration of the future travel demand models, inclusion of approved development
trips, and balancing of traffic volumes to ensure consistent throughput on the corridors.




                                                      12                          Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
               Section 4
Proposed Development Plan
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                               February 2016
Proposed Development Plan




PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT PLAN

PROJECT BACKGROUND
The site is located within the Laguna Ridge Specific Plan (LRSP), and more specifically in a sub-planning
area known as the Elk Grove Town Center, also referred to as the Laguna Ridge Town Center. The site
was envisioned as the western mixed-use retail area with retail and residential uses.


PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT PLAN
With full build-out the proposed project will include nearly 400,000 square-feet of retail uses. Access
will be provided from the surrounding roadways, including connections from Elk Grove Boulevard,
Bruceville Road, and Civic Center Drive.

The overall retail center will be constructed in phases, with the first phase consisting of the
approximately 150,500 square-foot Costco and fuel center. This initial phase will not include a
connection to Bruceville Road, but will provide a new signal onto Elk Grove Boulevard at the Ginther
Drive intersection, and connections onto Civic Center Drive including at a future shared-access location
with the planned Dignity Health campus.

Subsequent project phases will occur as tenants are identified. This is expected to occur over the next
three to five years.


TRIP GENERATION
Trip generation estimates are commonly prepared based on data contained within the standard
reference Trip Generation, 9th Edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). The
studies that comprise the ITE manual were prepared based on cordon studies at other similar
developments within suburban settings that are expected to be applicable to conditions within the Elk
Grove area.

Note that this analysis is focused on the weekday p.m. peak hour. During the weekday a.m. peak hour
the proposed Costco warehouse and most retail uses are not open for business or experience
significantly reduced traffic volumes compared to the afternoon and evening hours.

At this time specific building tenants have not yet been identified with exception of the Costco and fuel
center, which will comprise the Phase 1 development. Accordingly, we have applied ITE classifications
for all other uses, separating out only the fast-food restaurants due to the increased trip generation
intensity of these uses. Other high-intensity classifications could also be classified to arrive at an even
more conservative analysis estimate (such as separately classifying outlying pads as high-turnover sit-
down restaurants), but cordon studies we have conducted in other areas generally show that these

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                          15                                  Sacramento, California
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                 February 2016
Proposed Development Plan


high-intensity uses are generally balanced by lower-intensity tenants such as home improvement
stores, department/clothing stores, real estate offices, and others.

The land use code most commonly applied to Costco warehouse sites is the Discount Club, ITE Land Use
Code 857. This land use was first introduced within the 8th Edition of the Trip Generation manual in
2008. The land use description states the following:

          A discount club is a discount store or warehouse where shoppers pay a membership fee in
          order to take advantage of discounted prices on a wide variety of items such as food, clothing,
          tires and appliances; many items are sold in large quantities or in bulk.

The 9th Edition Trip Generation manual notes that the peak of these uses occurs between 11:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m., and trip data that comprises this classification was collected between the 1980’s and
2000’s. This land use does not distinguish between sites with or without fuel centers, but notes the
importance of including this information in future studies. ITE also notes that the weekday AM peak
hour trip information is based on a small sample size (unknown whether it includes sites with fuel
centers) and cautions the user about application of the data.

Based on our knowledge of Costco sites, the primary limitation with the ITE Discount Club data is that
no information was collected related to trip characteristics such as pass-by or diverted trips, or whether
the fueling station is included. Application of the Discount Club data without pass-by or diverted trip
information would inherently imply that every Costco trip represents a new home-to-Costco trip on the
transportation system, which customer surveys shows is both unrealistic and inappropriate.

We have compiled a database of Costco-specific trip generation surveys nationally that provides a more
accurate reflection of Costco-specific store characteristics, and distinguishes between sites with fuel
centers and other amenities (see appendices). This includes customer surveys at some of the locations
to better reflect the internalization between the fuel center and warehouse, and whether trips are
considered primary (home-based trips), pass-by (trips on adjacent roads turning into the site), or
diverted (trips on nearby roads diverting their route to Costco). Anecdotally, prior studies have shown
that the sum of pass-by and diverted trips is relatively constant across Costco sites; locations bordering
a major roadway include a high volume of pass-by and a lower percentage of diverted trips, whereas
sites that are not fronting a major roadway include the converse. As this analysis is focused only on the
site-access locations, we have not separated out pass-by trips but conservatively included these.

While the trip generation database for Costco includes the impact of a fuel center, the database does
not include any locations with 30 fueling positions. Before and after data collected as part of fuel center
expansions show that additional fueling positions generate a small increase in trips, albeit with
reductions in queuing, vehicle idling, and wait times. Additional details on the fuel center studies are
included in the appendices, and trips associated with the fuel center expansion to account for the
potential to include up to 30 fueling positions are identified within the trip generation table.


                                                      16                                Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                               February 2016
Proposed Development Plan


Finally, to accurately assess the site access points trips from each individual area were separated using
the cordons shown in Figure 3. These cordon areas identify the buildings that will rely on similar access
characteristics. Trip generation was prepared for these individual areas to ensure that trips throughout
the development were appropriately assigned to the individual access points that serve the property.
Table 1 summarizes the resultant trip generation estimates for each area and for the site as a whole.




Figure 3. Building Cordon Areas




                                                      17                              Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                              February 2016
Proposed Development Plan


Table 1. Estimated Trip Generation Potential By Area
                                                             ITE                   Daily    Weekday PM Peak Hour
                        Land Use                                          Size
                                                            Code                   Trips    Total     In          Out
                                                             Area 1
 Shopping Center                                                                    687       60     29            31
                                                             820      16,100 SF
   Internal Trips (10%)                                                             -69       -6     -3            -3
 Fast-Food Restaurant with Drive-through                                           1,736     114     59            55
                                                             934      3,500 SF
   Internal Trips (10%)                                                            -174      -11     -6            -5
 Total                                                                                       157     79            78
                                                             Area 2
 Shopping Center                                                                    914       79     38            41
                                                             820      21,400 SF
   Internal Trips (10%)                                                             -91       -8     -4            -4
 Fast-Food Restaurant with Drive-through                                           1,488      98     51            47
                                                             934      3,000 SF
   Internal Trips (10%)                                                            -149      -10     -5            -5
 Total                                                                             2,162     159     80            79
                                                             Area 3
 Fast-Food Restaurant with Drive-through                                           6,350     418     217          201
                                                             934      12,800 SF
   Internal Trips (10%)                                                            -635      -42     -22          -20
 Total                                                                             5,715     376     195          181
                                                             Area 4
 Shopping Center                                                                   2,340     203      98          105
                                                             820      54,800 SF
   Internal Trips (10%)                                                            -234      -20     -10          -10
 Fast-Food Restaurant with Drive-through                                           4,564     300     156          144
                                                             934      9,200 SF
   Internal Trips (10%)                                                            -456      -30     -16          -14
 Total                                                                             6,214     453     228          225
                                                             Area 5
 Shopping Center                                                         120,000   5,124     445     214          231
                                                             820
   Internal Trips (10%)                                                    SF      -512      -45     -21          -24
 Total                                                                             4,612     400     193          207
                                                      Costco and Fuel Center
 Costco Warehouse with Fuel Center                           N/A      150,548      10,713   1,076    521          555

 Fuel Center Expansion                                                 Future       400      35      17            18
                                                             N/A        Fuel
    Internal Trips                                                    Expansion     -135     -15     -7            -8
 Total                                                                             10,978   1,096    531          565
                                                            Site Total
 Total Trips                                                                       34,316   2,828   1,400       1,428
   Total Internal Trips                                                            -2,455    -187    -94         -93
 Net New Trips                                                                     31,861   2,641   1,306       1,335


Pass-by trips were excluded from this analysis as the purpose is to assess the effect of site development
on the access points. It should be noted that regional impacts will be less than those shown in Table 1
as approximately 1,042 of the weekday p.m. peak hour trips are expected to be trips from commuters
entering and exiting the site that would otherwise already be on the transportation system. For
purposes of assessing regional impacts the site is expected to generate 1,599 net new weekday p.m.
peak hour trips.




                                                                   18                                Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                February 2016
Proposed Development Plan



TRIP DISTRIBUTION
To estimate the weekday p.m. distribution of proposed Costco trips we applied the latest SACMET
model from SACOG using cumulative (2035) land-use assumptions for the Metropolitan Transportation
Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy (MTP/SCS). This version of the model is used in lieu of the
version utilized in the Laguna Ridge Town Center study in 2008, because SACMET’s land-use and
network assumptions have been updated based on known land-use developments and roadway
improvements anticipated in the southwest portion of Sacramento County.

To generate estimates of trip distribution patterns, KAI identified the traffic analysis zone in the model
that contains the site for the proposed Costco in Elk Grove. In the model’s land-use files, all land-use
categories associated with this TAZ are zeroed out except for the retail land-use category. The SACMET
model was then rerun with this updated land-use. Then a select-zone traffic assignment was performed
for the weekday p.m. peak hour, where vehicle trips from this selected TAZ are tracked separately.
These distribution patterns are expected to reflect all retail uses contemplated. The trip generation
estimates shown in Table 1 were then assigned to the transportation system in accordance with these
model-based distribution patterns to arrive at the trip assignment shown in Figure 4. Additional details
on the trip assignment for individual cordon areas is provided in the appendices.




                                                      19                               Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                          February 2016
Proposed Development Plan



OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS
Based on the summation of the cumulative no-build traffic volumes (Figure 2) and site-generated trips
(Figure 4), future cumulative “with-site” traffic volumes were prepared for the surrounding study
intersections. These volumes were analyzed using Synchro analysis software to identify the delay and
capacity of the intersections to accommodate the projected traffic volumes.

Findings of the analysis are summarized in Table 2 for the cumulative traffic conditions. This shows
overall intersection delays for signalized and all-way stop-controlled intersections, and worst-approach
delays for two-way stop-controlled intersections. The City of Elk Grove Traffic Impact Analysis
Guidelines identifies Level of Service “D” or better as acceptable. This shows acceptable overall
intersection operations throughout the study area with build-out of the site with the access, control
types, and lane configurations proposed, with exception of the Elk Grove Boulevard/Bruceville Road
intersection. Separate discussion of each of the adjacent intersections is provided below; the
intersections are listed from the Elk Grove Boulevard/Bruceville Road intersection in a clockwise
manner around the site perimeter.

Table 2. Summary of 2035 Cumulative Analysis Intersection Operations, Weekday PM Peak Hour
                                                                              Cumulative Build
  Int #            Intersection Name                     Control          Delay (s)        LOS       Acceptable?
            Bruceville Rd/
    1                                                   Signalized          52.5            D              Yes
            Elk Grove Blvd
            Elk Grove Blvd/                           Two-Way Stop-
    2                                                                       9.6              A             Yes
            Northwest RIRO Access                       Controlled
            Elk Grove Blvd/
                                                        Signalized
    3       Ginther Dr (RIRO) - Main                                        26.1             C             Yes
                                                       (Proposed)
            Access
            Elk Grove Blvd/                           Two-Way Stop-
    4                                                                       9.9              A             Yes
            East Retail RIRO Access                     Controlled
            Wymark Dr/
    5                                                   Signalized          13.3             B             Yes
            Elk Grove Blvd
            Wymark Dr/                                 All-Way Stop-
    6                                                                       22.0             C             Yes
            Civic Center Dr                             Controlled
            Civic Center Dr/                           All-Way Stop-
    7                                                                       18.5             C             Yes
            Babylon Dr – Shared Full Access             Controlled
            Civic Center Dr/                          Two-Way Stop-
    8                                                                       16.0             C             Yes
            Costco Loading Access                       Controlled
            Civic Center Dr/                          Two-Way Stop-
    9                                                                       11.9             B             Yes
            West Access                                 Controlled
            Bruceville Rd/
   10                                                   Signalized          39.8            D              Yes
            Civic Center Dr
            Bruceville Rd/                            Two-Way Stop-
   11                                                                       13.1             B             Yes
            Main LIRIRO Access                          Controlled
            Bruceville Rd/                            Two-Way Stop-
   12                                                                       11.1             B             Yes
            North RIRO Access                           Controlled


                                                                     21                          Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                            February 2016
Proposed Development Plan



QUEUING ANALYSIS
95th percentile queues were reviewed at each of the access points to verify that adequate storage space
was available to meet forecast needs. The analysis found that the existing site layout can accommodate
95th percentile queues at the site accesses as currently shown in the plans. Intersections that exceed
available queue storage are largely along Elk Grove Boulevard; solutions include review of the
landscaped median area to extend storage bays as part of frontage improvements.

Table 3 summarizes queue deficiencies at the study intersections under cumulative year 2035 traffic
conditions. Additional queue analysis details are provided within the Synchro output sheets within the
appendices.

Table 3. Summary of 2035 Cumulative Analysis Intersection Queuing, Weekday PM Peak Hour
             Intersection                  95th Percentile Queue
Int #           Name                          Accommodation                             Potential Mitigation
                                     NB LT: 225 feet available, 200        Extend WB LT storage bay an additional 175 feet
                                     feet forecast
         Bruceville Rd/
  1                                  WB LT: 190 feet/380 feet
         Elk Grove Blvd
                                     available, 371 feet forecast (both
                                     lanes)
                                     WB LT: 350 feet required              Construct 400 feet of WB LT queue storage
         Elk Grove Blvd/
                                     NB LT: 200 feet required              Extend NB LT storage south to internal
  3      Ginther Dr (RIRO)
                                     NB RT: 75 feet required               intersection
         - Main Access
                                     SB RT: 25 feet required
                                     WB LT: 320 feet available, 275        Extend SB LT queue storage to 250 feet
                                     feet forecast                         Restripe additional median space beyond the
         Bruceville Rd/              WB RT: 300 feet available, 75 feet    westbound left-turn bay if additional queue
  10
         Civic Center Dr             forecast                              storage space is needed in the future.
                                     SB LT: 180 feet available, 250 feet
                                     forecast
         Bruceville Road/            SB LT: 50 feet forecast, 200 feet     None; prioritize median for northbound
  11
         LIRIRO Access               available                             Bruceville/Elk Grove Blvd long-term needs
NB: Northbound, SB: Southbound, EB: Eastbound, WB: Westbound, LT: Left-turn, RT: Right-turn
RIRO: Right-in, Right-out
LIRIRO: Left-in, Right-in, Right-out




                                                                22                                 Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
Transportation Needs
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                             February 2016
Transportation Needs




TRANSPORTATION NEEDS
This section reviews specific geometric and safety considerations at each of the access based on the
operational analysis, area context, and the current site plan. In general, The Ridge/Costco will be served
by Elk Grove Boulevard and Bruceville Road, with Civic Center Drive providing a secondary role in
access. These accesses are expected to be adequate to serve site demands while reducing reliance on
U-turn maneuvers.

Key access considerations as summarized within the individual access discussions below are as follows:

          Intersection capacity, safety, and queue storage needs
          Safety and accessibility along the Elk Grove Boulevard multi-use pathway;
          Weaving concerns due to access locations on high-volume and high-speed multi-lane arterial
           roadways; and
          Queuing and storage needs to prevent spillback onto the arterials.


1. Bruceville Road/Elk Grove Boulevard Intersection
The signalized intersection of Bruceville Road/Elk Grove Boulevard is shown to operate at an acceptable
overall LOS “D” with left-turn/U-turn maneuvers operating with high delays during the weekday
evening peak hour on the eastbound, northbound, and westbound approaches in 2035 with area build-
out.

Congestion relief at this intersection is expected to occur through the City’s development of alternative
routes. Routes parallel to Elk Grove Boulevard are available for motorists through the existing grid
network, which will likely reduce these forecast demands and motorists seek out routes with lower
delays. This will primarily occur through future plans to construct an interchange at the Whitelock
Parkway connection to SR 99, helping to reduce reliance on the Elk Grove Boulevard corridor.

Development-associated mitigation measures for this intersection include the extension of the left-turn
queue storage. It is recommended that the westbound left-turn storage bay be extended an additional
175 feet to accommodate long-term demands.1




1     th
    95 percentile queue analysis shows a demand for 371 feet of storage in two lanes (741 total feet). The current
configuration provides 190 feet in the outer lane and 380 feet in the inside turn lane, leaving 175 feet of storage need.

                                                              24                                    Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                          February 2016
Transportation Needs


2. Elk Grove Boulevard/Western Right-in, Right-out Access
The western right-in, right-out access on Elk Grove Boulevard is expected to primarily serve the retail
uses located west of the Costco site. The access restriction will be enforced by the raised median on Elk
Grove Boulevard. The analysis results identify low delays at this intersection.

Review of site identifies a transit stop is currently provided west of the driveway, and the new access
will require a crossing of the Elk Grove Boulevard Multi-Use pathway. The following recommendations
are provided for this access:

         The eastbound right-turn deceleration lane for the access should begin beyond the transit stop.
         The multi-use pathway treatments should include the design elements as separately described
          within this analysis to improve the safety at crossings of the EGB Multi-use Pathway.


3. Elk Grove Boulevard/Ginther Drive - Main Signalized Entrance
The main entrance to the site
along Elk Grove Boulevard is
proposed to align with Ginther
Drive, which serves as an access
to an established residential
neighborhood. The signalized
access will be critical to the
Laguna Ridge retail area, as this
provides the only access for
westbound Elk Grove Boulevard
motorists to access the site, and
will also serve as a key egress
location for westbound motorists
onto Elk Grove Boulevard. Figure
5     illustrates   the     current
intersection configuration.                           Figure 5. Elk Grove Boulevard/Ginther Drive existing layout.
                                                      Source: maps.google.com
As part of this analysis we
considered two potential layout
options for the future traffic signal configuration:

         Full-access movements from Ginther Drive
         Retention of the existing right-in, right-out configuration of Ginther Drive

In reviewing full-access movements we noted that there is expected to be a significant volume
imbalance between the two accesses, with the southbound Ginther Drive approach carrying
approximately 50 to 100 vehicles during the peak hour and the retail site projected to serve
                                                                   25                            Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                 February 2016
Transportation Needs


approximately 1,200 vehicles. Further, with residential uses constructed along both sides of Ginther
Drive the ability to widen the existing northern approach would be limited, and any widening would
create significant impacts to the adjacent residents.

With these constraints, to provide full-access to both sides of Ginther Drive the most efficient
accommodation of the traffic volumes would be provided with split signal phasing. While this design
was shown to meet City standards and provide direct access to the retail area for the adjacent
residents, it would also reduce the ability to coordinate signal operations on the critical Elk Grove
Boulevard arterial. The development team also noted that this design that would alter neighborhood
traffic patterns and potentially add cut-through uses within the neighborhood, which would be
considered detrimental to the existing residents. Accordingly, our team recommends retaining right-in,
right-out maneuvers from Ginther Drive (with signalization), while providing a signalized pedestrian
crossing of Elk Grove Boulevard on the east side of the intersection that will improve access to the retail
area, transit system, and multi-use pathway. A conceptual drawing of this configuration is shown in
Figure 6.




Figure 6. Conceptual traffic signal layout.

Other configuration recommendations for this signalized access are as follows:

         Extend the northbound queue storage bays south into the retail center to the nearest east-west
          intersection to maximize the available outbound queue storage. A bulb-out should be used at

                                                      26                                Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                  February 2016
Transportation Needs


          the south end of the right-turn lane to reduce the intersection width, improve alignment with
          the drive aisle to the south, and simplify driver decisions.
         A raised median is recommended to separate inbound and outbound traffic within the retail
          center.
         As currently shown in the site plan, no access should be allowed to any parcels along the entry
          throat.
         The addition of dashed lane marking extensions would ensure that the dual northbound left-
          turns exiting the retail center were directed to the inside through lanes on Elk Grove Boulevard,
          and the neighborhood exit would be directed to the curbside westbound through lane.
         A new eastbound right-turn deceleration lane should be constructed within the striped
          shoulder area along Elk Grove Boulevard, and a new westbound left-turn lane (with 400 feet of
          storage) should be constructed within the median space.
         The multiuse pathway crossing will be accommodated within the signalized crosswalk. It is
          recommended that this crossing include pedestrian countdown timers, and pushbuttons should
          be positioned for cyclists as well as pedestrians. Other visibility treatments applied at the
          unsignalized intersections, such as textured or colored pavement, full-width (10-foot wide)
          pathway ramps, and pedestrian warning signing and striping should be provided in consultation
          with City staff.
         Design of the signal will need to review available sight lines toward the future signal heads,
          particularly given the width of the tree canopy along the Elk Grove Boulevard center median.
          Retroreflective signal backplates may help improve the visibility of the signal heads against the
          green backdrop.
         Owing to the heavy projected left-turn volume turning from westbound Elk Grove Boulevard
          into the site we further recommend dual receiving lanes into the site. The curbside inbound
          lane will be dedicated for right-turns at the first internal intersection, providing access to the
          Costco fuel center and to the various retail pads. The internal intersection is recommended to
          remain uncontrolled for inbound maneuvers (stop-controlled for east-west trips) to prevent
          queue spillback.


4. East Retail Elk Grove Boulevard Right-in, Right-out Access
The eastern right-in, right-out access onto Elk Grove Boulevard provides approximately 75-feet of
northbound queue storage and the multiuse pathway crossing before perpendicular parking is
permitted along the drive aisle. While outbound queues are expected to be relatively short, the
proximity of the parking could be in conflict during peak periods or the holiday season. To the extent
practical, it is recommended that this parking be assigned for employee use to reduce turnover,
thereby limiting conflicts.




                                                        27                               Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                 February 2016
Transportation Needs


The following recommendations are provided for this access:

         Multi-use pathway crossing treatments should be provided at this unsignalized crossing (as
          separately addressed).
         An eastbound right-turn deceleration lane should be striped along Elk Grove Boulevard.
         Use of the shoulder area as an acceleration lane or the turn lane as a through movement should
          be restricted through striping and/or frontage modifications.


5. Elk Grove Boulevard/Wymark Drive Signal
The signalized intersection has been constructed with accessible curb ramps and an accommodation of
the Elk Grove Boulevard multi-use pathway. This traffic signal will serve as the primary access to the
hospital and supporting medical office buildings. The operations analysis shows that the intersection
operates within City operational standards, though it was noted that the EGB multi-use pathway is
treated similar to a typical crosswalk.


6. Civic Center Drive/Wymark Drive All-Way Stop
The all-way stop-controlled intersection of Civic Center Drive/Wymark Drive is constructed today and
shows acceptable long-term operations in its current configuration. We note that colored and textured
crosswalk treatments are in place for east-west crossings, but no crosswalks are present for north-
south connections to the surrounding neighborhoods, and the orientation of the curb ramps does not
readily accommodate this crossing.

         Consider the addition of colored and textured pedestrian crossings north-south to connect the
          new center to the existing neighborhoods.
         With the addition of new crossings, new accessible ramps should also be constructed. This will
          provide an approximately 42-foot pedestrian crossing versus the 60-foot crossing from the
          current ramp locations.


7. Costco Civic Center Shared Access
With the layout of the site, Civic Center Drive serves as a secondary access route to the overall center, a
secondary connection to the signalized arterial roadway system, and helps support delivery vehicle
needs. The layout of the site de-emphasizes this route and provides the priority for access along Elk
Grove Boulevard and Bruceville Road consistent with their classification.

East of the Costco site an access is provided onto Civic Center Drive. This access will be shared with
Dignity Health, replacing what was previously approved as a right-in, right-out access slightly offset
from the all-way stop-controlled intersection. The layout of the site intentionally prevents a direct
north-south cut-through route between Elk Grove Boulevard and Civic Center to avoid high speeds
within the parking area.
                                                      28                                Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                               February 2016
Transportation Needs


Several configuration options were explored at this access that would maintain separation between the
Costco site and the adjacent medical uses. The future medical building areas opposite the Costco are
primarily designated as loading areas; the western side of the medical site is not designed as patient or
primary employee accesses. Following discussion with the overall project team and City staff, the
concept in Figure 7 was identified as a potential configuration option as it maintained the separation of
access required from Dignity Health. Review of traffic operations at the all-way stop-controlled
intersection on Civic Center showed acceptable queuing and operations. However, specific
improvement needs associated with this access were identified in subsequent discussions with City
staff:

         Extend the southbound queue storage area to accommodate additional cars without blocking
          the access
         Avoid channelizing inbound left-turns into the drive-aisle and increase the storage bay.
         Modifications to the access will require review by Dignity Health but can be provided by
          relocating the inbound left-turn lane to the north.

It is recommended that the design and construction of this access be finalized with Dignity Health and
the City of Elk Grove prior to occupancy.




  Figure 7. Conceptual shared access layout.

                                                      29                              Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                 February 2016
Transportation Needs


8. Civic Center Drive Central Retail Access
The primary function of the Civic Center Drive central retail access is to accommodate Costco delivery
vehicles and provide full-access to Civic Center for retail uses west of the Costco. The access also serves
as a secondary access from the retail center to the signalized arterial system. No operational or queuing
issues were identified at this intersection.


9. Civic Center Drive West Access
The location of the proposed right-in, right-out access onto Civic Center Drive is in close proximity to
the signalized Bruceville Road/Civic Center intersection. It is recommended that a raised median be
installed along Civic Center Drive to restrict this access to right-in, right-out only. This access was also
shifted slightly east within the site plan to increase the spacing from the signal while maintaining
delivery vehicle and patron access.


10. Bruceville Road/Civic Center Signal
The signalized intersection has been fully constructed with crosswalks, accessible curb ramps, and turn
lanes in anticipation of the retail center. Volumes from Civic Center Drive are expected to remain below
planned build-out levels, providing reserve capacity at this signal to support future development east of
the site. No mitigation measures were identified to accommodate near-term needs; long-term
restriping of the two-way center left-turn lane may be needed if westbound left-turn queues routinely
extend beyond the striped storage bay.


11. Bruceville Road Left-in, Right-in, Right-out Access
The Bruceville Road Access is currently built as a stubbed driveway connection into the site. The access
allows left-in, right-in, right-out access as currently configured, and already includes curb returns and a
46-foot entry width. This connection is not planned as part of the initial Costco development to avoid
reconstructing the access to place future utilities.

Operational analysis shows that despite the relatively high inbound left-turning volumes, at full site
build-out the access is projected to operate with low delays and short queues. The existing storage bays
can accommodate the forecast 95th percentile storage needs during the weekday p.m. peak hour
without additional extension, though more space is available should it be needed in the future. We
recommend that this space be prioritized toward future extension of the northbound left-turn bays at
the Elk Grove Boulevard/Bruceville Road intersection rather than extension of the left-in turn bay.
Pedestrian crossing treatments that include a striped crosswalk and illumination are recommended
along the Bruceville Road site frontage owing to the relatively wide curb radii, adjacent travel speeds,
and approximately 70-foot crossing width as measured from the ramps. This treatment should be
completed when the Bruceville Road connection into the site is made.


                                                       30                               Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
       The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                   February 2016
       Transportation Needs


       12. Bruceville Road Northern Right-in, Right-Out Access
       The right-in, right-out access near the northwest corner of the site is located near the signalized
       intersection with Elk Grove Boulevard and contains a six-lane northbound section. The access was
       located south of the development of the northbound left-turn lanes onto Elk Grove Boulevard to
       reduce weaving maneuvers. The right-in, right-out configuration will be enforced by the raised
       channelization along Bruceville Road.


       ELK GROVE BOULEVARD MULTI-USE PATHWAY DESIGN
       A multi-use trail system extends along the Elk Grove Boulevard site frontage, providing bi-directional
       use for pedestrians and cyclists. The proposed site plan shows three accesses from Elk Grove Boulevard,
       which will conflict with trail users. Figure 8 includes a conceptual design that is recommended at the
       unsignalized access locations.

       While a driveway treatment at the accesses would be preferred to maintain the grade for pedestrians,
       with the medical uses planned on the eastern portion of the site having a flat grade for patients was
       imperative. It was also noted that the treatment at unsignalized intersections should be consistent
       throughout the corridor to provide consistent messaging and behavior for pathway users and drivers.




Figure 8. Recommended typical unsignalized access treatment options at a multi-use pathway intersection. Note that all
treatments shown are intended to be conceptual in nature, detailed design plans subject to City review and approval
will be required prior to construction.

       The recommended multi-use pathway crossing treatments include the following:

                Designation of a right-turn deceleration lane along Elk Grove Boulevard. This will provide a
                 waiting area for motorists outside of the through travel lanes if there are conflicting trail users.
                The new curb radius should be fairly tight (25 to 30 foot radius) to enforce a lower turning
                 speed. The design of these curbs should consider delivery vehicle needs.

                                                                31                               Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                  February 2016
Transportation Needs


         The pedestrian crossing should be located adjacent to the road. This will allow drivers on Elk
          Grove Boulevard to assess whether pedestrians or cyclists are on the trail when making a
          decision to turn right, and will maintain a clear view in both directions for motorists.
         The multi-use trail ramp should encompass the full width of the trail (approximately 10 feet) to
          maintain bi-directional use for cyclists at the crossings.
         Bollards should be located within the multi-use trail near the crossing to prevent vehicle use of
          the pathway.
         Stop signs and intersection ahead signs should be installed on the path to warn trail users of the
          intersection, supplemental pavement markings could also be considered.
         Removal of roadside vegetation that could occlude views of trail users on the deceleration lane
          approach. Within this area, overgrown trees and shrubs will need to be relocated or limbed to
          maintain clear sight lines toward pedestrians and cyclists. Typically, this requires a clear view
          with vegetation removal between a height of 2 feet and 8 feet.
         Striped crosswalks along the trail alignment and textured pavement treatments within the
          crossing. An advance stop bar should be located behind the crosswalk to avoid vehicle
          encroachment into the trail crossing.

         Signs should be installed along the Elk Grove Boulevard approach
          such as MUTCD R10-15 (Turning Vehicles Yield to Pedestrians) as
          shown in Figure 9.
         Illumination design will require a photometric analysis to provide
          adequate lighting of the conflict area within the crosswalk as well
          as along the multi-use path approaches. The illumination is
          intended to alert drivers to approaching cyclists and pedestrians
          during dark or low-light conditions.                                 Figure 9. MUTCD R10-15.
         As a supplemental option, a stencil within the Elk Grove right-turn
          lane could be provided that states “YIELD TO PEDS” followed by the right-turn arrow.

In addition, based on input and feedback from the Trails Committee the following mitigation measures
were also incorporated:

         All pathway signage should be oriented to two-way pedestrian travel.
         Pavement at intersections along the multi-use trail should include a transition to routes into the
          site through radius or 45-degree pavement treatments.

The combination of these measures will improve visibility of trail users and reduce the potential for
conflicts with motorists. An example of a multi-use trail that incorporates several of these elements
(although at a midblock crossing) is provided in Figure 10.




                                                        32                               Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                 February 2016
Transportation Needs




Figure 10. Example of Multi-use Trail Crossing Treatments (a midblock trail crossing is shown).


INTERNAL SITE CIRCULATION
This section identifies proposed changes to the internal site circulation based on detailed review of the
site plan, trip generation characteristics and delivery needs of individual tenant spaces, and geometric
considerations.


Elk Grove Boulevard Deceleration Lanes
The Elk Grove Boulevard frontage provides striped space outside of the travel lanes approximately 12
feet in width. With the adjacent multi-use pathway parallel to Elk Grove Boulevard use of this space for
bicycle lanes is unnecessary. While typically right-turn lane warrants could be assessed and used as the
applicable criteria for installation of right-turn lanes, the circumstances in Elk Grove deviate from the
assumptions behind a typical warrant analysis. The Harmelink plots typically cited for right-turn lane
warrants assess generalized costs and benefits of roadway and crash reduction; however, in Elk Grove
only restriping is necessary, and if the turn lanes were not striped, most drivers would use this space for
a deceleration lane regardless. Accordingly, within this context it is recommended that the right-turn
lanes are striped and designated as a right-turn only lane at each of the accesses. This will also provide
a space for motorists to wait outside of the travel lanes while yielding to trail users.



                                                      33                                Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                           February 2016
Transportation Needs


To prevent motorists from accelerating within the shoulder space it is further recommended that the
curb lines beyond each of the accesses be moved north, requiring motorists to turn into the outermost
through lane before tapering back for the next deceleration lane. This is currently provided through
striping only; extension of the curbing would better enforce this configuration (and prevent through-
lane use of the turn lane) but either treatment (extension of the curb or striping) could be used. This
configuration may require breaks in the curbing to accommodate drainage needs, but could also help
support lower travel speeds along Elk Grove Boulevard as the City indicated would be desirable as this
area develops.


Fuel Center Layout
Review was conducted of the
fuel center layout to ensure
that         queuing         and
ingress/egress can be safely
accommodated. The primary
concern with the location of
the fuel center involved its
connection to the east-west
drive aisle in close proximity to
the access to the new traffic
signal. While this northern                              Closure of
access provides a convenient                          northern fuel exit
exit from the retail center onto
Elk Grove Boulevard, as other
retail uses develop to the west
the queues on the internal
east-west       approach     will
commonly extend across the
                                                   Drive aisle alignment
closely-spaced access. Further,
                                                  with eastern shift, north-
by placing a higher burden on
                                                     south stop control
this internal intersection it
would become necessary to
configure this as an all-way
stop. This could become
problematic during peak times
with the heavy inbound and
outbound traffic volumes
arriving in platoons from the                  Figure 11. Fuel Center and Internal Intersection Modifications.
signal.     Accordingly,     the
following is recommended:
                                                                   34                             Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                 February 2016
Transportation Needs


         The northern fuel center exit should be closed as shown in Figure 11, forcing exiting traffic
          toward the Costco Warehouse (studies show that the majority of Costco patrons that use the
          fuel station do so before shopping at the warehouse).
         The internal intersection should be two-way stop-controlled with stop signs on the east-west
          approaches and free flow north-south. This will eliminate queue back-ups onto Elk Grove
          Boulevard and will provide an unbroken stream of exiting traffic that will provide more efficient
          egress from the retail center.

Near the fuel center the drive-aisles were better aligned with the exit lane through an eastern shift in
alignment, as is currently shown in the site plan and within Figure 11. Stop control on the north-south
approaches will help avoid the potential for high speeds entering the parking area.


Northeastern Drive-Through Retail Pads
There are three retail buildings (four tenant spaces) within the retail area north of Costco that were
reviewed, as illustrated in Figure 12. All three buildings currently identify a drive-through lane that
would allow tenants such as banks, coffee stores, or fast-food restaurants. These types of uses are
generally auto-centric and have a higher driveway trip generation rate than other similar retail tenants.
In review of the layout, it was noted that typical drive-through space is provided for each of the
buildings, which would allow approximately five or more vehicles to queue (depending on the specific
location of the drive-through ordering location and pick-up window).




                                                       35                               Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                            February 2016
Transportation Needs




                                                                                    Difficult entrance
                                                                                     for southbound
                                                                                   motorists from east




                                                                 Offset
                                                                 access




Figure 12. Northeast retail pad circulation.

Based on the circulatory direction at each of these buildings, a potential challenge we note is the
southbound vehicles ability to make a U-turn and enter the drive-through serving the building in the
northeast corner. It is recommended that one of the following options be provided prior to tenant
approval:

         Demonstration of the ability for a standard passenger car to complete this maneuver without
          encroaching on the outbound lane (using AutoTurn or similar).
         Westerly relocation of the drive-through entrance to accommodate a wider turning radius.
         Closure of the eastern access to route patrons in from the nearby driveways.

Secondly, it was noted that the drive-aisles from Costco are not aligned with the entrances to the pad
buildings. The slightly offset drive-aisles impact direct pedestrian connectivity, though turning
movement conflicts are not anticipated with the two-lane section.

The final comment within this area relates to the undefined pedestrian connections within these pads
and to the surrounding pathway/sidewalk system. The need for pedestrian connectivity improvements
throughout the site is separately addressed within this report.



                                                      36                           Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                               February 2016
Transportation Needs


North Central Retail Area
An illustration of the north central retail area is provided in Figure 13 for context. The primary issue
within this portion of the site is the widening to accommodate the left-turn lane into the Costco fuel
center and the requisite tapers back to a two-lane section. Within this area it was noted that the
channelization does not provide a clear “edge” to motorists as identified below. Minor curbing changes
would be adequate to address this area as noted below.




            Match radius
             treatment                                Review
                                                      curbing




Figure 13. North central retail area.



General Pedestrian Connectivity
Review of the overall site plan noted that the internal pedestrian network between buildings was not
well connected, with sidewalks ending abruptly and lack of connections between adjacent uses. Figure
14 illustrates the pedestrian connections throughout the site (excluding Costco, as separately
provided). This shows a comprehensive pedestrian network within the site.

The following is recommended to improve pedestrian connectivity and ensure connections between
the public sidewalks and building entrances:

         Each site plan should include a detailed pedestrian plan that shows connections between all
          buildings within the overall center, and connections to the public sidewalk and pathway system.

                                                        37                            Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                    February 2016
Transportation Needs


         The location of stop bars should allow pedestrians to cross from the ramps in front of waiting
          vehicles.
         Pedestrian crossings should occur at intersections, and not be set back. This will allow motorists
          to assess the conflicts before initiating a turning maneuver.
         Signs (such as ADA signs), planters, utilities, light poles, and other street furniture or vegetation
          should be carefully placed to maintain a clear width along sidewalks for carts, strollers, and
          wheelchairs.
         The sidewalks along public streets surrounding the retail site should identify the shortest routes
          to the buildings and provide pedestrian accommodations along these routes where feasible.
         Curb stops should be considered where the parking is adjacent to a curb-tight sidewalk to
          prevent vehicle overhang, or a minimum 6-foot walkway width should be provided.

The proposed Costco layout incorporates detailed review of the pedestrian system and provides an
integrated network of walkways throughout the site. This includes major pedestrian pathways along
the storefront that extend throughout the parking areas and provide connections in all directions.
Further, the orientation of parking stalls was designed to allow Costco patrons to push carts to their
vehicles without traveling between parked cars.

The pedestrian system outside of the Costco parcel should allow the direct connection of Costco to the
Elk Grove Boulevard multi-use trail system and adjacent uses, to reduce the need for site patrons to
drive between adjacent buildings. While connections are currently shown in the plan, additional review
and consideration of connections could be provided as specific building tenants and plans are finalized.




                                                         38                                Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                                                      February 2016
Transportation Needs




                                                      Figure 14. Pedestrian Connectivity outside of Costco site plan.


                                                                                                                        39   Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
Findings and Recommendations
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                  February 2016
Findings and Recommendations




FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Key findings of this analysis are as follows:

         The proposed development is planned to contain approximately 400,000 square-feet of total
          building area with full buildout.
         The site will be developed in phases as tenants are identified. Costco and the fuel center will be
          constructed as part of the initial site development.
         The overall site is expected to generate approximately 2,641 trips at the driveways (1,599 net
          new regional trips) with full site build-out.
         A new traffic signal will be installed at the intersection of Elk Grove Boulevard/Ginther Drive.
          Additional access will be provided to the overall center from Bruceville Road, Civic Center Drive,
          and through right-in, right-out connections to Elk Grove Boulevard.
         All of the study intersections will operate acceptably with full build-out in the year 2035 during
          the critical weekday p.m. peak hour.
         95th percentile queues during the weekday p.m. peak hour will extend beyond the available
          storage in locations along the site frontage.
         The Elk Grove Boulevard frontage will require modifications within the striped shoulder area.
          This space will be needed for right-turn deceleration lanes to separate through and turning
          traffic.
         The new site access points along Elk Grove Boulevard will create conflicts with the Elk Grove
          Boulevard multi-use pathway that will require mitigating treatments.

General recommendations of this analysis are provided below:

         The new signal at the Elk Grove Boulevard/Ginther Drive intersection should be designed to
          maintain right-in, right-out access (with signalization) from the neighborhood to the north. Full
          access should be provided from the retail center. The configuration of this signal will best
          accommodate signal progression, maintain the existing travel patterns through the
          neighborhood, avoid widening adjacent to residences, and provide direct pedestrian
          connectivity between the neighborhood, retail center, and Elk Grove Boulevard multi-use trail
          system.
         Frontage improvements along Elk Grove Boulevard will be required to prevent use of the
          striped area as an acceleration lane.
         Left-turn bay extensions will be required along Elk Grove Boulevard to support the new traffic
          signal at Ginther Drive and to provide more storage to accommodate the development.
         The conceptual design of the Civic Center Drive/Babylon Drive – shared access should be
          modified to increase the available storage while maintaining the same movement restrictions.
          Development of the design will require coordination and approval from Dignity Health and the
          City of Elk Grove.
         A raised median should be installed along Civic Center Drive to restrict the westernmost access
          to right-in, right-out access only.
                                                        41                               Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
The Ridge and Costco Transportation Impact Analysis                                                 February 2016
Findings and Recommendations


         New crossings of the Elk Grove Boulevard multi-use pathway should adhere to the treatment
          options identified within this report to provide clear sight lines and improve visibility between
          motorists and pedestrians. The proposed crossings prioritize pedestrian/cyclist use of the
          pathway while providing measures to increase yielding and reduce the potential for conflicts.

Pedestrian connectivity should be reviewed as part of individual tenant plans for the site to ensure
direct connections are provided between buildings and to the public sidewalks and Elk Grove Boulevard
multiuse pathway.

We trust that this transportation impact analysis provides the necessary materials for the City to review
the proposed development application. Please let us know if you have any questions or need any
additional information to complete your review.




APPENDICES
Appendix A: Manual Turning Movement Counts
Appendix B: Travel Demand Model Outputs and Land Use Assumptions
Appendix C: Dignity Health Elk Grove Medical Campus
Appendix D: Trip Generation Assumptions and Methods
Appendix E: Cordon Area Trip Assignment, Weekday PM Peak Hour
Appendix F: Synchro Analysis Worksheets




                                                       42                               Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
 




              APPENDIX A  
    MANUAL TURNING MOVEMENT COUNTS 




 
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Bruceville Rd -- Elk Grove Blvd                                                                                       QC JOB #: 13590422
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                       DATE: Thu, Sep 24 2015
                     1236          1133                            Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  1.0        0.8

                     259 690 287
                                                                  Peak 15-Min: 5:30 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                                                                                                                  1.2 0.3 2.4


       1565   393                         235    1808
                                                                                                                     1.0   0.3                      1.7      1.0
              1137          0.96          1154
                                                                                                                           1.1                      1.0
       1651   121                         419    1558
                                                                                                                     0.8   0.0                      0.5      1.6

                     136 476 179
                                                                                                                                  0.0 0.8 3.4

                     1230          791
                                                                                                                                  0.3        1.3



                             8                                                                                                     0    1    0



                                                                                                                           0                          0

              4                             3                                                                              0                          0

                                                                                                                           0                          0

                             1                                                                                                     0    0    0




                            NA                                                                                                          NA




              NA                           NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                          NA



 5-Min Count                Bruceville Rd                      Bruceville Rd               Elk Grove Blvd            Elk Grove Blvd                Total      Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left           Thru Right     U           Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM     17            18     14     0            23      37     16     2       26    85     12      0    19    83     14    0              366
    4:05 PM     11            53     14     0             8      51     25     3       33    51      6      1    41    61     14    0              372
    4:10 PM     11            12     19     0            13      33     14     8       19   107      9      3    27   109     18    0              402
    4:15 PM     15            49     12     0            27      79     25     5       13    49      6      2    30    58     16    1              387
    4:20 PM      9            19     15     0            17      25     18     5       30    86     10      2    40    89     12    1              378
    4:25 PM     11            33     13     0            12      76     24     4       29    52     10      3    35    82      9    0              393
    4:30 PM      8            21      9     0            20      46     13     4        9   101     18      1    19   115     12    0              396
    4:35 PM      7            41     16     0            12      66     21     1       27    56      6      1    40    71     12    0              377
    4:40 PM      5            28     16     0            21      33     17     6       22    97     17      1    22    97     26    0              408
    4:45 PM      5            52     14     0             8      65     16     4       28    63     11      2    34    73     17    0              392
    4:50 PM     14            36     15     1            19      33     23     7       27    93     13      0    48    81     19    0              429
    4:55 PM     14            42     13     1            16      61     19     6       30    80     13      0    26    58     11    0              390            4690
    5:00 PM     14            31     13     0            28      44     24     2       27    66     11      3    24   106     27    0              420            4744
    5:05 PM      8            50     18     0            15      58     23     6       29    90     17      2    43    96     20    0              475            4847
    5:10 PM     10            37      9     0            20      39     21     4       24   131      8      0    22    96     19    0              440            4885
    5:15 PM     13            60     13     0            18      65     17     3       34    89      9      0    30    67     21    1              440            4938
    5:20 PM      9            35      7     1            15      54     10     7       34   130     12      2    32   106     19    0              473            5033
    5:25 PM     11            45     23     0            18      84     24     4       38    72      5      2    35    83     15    0              459            5099
    5:30 PM     20            20     10     0            22      39     16     6       28   115      9      1    32   114     23    0              455            5158
    5:35 PM      7            60     14     0            24      65     19     1       34    58      7      0    60    95     20    0              464            5245
    5:40 PM     12            31     20     0            26      54     26     7       27   123     16      1    24   123     22    0              512            5349
    5:45 PM      8            35     20     0            22      60     30     0       40    74      5      3    32    73     17    0              419            5376
    5:50 PM     15            35     17     0            21      61     27     4       28    83      9      0    35   109     17    0              461            5408
    5:55 PM      8            37     15     0            12      67     22     2       33   106     13      3    49    86     15    0              468            5486
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                         Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left          Thru Right     U           Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                     Total
  All Vehicles 156          444     176     0           288     632    244   56       356 1184     128      8   464 1328     260    0                     5724
 Heavy Trucks    0             8      8                  12       0      0              4    20      0            4     8      4                           68
  Pedestrians                  4                                 12                           4                         4                                  24
    Bicycles     0             0      0                   0       0      0              0     0      0            0     0      0                            0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                             SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Wymark Dr -- Elk Grove Blvd                                                                                            QC JOB #: 13590423
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                        DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                         90          138                            Peak-Hour: 4:55 PM -- 5:55 PM                                  0.0        0.7

                         15    10    65
                                                                   Peak 15-Min: 4:55 PM -- 5:10 PM
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0


       1735   19                            116   1826
                                                                                                                      0.8   0.0                      0.9      0.8
              1320            0.96         1687
                                                                                                                            1.4                      0.8
       1383   44                             23   1427
                                                                                                                      1.3   0.0                      0.0      1.3

                         29    7     40
                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.0 0.0

                         75          76
                                                                                                                                   0.0        0.0



                               0                                                                                                    0    0    0



                                                                                                                            0                          0

              0                               3                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                            0                          0

                               1                                                                                                    1    0    0




                              NA                                                                                                         NA




              NA                            NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                              NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count                   Wymark Dr                         Wymark Dr                   Elk Grove Blvd            Elk Grove Blvd               Total      Hourly
     Period                   (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                            Totals
 Beginning At      Left        Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM         2            0      2     0            6       3      2     0         3   115      2      1     6   115      6    0             263
    4:05 PM         5            1      5     0            3       0      1     0         1   116      1      0     1   143      7    0             284
    4:10 PM         1            1      3     0            2       1      1     0         0    84      4      0     8   145      6    0             256
    4:15 PM         0            2      5     0            0       1      1     0         0   115      6      0     4   156      4    0             294
    4:20 PM         2            0      0     0            3       1      0     0         4    89      3      0     3   102      4    0             211
    4:25 PM         0            0      4     0            4       1      0     0         1    94      1      0     4   129      7    0             245
    4:30 PM         1            0      7     0            8       0      2     0         0   110      4      0     2   128      7    0             269
    4:35 PM         2            0      4     0            4       0      0     0         0   101      1      1     0   162      9    1             285
    4:40 PM         4            0      2     0            8       1      0     0         2    94      2      0     3   109      8    1             234
    4:45 PM         1            1      4     0            6       1      0     0         1   117      6      0     0   153      8    0             298
    4:50 PM         1            1      9     0           10       1      1     0         3    69      4      1     4   133     10    0             247
    4:55 PM         0            0      4     0            3       0      1     0         0   117      4      0     2   177     14    0             322            3208
    5:00 PM         7            0      4     0            6       0      1     0         2    87      2      1     2   112      9    0             233            3178
    5:05 PM         4            1      7     0            3       2      1     0         1   118      3      0     1   164     15    0             320            3214
    5:10 PM         2            3      2     0            7       0      1     0         1   119      2      0     2   123      6    0             268            3226
    5:15 PM         3            1      7     0            4       0      2     0         1    98      4      0     0   123      6    0             249            3181
    5:20 PM         0            0      2     0           10       0      1     0         1   110      3      1     2   147     12    0             289            3259
    5:25 PM         1            0      3     0            6       1      2     0         0   100      8      0     2   157     10    0             290            3304
    5:30 PM         3            0      2     0            6       2      0     0         1    87      5      0     3   127     10    1             247            3282
    5:35 PM         4            1      2     0            1       0      1     0         0   121      4      0     1   147     12    1             295            3292
    5:40 PM         4            0      3     0            6       3      0     0         4    73      1      1     2   120      6    0             223            3281
    5:45 PM         0            0      2     0            9       1      2     0         3   142      7      1     4   174      9    0             354            3337
    5:50 PM         1            1      2     0            4       1      3     0         1   148      1      0     0   116      7    0             285            3375
    5:55 PM         1            2      2     0            7       0      2     0         1   107      5      1     1   141      6    0             276            3329
 Peak 15-Min                       Northbound                        Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates       Left        Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles      44           4     60     0           48       8     12     0        12 1288      36      4    20 1812     152    0                    3500
 Heavy Trucks        0           0      0                  0       0      0               0    16      0            0    20      0                          36
  Pedestrians                    0                                 0                            0                         4                                  4
    Bicycles         1           0      0                 0        0      0               0     0      0            0     0      0                           1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                              SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                 Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Big Horn Blvd -- Elk Grove Blvd                                                                                     QC JOB #: 13590424
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                     726          557                            Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                  0.3        0.9

                     242 322 162
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:45 PM -- 6:00 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.6 0.0


       1844   232                        193   1950
                                                                                                                   0.8   0.9                      0.0      0.7
              1107         0.96         1449
                                                                                                                         1.7                      0.9
       1430   91                         308   1432
                                                                                                                   1.5   0.0                      0.0      1.4

                     84 195 158
                                                                                                                                1.2 1.5 0.6

                     710          437
                                                                                                                                0.3        1.1



                            3                                                                                                    0    1    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

              3                            0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          0

                            5                                                                                                    0    2    0




                           NA                                                                                                         NA




              NA                         NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                         NA



 5-Min Count               Big Horn Blvd                     Big Horn Blvd               Elk Grove Blvd            Elk Grove Blvd                Total      Hourly
     Period                (Northbound)                      (Southbound)                 (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At Left          Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM      4           11     16     0            8      26     22     0       23    51      9     8     19    91     25     3             316
    4:05 PM      8           28     11     0           13      20     14     2       11   123      8     5     18   131     20     0             412
    4:10 PM      5           10     12     0           12      20     34     0       12    69      4     4     22   116     14     0             334
    4:15 PM      6           13     18     0           14      23     26     0        7    95      8     4      9   121     19     1             364
    4:20 PM      6           15     11     0           13      20     12     0       15    92      4     8     22    96     13     1             328
    4:25 PM      7           12     11     0           19      26     23     1       13    55      1     3     11   108     12     0             302
    4:30 PM      2           18     10     0            7      19     16     0       19   107      6     5     19   113     19     3             363
    4:35 PM     10           15     11     0           21      18     26     0        9    74     10     4     16   133     18     1             366
    4:40 PM      7           17     12     0           13      26     11     0       22    93      2     5     27   113     18     1             367
    4:45 PM      6           13     16     0           23      21     26     1       12   108      5     3     14   118     23     0             389
    4:50 PM      4           10     13     0            6      14     17     0       11    73      3     4     25   138     15     0             333
    4:55 PM      6           20     20     0           15      21     23     0       13    77      2     4     13   147     14     0             375            4249
    5:00 PM      8            9     12     0            7      27     26     0       13    95      8     8     25   107     14     3             362            4295
    5:05 PM      6           21     11     0           15      19     24     1       15    90      9     1     15   129     17     0             373            4256
    5:10 PM      2           10      8     0           14      25     14     0       23   104      6     4     37   118     10     0             375            4297
    5:15 PM     10           14     11     0           20      33     19     1       10    94      8     4      9   102     21     1             357            4290
    5:20 PM      5           14      9     0           18      37     23     0       14    75      5     6     32   138     18     2             396            4358
    5:25 PM      7           18     13     0           14      22     21     1       13    93      7     4     23   128     22     0             386            4442
    5:30 PM      3            7     12     0            7      34     14     1       15    85      3    10     32   134     17     2             376            4455
    5:35 PM      9           12     14     0           16      21     27     1       10    88     11     4     21   106     17     0             357            4446
    5:40 PM      9           24     14     0            7      32     14     0       16    67      6     5     41   124     16     0             375            4454
    5:45 PM      8           13     16     0           14      24     20     0       11    91      8     6     19   148     14     1             393            4458
    5:50 PM      8           31     25     0           13      27     22     0       16   118      9    10     22    95     19     1             416            4541
    5:55 PM      9           22     13     0           11      21     18     1        7   107     11     7     21   120      8     1             377            4543
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                        Southbound                  Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates   Left         Thru Right     U          Left    Thru Right    U       Left Thru Right      U    Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles 100         264     216     0          152     288    240     4      136 1264     112    92    248 1452     164    12                    4744
 Heavy Trucks    0            0      0                  0       4      0              0    16      0            0     4      0                           24
  Pedestrians                 4                                 4                           4                         0                                  12
    Bicycles     0            2      0                  0       0      0              0     0      0            0     0      0                            2
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                           SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Laguna Springs Dr -- Elk Grove Blvd                                                                                QC JOB #: 13590425
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                     314          225                            Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                 1.6        0.9

                     117 73 124
                                                                Peak 15-Min: 5:15 PM -- 5:30 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 4.0


       1961   94                          87   1978
                                                                                                                  0.6   1.1                      1.1      0.6
              1286         0.94         1752
                                                                                                                        1.4                      0.6
       1421   41                         139   1558
                                                                                                                  1.3   0.0                      0.0      1.7

                      79    57 148
                                                                                                                               2.5 0.0 2.0

                     253          284
                                                                                                                               0.0        1.8



                            0                                                                                                   0    1    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

              12                           0                                                                            0                          0

                                                                                                                        0                          1

                            2                                                                                                   0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                        NA




              NA                         NA                                                                             NA                       NA




                           NA                                                                                                        NA



 5-Min Count           Laguna Springs Dr                  Laguna Springs Dr              Elk Grove Blvd            Elk Grove Blvd               Total      Hourly
     Period              (Northbound)                       (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                            Totals
 Beginning At      Left Thru Right       U            Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM         11     6     14      0             14      8      9     0         6    68      4      1     6   143      9    2             301
    4:05 PM          6     9      7      0             10      5      7     0        15   106      0      0    18   113      7    1             304
    4:10 PM          8     2     10      0             11      7     10     0         4   104      1      0     7   163      7    0             334
    4:15 PM          4     5     16      0              6      7     11     0         8   110      5      3     8   110      6    0             299
    4:20 PM          4     4      9      0             12      4      7     0         8    95      4      3     1   150      6    0             307
    4:25 PM          4     3     10      0              7      7     12     0         7    84      2      1    10   133      7    0             287
    4:30 PM          4     5     15      0              8      2      5     0         6   108      1      0     3   127      9    0             293
    4:35 PM          5    10     13      0             15      8     12     0        10   107      2      5     8   140      7    0             342
    4:40 PM          6     5     13      0             20      4     12     0         9    99      4      2    12   154     10    2             352
    4:45 PM          7    10      6      0             13      6      7     0         8   126      2      5     9   131      7    0             337
    4:50 PM          5     6     12      0              9      5      9     0         4    97      1      1     6   194      7    0             356
    4:55 PM          5     8      9      0              9      7      9     0         8    84      3      1     9   120      5    2             279            3791
    5:00 PM          8     5      7      0              4      0     15     0         6   108      3      0     2   141      5    0             304            3794
    5:05 PM          8     1     10      0             16      7     10     0         5   119      2      1     8   129      6    0             322            3812
    5:10 PM          3     6     15      0             11      1     16     0         6   114      3      1     7   132      6    0             321            3799
    5:15 PM         12     9     13      0             19      5     11     0         8    86      2      1    15   154      9    0             344            3844
    5:20 PM          3     3     12      0             11      7      7     0         5   117      2      0     8   186      8    0             369            3906
    5:25 PM          2     7     11      0              9     10     14     0         7   119      4      1    10   144     11    0             349            3968
    5:30 PM         14     4     10      0             15      6      9     0         7    76      2      0     8   139      5    0             295            3970
    5:35 PM          7     4     12      0              7     15      7     0         5    92      3      2    24   132      9    0             319            3947
    5:40 PM          9     5     15      0              6      4      5     0         8    98      4      1    13   165     10    0             343            3938
    5:45 PM          2     3     15      0              9      9      8     0         8   106      4      2    17   156      4    0             343            3944
    5:50 PM          7     4     18      0              7      3      8     0         7   130     10      1    11   142      6    0             354            3942
    5:55 PM          4     6     10      0             10      6      7     0         9   121      2      3    16   132      8    0             334            3997
 Peak 15-Min                 Northbound                          Southbound                   Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates       Left Thru Right       U            Left Thru Right       U       Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right     U                    Total
  All Vehicles      68    76    144      0            156     88    128     0        80 1288      32      8   132 1936     112    0                    4248
 Heavy Trucks        0     0      0                     0      0      0               0    16      0            0    12      4                          32
  Pedestrians              4                                   0                            0                         0                                  4
    Bicycles         0     0      0                     0      0      0               0     0      0            0     0      0                           0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                           Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Bruceville Rd -- Civic Center Dr/Backer Ranch Rd                                                               QC JOB #: 13590426
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                    1077          730                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                 0.4        0.7

                       63 971 43
                                                            Peak 15-Min: 5:05 PM -- 5:20 PM
                                                                                                                           0.0 0.4 0.0


       201   42                         53   187
                                                                                                              0.5   2.4                     0.0   1.1
             55            0.94         61
                                                                                                                    0.0                     0.0
       182   85                         73   131
                                                                                                              0.5   0.0                     2.7   0.0

                       94 619 49
                                                                                                                           1.1 0.6 0.0

                    1146          762
                                                                                                                           0.5        0.7



                            2                                                                                               0    1    0



                                                                                                                    0                        0

             3                           1                                                                          0                        0

                                                                                                                    1                        0

                            0                                                                                               0    0    0




                           NA                                                                                                    NA




             NA                         NA                                                                          NA                      NA




                           NA                                                                                                    NA



 5-Min Count               Bruceville Rd                Bruceville Rd     Civic Center Dr/Backer RanchCivic
                                                                                                       Rd Center Dr/Backer Ranch RdTotal      Hourly
     Period                (Northbound)                 (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                      Totals
 Beginning At     Left      Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right     U
    4:00 PM         4        55      3     1         5    74      0     0      4      6      5     0       1    4      4     0     166
    4:05 PM         8        52      6     1         3    81      4     0      4      0      4     0       2    6      0     0     171
    4:10 PM         6        31      1     3         3    78      5     1      2      2      6     0       4   10      3     0     155
    4:15 PM         6        52      6     2         2    81      3     3      3      4      7     0       5    5      3     0     182
    4:20 PM         8        45      4     2         3    63      4     1      3      5      3     0       6    5      2     0     154
    4:25 PM         1        48      5     0         2    72      3     1      4      3     10     0       1    3      2     0     155
    4:30 PM         2        53      6     1         1    72      8     2      5      6      7     0       8    5      1     0     177
    4:35 PM         8        61      5     0         0    83      8     6      1      5      7     0       3    1      3     0     191
    4:40 PM         4        49      3     0         1    73      3     0      4      2      6     0       5   15      4     0     169
    4:45 PM         5        59      4     1         6    89      4     1      2      4      7     0       3    3      3     0     191
    4:50 PM        10        51      9     4         0    58      0     4      8      2      8     0       8    4      4     0     170
    4:55 PM         8        62      5     1         4    80      5     0      4      5      3     0       1    7      2     0     187         2068
    5:00 PM         3        41      4     0         1    78     11     1      3      4      6     0       6    9      5     0     172         2074
    5:05 PM         8        63      4     2         4    75      5     0      4      9      8     0       8    0      6     0     196         2099
    5:10 PM         7        51      2     0         2   111      3     0      2      8      9     0       3    2      3     0     203         2147
    5:15 PM         5        48      4     1         2    85      6     2      5      6      7     0       8    5      5     0     189         2154
    5:20 PM         8        44      1     1         0    72      3     1      3      4      7     0       6    4      5     0     159         2159
    5:25 PM         6        47      6     2         4    82      6     3      1      5      6     0       4    6      5     0     183         2187
    5:30 PM         2        46      3     1         0    75      6     2      3      3      9     0      11   14      5     0     180         2190
    5:35 PM        11        65      4     3         3    57      3     1      4      4     10     0       4    4      4     0     177         2176
    5:40 PM         4        42      3     1         1   109     11     1      3      1      5     0      11    3      6     0     201         2208
    5:45 PM         7        50      1     2         2    90      2     2      3      3      4     0       1    7      5     0     179         2196
    5:50 PM         7        59      3     0         4    69      5     0      5      2     10     0       5    3      4     0     176         2202
    5:55 PM         4        41      4     1         4    74      6     1      4      4      8     0       3    8      2     0     164         2179
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                   Southbound                 Eastbound                 Westbound
   Flowrates      Left      Thru Right     U       Left Thru Right     U     Left Thru Right       U     Left Thru Right     U           Total
  All Vehicles     80      648      40   12         32 1084      56     8     44     92     96     0      76   28     56     0          2352
 Heavy Trucks       0         4      0               0     0      0            0      0      0             0    0      0                  4
  Pedestrians                 0                            0                          0                         0                         0
    Bicycles       0          0      0               0     0      0            0      0      0             0    0      0                  0
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                                Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Babylon Dr -- Civic Center Dr                                                                                       QC JOB #: 13590428
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                     DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                         0          0                           Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                   0.0        0.0

                         0    0     0
                                                               Peak 15-Min: 5:25 PM -- 5:40 PM
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0


       188   0                             0   200
                                                                                                                   0.5   0.0                      0.0       0.5
             112             0.92        164
                                                                                                                         0.0                      0.6
       132   20                           36   130
                                                                                                                   0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                       24     0     18
                                                                                                                                0.0 0.0 0.0

                       56           42
                                                                                                                                0.0        0.0



                              0                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                         0                          0

             1                             0                                                                             0                          0

                                                                                                                         0                          1

                              1                                                                                                  0    0    0




                             NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                          NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                             NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                  Babylon Dr                     Babylon Dr                  Civic Center Dr            Civic Center Dr              Total       Hourly
     Period                  (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM        2            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0     12       0      0     1     8       0    0             24
    4:05 PM        0            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0      9       2      0     6     8       0    0             25
    4:10 PM        2            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0      5       1      0     0    14       0    0             24
    4:15 PM        1            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0     10       1      0     3    12       0    0             28
    4:20 PM        1            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0      9       4      0     3    12       0    0             30
    4:25 PM        1            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0      8       2      0     4     5       0    0             23
    4:30 PM        1            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0     13       1      0     2    13       0    0             30
    4:35 PM        1            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0      8       2      0     1     9       0    0             22
    4:40 PM        3            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0      4       1      0     3    18       0    0             31
    4:45 PM        1            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0     12       2      0     5     9       0    0             29
    4:50 PM        2            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0     11       0      0     4    14       0    0             32
    4:55 PM        0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0     13       2      0     2     9       0    0             28              326
    5:00 PM        2            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0      7       2      0     3    20       0    0             34              336
    5:05 PM        1            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0     15       2      0     1    11       0    0             31              342
    5:10 PM        2            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0      6       4      0     4    13       0    0             31              349
    5:15 PM        3            0      3     0        0        0      0     0        0     13       1      0     2    14       0    0             36              357
    5:20 PM        0            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0      4       1      0     2     9       0    0             18              345
    5:25 PM        2            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0     11       4      0     4    21       0    0             43              365
    5:30 PM        3            0      2     0        0        0      0     0        0      4       1      0     1    18       0    0             29              364
    5:35 PM        2            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0     11       0      0     4    13       0    0             30              372
    5:40 PM        6            0      4     0        0        0      0     0        0      5       1      0     4    13       0    0             33              374
    5:45 PM        1            0      1     0        0        0      0     0        0      4       2      0     1    17       0    0             26              371
    5:50 PM        1            0      5     0        0        0      0     0        0      7       1      0     2     6       0    0             22              361
    5:55 PM        1            0      0     0        0        0      0     0        0      9       0      0     2    12       0    0             24              357
 Peak 15-Min                      Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles     28           0     12     0        0        0      0     0        0    104     20       0    36   208       0    0                    408
 Heavy Trucks       0           0      0              0        0      0              0      0       0            0     0       0                          0
  Pedestrians                   0                              0                            4                          0                                  4
    Bicycles       0            0      0              0        0      0              0      0       0            1     0       0                          1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                          SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                               Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Wymark Dr -- Civic Center Dr                                                                                       QC JOB #: 13590430
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                    DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                       83          31                          Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM                                   0.0        0.0

                       19    40    24
                                                              Peak 15-Min: 5:25 PM -- 5:40 PM
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0


       199   9                            3   188
                                                                                                                  0.5   0.0                      0.0       0.5
             104            0.88        163
                                                                                                                        0.0                      0.6
       130   17                          22   140
                                                                                                                  0.0   0.0                      0.0       0.0

                       17    19    12
                                                                                                                               0.0 0.0 0.0

                       79          48
                                                                                                                               0.0        0.0



                             1                                                                                                  0    0    0



                                                                                                                        0                          0

             1                            0                                                                             0                          1

                                                                                                                        0                          0

                             1                                                                                                  0    1    0




                            NA                                                                                                       NA




             NA                         NA                                                                              NA                       NA




                            NA                                                                                                       NA



 5-Min Count                 Wymark Dr                      Wymark Dr                   Civic Center Dr            Civic Center Dr              Total       Hourly
     Period                 (Northbound)                   (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                             Totals
 Beginning At     Left       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM        1           1      2     0        1        4      2     0        0     10       1      0     0     6       0    0             28
    4:05 PM        1           1      0     0        1        0      2     0        1      7       3      0     3    11       1    0             31
    4:10 PM        1           3      0     0        0        5      1     0        0      8       0      0     0    12       0    0             30
    4:15 PM        0           1      1     0        2        5      3     0        2      5       1      0     0    12       0    0             32
    4:20 PM        2           0      1     0        2        2      1     0        0      8       1      0     3    11       0    0             31
    4:25 PM        1           0      2     0        0        2      3     0        1     12       1      0     2     6       1    0             31
    4:30 PM        0           0      2     0        1        2      2     0        1      7       1      0     3    12       0    0             31
    4:35 PM        2           2      3     0        1        2      0     0        0     11       1      0     1    10       1    0             34
    4:40 PM        1           1      3     0        0        2      0     0        0      6       1      0     1    19       0    0             34
    4:45 PM        0           3      0     0        2        4      5     0        0      9       1      0     2    10       0    0             36
    4:50 PM        1           0      0     0        2        3      2     0        2     12       0      0     2    15       0    0             39
    4:55 PM        1           0      1     0        0        3      0     0        2      9       3      0     1     9       0    0             29              386
    5:00 PM        2           2      1     0        2        4      2     0        0      4       2      0     1    18       0    0             38              396
    5:05 PM        3           3      1     0        4        3      3     0        0     14       2      0     0     7       1    0             41              406
    5:10 PM        1           2      2     0        2        2      2     0        0      7       3      0     4    14       0    0             39              415
    5:15 PM        1           2      1     0        2        2      0     0        2     11       1      0     0    15       0    0             37              420
    5:20 PM        0           0      2     0        0        2      1     0        1      6       1      0     3    10       1    0             27              416
    5:25 PM        3           1      0     0        4        5      1     0        0     10       0      0     2    21       0    0             47              432
    5:30 PM        1           1      2     0        1        7      0     0        0      8       1      0     4    18       1    0             44              445
    5:35 PM        2           5      0     0        4        1      2     0        0      8       1      0     1    13       0    0             37              448
    5:40 PM        2           0      2     0        1        4      1     0        2      6       2      0     2    13       0    0             35              449
    5:45 PM        1           1      0     0        1        6      1     0        0      5       0      0     5    16       0    0             36              449
    5:50 PM        1           1      2     0        1        3      2     0        1      8       1      0     0     6       1    0             27              437
    5:55 PM        2           1      2     0        1        2      0     0        0      8       0      0     1    12       1    0             30              438
 Peak 15-Min                     Northbound                     Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U                    Total
  All Vehicles     24         28      8     0        36      52     12     0        0    104       8      0    28   208       4    0                    512
 Heavy Trucks       0          0      0               0       0      0              0      0       0            0     0       0                          0
  Pedestrians                  0                              0                            0                          0                                  0
    Bicycles       0           0      0              0        0      0              0      0       0            0     1       0                          1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:57 AM                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                            Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: Big Horn Blvd -- Civic Center Dr                                                                                QC JOB #: 13590432
 CITY/STATE: Elk Grove, CA                                                                                                 DATE: Tue, Sep 22 2015
                    710          440                        Peak-Hour: 5:00 PM -- 6:00 PM                                   0.0        0.7

                    133 563 14
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 5:40 PM -- 5:55 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.0 0.0


       214   59                         9   66
                                                                                                               0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0
             44           0.90         53
                                                                                                                     0.0                      0.0
       132   29                         4   66
                                                                                                               0.0   0.0                      0.0      0.0

                       28 372     8
                                                                                                                            0.0 0.8 0.0

                    596          408
                                                                                                                            0.0        0.7



                           0                                                                                                 0    0    0



                                                                                                                     0                          0

             4                          6                                                                            0                          1

                                                                                                                     1                          0

                           1                                                                                                 0    2    0




                          NA                                                                                                      NA




             NA                        NA                                                                            NA                       NA




                          NA                                                                                                      NA



 5-Min Count              Big Horn Blvd                 Big Horn Blvd                Civic Center Dr            Civic Center Dr              Total      Hourly
     Period               (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                  (Eastbound)                (Westbound)                            Totals
 Beginning At     Left     Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U
    4:00 PM        1        29      1     0       1       41      6     1         7     3       2      0    0      3       2    0             97
    4:05 PM        0        41      1     0       2       41     11     0         4     3       1      0    1      3       0    0            108
    4:10 PM        0        19      0     0       2       33      7     0         4     3       1      0    0      6       1    0             76
    4:15 PM        0        36      0     0       4       31      4     0         4     2       0      0    0      5       1    0             87
    4:20 PM        0        22      0     0       1       37     14     0         9     1       0      0    0      5       1    0             90
    4:25 PM        1        23      0     0       0       27      7     0         5     4       4      0    0      2       1    0             74
    4:30 PM        0        21      1     0       1       37     14     0         7     6       0      0    1      3       0    0             91
    4:35 PM        1        23      1     0       1       33      7     0         9     5       2      0    1      3       1    0             87
    4:40 PM        2        34      1     0       0       38     20     0         6     4       0      0    0      4       1    0            110
    4:45 PM        1        26      0     0       2       26      5     0         5     2       3      0    0      1       1    0             72
    4:50 PM        3        22      1     0       0       23     11     1         8     5       3      0    0      2       0    0             79
    4:55 PM        2        30      0     0       1       35      5     0         9     1       1      0    0      3       0    0             87            1058
    5:00 PM        7        28      0     0       0       56     10     0         3     3       1      0    0      2       3    0            113            1074
    5:05 PM        0        28      0     0       3       30      5     0         7     8       3      0    0      4       0    0             88            1054
    5:10 PM        0        22      2     0       1       53     16     0         5     3       4      0    0      3       0    0            109            1087
    5:15 PM        1        23      0     0       2       35     12     0         6     6       2      0    0      5       0    0             92            1092
    5:20 PM        4        25      2     0       0       60     16     0         1     3       2      0    0      4       2    0            119            1121
    5:25 PM        3        29      1     0       1       43     10     0         5     4       6      0    0      8       1    0            111            1158
    5:30 PM        2        26      0     0       0       49     15     0         6     3       2      0    2      4       0    0            109            1176
    5:35 PM        1        29      0     0       1       43      9     0         3     3       3      0    0      6       1    0             99            1188
    5:40 PM        1        45      1     0       2       54     14     0         5     1       1      0    0      6       1    0            131            1209
    5:45 PM        3        30      1     0       2       48     12     0         5     3       1      0    1      7       1    0            114            1251
    5:50 PM        2        50      0     0       1       46      7     0         5     5       3      0    1      1       0    0            121            1293
    5:55 PM        4        37      1     0       1       46      7     0         8     2       1      0    0      3       0    0            110            1316
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                    Southbound                    Eastbound                  Westbound
   Flowrates      Left     Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U        Left Thru Right        U   Left Thru Right      U                   Total
  All Vehicles     24     500       8     0       20     592    132     0        60    36     20       0    8     56       8    0                   1464
 Heavy Trucks       0        4      0              0       0      0               0     0       0           0      0       0                          4
  Pedestrians                4                             0                            4                          8                                 16
    Bicycles       0         1      0             0        0      0               0     0       0           0      0       0                          1
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 9/30/2015 10:58 AM                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net) 1-877-580-2212
