Volume 2




I-84 Barnhart Road
IAMP Technical
Appendix

Umatilla County, Oregon




ADOPTED August 16,
2007

August 2007
Volume 2




I-84/Barnhart Road
Technical Appendix


Umatilla County, Oregon



Prepared For:
The Oregon Department of Transportation
Region 5
3012 Island Ave
La Grande, OR 97850
(541) 963-1344



Prepared By:
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.
610 SW Alder, Suite 700
Portland, OR 97205
(503) 228-5230



In Association with:
Anderson Perry & Associates, Inc.



Project No. 7930.00



August 2007
                         Table of Appendices
Appendix A   Project Planning Management Team and Public Involvement Summary

Appendix B   Technical Memorandum #1 Interagency and Public Involvement Program

Appendix C   Technical Memorandum #2 Plan and Policy Review

Appendix D   Technical Memorandum#3 Transportation/Land Use Inventory of Existing Conditions

Appendix E   Technical Memorandum #4 Future Conditions

Appendix F   Technical Memorandum #5 Opportunities and Constraints Analysis
                                           Preface


This document is Volume II of the I-84/Barnhart Road IAMP. The development of the I-84/Barnhart
Road IAMP has been an extensive process that began in June of 2006. From this point, the consultant
team and the Project Planning Management Team (PPMT) has undertaken an iterative process to
uncover many of the transportation planning, land use, and design issues that are important in the
alteration of a highway interchange usage. To document this work effort, technical memorandums were
prepared throughout the process for review by the PPMT and the general public. Volume II of the I-
84/Barnhart Road IAMP contains a summary of the Project Planning Management Team (PPMT) and
Public Workshop meetings and final copies of these technical memorandums, which have been provided
to support the findings and conclusions of I-84/Barnhart Road IAMP.

Appendix "A"
Appendix "A" contains a summary of the Project Planning Management Team (PPMT) and Public
Workshop meetings.

Appendix "B"
Appendix "B" contains an overview of the plan for this project, communication within the team, and
presentation of the I-84/Barnhart Road IAMP to the public. (Technical Memorandum #1)

Appendix "C"
Appendix "C" documents the current plans for the state, city and country regarding the IAMP study
area. (Technical Memorandum #2)

Appendix "D"
Appendix "D" documents the current land use conditions as well as the operational and geometric
characteristics of the transportation facilities within the IAMP study area. (Technical Memorandum #3)

Appendix "E"
Appendix "E" documents the future baseline conditions analysis under a "no-build" scenario as well as
offers several scenarios of future "build". (Technical Memorandum #4)

Appendix "F"
Appendix "F" documents the development and preliminary evaluation of eight access and alignment
concepts for the Barnhart Road to Airport Road Connector Roadway and two access concepts for the
area south of the I-84/Barnhart Road interchange. (Technical Memorandum #5)
          Appendix A
      Project Planning
Management Team and
    Public Involvement
              Summary
     Project Planning Management Team and Public
                 Involvement Summary
To ensure that adequate project coordination and public participation occurred throughout the
development of the I-84/Barnhart Road Interchange Area Management Plan, a series of Project Planning
Management Team (PPMT) and Public Workshop meetings were held over the course of the project.
These meeting dates and objectives are summarized below:

                                              Table 1-1
                                           Meeting Summary

   Meeting Event             Date                            Meeting Purpose/Objectives

                                          The purpose of the PPMT Meeting #1 was to introduce the Barnhart
                                          Road to Airport Road Connector project and the consultant team,
                       September 21,
 PPMT Meeting #1                          overview the IAMP process, discuss the goals of the project, review
                       2006
                                          the evaluation criteria, discuss the project schedule, and set near-
                                          term deliverable dates.

                                          The purpose of the PPMT Meeting #2 was to review Technical
                                          Memorandum 3 (Existing Conditions), present the tools that can be
 PPMT Meeting #2       October 19, 2006
                                          used in an IAMP, discuss the options for the upcoming future
                                          conditions technical memorandum.

                                          The purpose of the PPMT Meeting #3 was to review Technical
                                          Memorandum 4(Future Conditions), present the initial Connector
                       November 13,
 PPMT Meeting #3                          Roadway alignment concepts developed prior to this project, review
                       2006
                                          the qualitative evaluation for the various future conditions, and
                                          prepare for public workshop #1.

                                          The purpose of the first Public Workshop was to introduce the I-
                                          84/Barnhart Road Interchange Area Management Plan study to
 Public Workshop
                       November 13,       adjacent property owners and interested citizens. Those in
 (#1) Pendleton City
                       2006               attendance were asked to participate in a mini design charette that
 Hall
                                          focused on potential alignment and access design and circulation
                                          alternatives for the adjacent IAMP study area.

                                          The purpose of the PPMT Employment Assumptions Meeting was to
 PPMT Employment
                       December 13,       discuss the discrepancy in the various future trip generation studies
 Assumptions
                       2006               and to make decisions regarding the PPMT's plan to move forward
 Meeting
                                          with the IAMP process.

                                          The purpose of the second Public Meeting was to provide an
 Public Workshop
                                          overview of the process to date, present the alignment and access
 (#2) Pendleton City   January 17, 2007
                                          alternatives, and discuss the thoughts and opinions of the
 Hall
                                          participants

                                          The purpose of the PPMT Meeting #4 was to review Technical
                                          Memorandum #5 (Opportunities & Constraints Analysis). The
                                          meeting also discussed the opinions represented at the second
 PPMT Meeting #4       January 18, 2007
                                          Public Meeting. The discussion moved through each Concept and
                                          reached a conclusion to further evaluate the Concepts #N2A and
                                          #N4. The Concept #S1 was decided to be the preferred option.

                                          The purpose of PPMT Meeting #5 was to review the complete Draft
                       March 6, 2007/
 PPMT Meeting #5                          IAMP document and receive recommendations for the Final IAMP
                       Conference Call
                                          Document.

 - PPMT ­ Project Planning Management Team

Meeting Minutes and Presentation materials from all the PPMT Meetings and Public Workshops are
included in the remainder of this appendix.
                                                  Meeting Summary
                                                  I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP
                                                      PPMT Meeting #1
                                                          (9/21/06)


       Date: September 28, 2006                                                                        Project #: 7930

       To: I-84 Barnhart Road PPMT
     From: Susan Wright, P.E., Marc Butorac, P.E., P.T.O.E., Matt Wiesenfeld

          cc: Howard Perry, Anderson Perry and Associates, Inc


The following documents the participants and discussion items from September 21, 2006 I-84/Barnhart
Road PPMT Meeting #1 conference call.

Participants:

          ODOT La Grand Office:
          Teresa Penninger, Region 5 Planning Director
          Doug Wright, Federal Aid Specialist
          Don Fine ­Traffic Engineer
          Umatilla County:
          Tamra Mabbott, County Planner
          Hal Phillips, Public Works Director, Roadmaster
          City of Pendleton:
          Mike Muller, City Planner
          Tim Simons, City Engineer
          Bob Patterson, Public Works Director
          Pete Wells, City Attorney/Planning Director
          DLCD:
          Jon Jinings, Rep to Umatilla County
          Darren Nichols, Rep to City of Pendleton
          Bob Cortwright, Transportation Planning Coordinator
          Matthew Crall, DLCD, Transportation Planner


FILENAME: H:\projfile\7930 - I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP\PPMT Meetings\PPMT #1\PPMT#1 Minutes 092106.doc
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                            Project #: 7930
September 28, 2006                                                                          Page 2
        Consultants:
        Marc Butorac, Kittelson & Associates
        Susan Wright, Kittelson & Associates
        Matt Wiesenfeld, Kittelson & Associates
        Howard Perry, Anderson Perry & Associates Inc



Agenda Items:

        Project Process / Review Schedule
         The PPMT Meetings have been scheduled in order to receive input and direction
        from the PPMT and the public at specific milestones in the project. Receiving input on
        the draft deliverables and direction to proceed at each meeting is critical to the project
        schedule.

         Dates have been set for each of the PPMT meetings and Public Workshops. Kittelson
        will coordinate with Umatilla County and DLCD to refine the dates and timelines for the
        County Commission and Oregon Transportation Commission hearings. The OTC
        hearings require at least one month of notice.


        Future Meeting Locations
         Kittelson worked off-line with the City of Pendleton and Umatilla County to establish
        future meeting locations. All future PPMT meetings and Public Workshops will be held
        at the City of Pendleton City Hall in the Community Room located on the first floor at
        501 SE Emigrant, Pendleton, Oregon.


        Goal Exception Process
         The IAMP and Goal Exception processes needs to be running simultaneously and
        will require aggressive coordination. Kittelson, Umatilla County, the City of Pendleton,
        and DLCD discussed coordination of these efforts further off-line. The City of Pendleton
        anticipates submitting the goal exception application in early December but will bring a
        refined schedule to PPMT#2 for further discussion.

         Using an envelope approach for the roadway alignment alternatives within the
        vicinity of the interchange was discussed for the goal exception application. Kittelson
        believes that roadway alternatives and corresponding goal exception area envelope may
        be able to be reduced further by November. The roadway alignment alternatives within
        the IAMP study area are provided in the attached materials.

         Obtaining the goal exception and OTC approval of the IAMP by May 2007 is critical
        to the bid letting and funding for the roadway project.

         As requested by the DLCD, the City of Pendleton, Umatilla County, and the
        consultant team will engage DLCD early in the goal exception application process and
        with the roadway and IAMP alternatives.
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                     Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                             Project #: 7930
September 28, 2006                                                                           Page 3
        Land Use Study Area
         The land use study area was agreed upon; however, three options were discussed with
        regard to how to analyze the EFU land on the south side of the future roadway alignment
        that will become isolated between the new roadway and Interstate-84. The three options
        were to:

                        1) Assume no land use change of the partitioned EFU land

                        2) Complete a threshold analysis on the preferred alternative as to how
                        much development of the isolated EFU land could be accommodated by
                        the selected alternative without harming the performance of the new
                        roadway or the interchange.

                        3) Assume the EFU land will be rezoned as part of the project.

         The consensus of the PPMT was that Option 2, complete a threshold analysis, is the
        most acceptable approach and would best serve all parties.


        Property Owners Participation in the PPMT
         Inclusion of property owners on the PPMT was discussed but the consensus was that
        they have been sufficiently informed throughout the roadway connector project, will
        continue to be informed by the City and County, and will have further opportunities to
        participate as stakeholders during the Public Workshops.


        Memo #1
        Goals and Objectives Review
         Concerns about the goals not covering the protection of natural resources were raised
        along with the other statewide planning goals identified in Memo #2. A goal will be
        added to the project that incorporates all of the statewide planning goals identified in
        Memo #2.

         The need for a problem statement to frame the goals and objectives was identified and
        will be added to Memo #1.


        Memo #2
         ODOT roadway mobility standards will be added to Memo #2.

         The City of Pendleton does not have standards for a rural road of this character and
        therefore will use AASHTO standards for this roadway.

         The County's access management standards will be added to Memo #2.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                       Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                         Project #: 7930
September 28, 2006                                                                       Page 4
        City of Pendleton's Goal 9 Update
         The City of Pendleton hopes to add a maximum of 330 acres of industrial land in the
        vicinity of the airport through an on-going Goal 9 update process. The IAMP must
        assume the adopted comprehensive plan land uses for the future conditions analysis but
        will evaluate the additional 330 acres of industrial land as an alternative.


        Measure 37
            Measure 37 will be addressed to Memo #2.

         Potential Measure 37 claims will not be evaluated as part of the IAMP; however, a
        Measure 37 Management Plan should be included as part of the IAMP to identify how to
        handle a Measure 37 claim in the event that one is filed.

         The potential impacts of Measure 37 claims can be reduced through purchasing
        access control within the study area.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                  Portland, Oregon
 I-84 Barnhart Rd. IAMP                                                                                                                                   August 2006




                                                                          Barnhart Rd
                                                                                         Clark Ln




                                                                                                                                                                          K:\Kittelson\Pendleton_IAMP\MXD\IAMP_Study_Area_081006_11x17.mxd, Date: August 14, 2006 10:25:17 AM
                                                           Fanshier Rd




                                                                                                                    Barnhart Rd
LEGEND
   IAMP Operations and Access Study Area
   Land Use Study Area
County Zoning Designations
   Exclusive Farm Use
   Rural Light Industrial                              0      200   400                 800         1,200   1,600                 2,000
                                                                                                                                            IAMP STUDY AREA      FIGURE



   Rural Tourist Commercial                                                                                                          Feet     PENDLETON, OR     0-1
      KITTELSON & ASSOCIATES, INC.
       TRANSPORTATION PLANNING / TRAFFIC ENGINEERING
                                                  Meeting Summary
                                                  I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP
                                                      PPMT Meeting #2
                                                          (10/19/06)


       Date: October 19, 2006                                                                   Project #: 7930

         To: I-84 Barnhart Road PPMT

     From: P.E., Marc Butorac, P.E., P.T.O.E. and Matt Wiesenfeld

          cc: Howard Perry, Anderson Perry and Associates, Inc


This memorandum documents the participants and discussion items from October 19, 2006 I-84/Barnhart
Road PPMT Meeting #2.

Participants:

          ODOT La Grand Office:
          Teresa Penninger, Region 5 Planning Manager
          Doug Wright, Federal Aid Specialist
          Don Fine ­Traffic Engineer


          ODOT District 12:
          George Ruby, District 12 Maintenance Manager


          Umatilla County:
          Tamra Mabbott, County Planning Director
          Hal Phillips, Public Works Director, Roadmaster
          City of Pendleton:
          Mike Muller, City Planner
          Tim Simons, City Engineer
          Bob Patterson, Public Works Director
          Pete Wells, City Attorney/Planning Director


FILENAME: H:\projfile\7930 - I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP\PPMT Meetings\PPMT #2\PPMT#2 Minutes.doc
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                              Project #: 7930
September 28, 2006                                                                            Page 2
        Consultants:
        Marc Butorac, Kittelson & Associates
        Matt Wiesenfeld, Kittelson & Associates
        Howard Perry, Anderson Perry & Associates Inc



Agenda Items:

        1) Review Technical Memorandum #3 ­ Existing Conditions
         Marc Butorac presented the existing conditions technical memorandum to the PPMT.
        The memorandum included sections on the study area, current land uses, existing
        transportation infrastructure, existing traffic conditions characteristics, including:
        operations and safety, existing access locations, and cultural and environmental heritage.

         Several questions and requests for clarification were raised by the PPMT, including:

            o The study area should be expanded to include the entire portion of Barnhart Road
              within 1,320 feet of the westbound I-84 interchange terminal.

            o The specific zoning of the utility substation needs to be verified.

            o A section within the memorandum should be developed to document the existing
              geometrics and conditions of the I-84 and Barnhart Road interchange.

            o The ownership of Clark Lane needs to be determined.

            o The existing access route to the substation should be specifically defined and
              illustrated with the access figures.

            o Howard Perry indicated that a complete cultural survey would be conducted as
              part of the project.

          Action Items

            o The PPMT is to provide Kittelson & Associates, Inc. with all additional
              comments on the Existing Conditions technical memorandum by Friday, October
              27th.

            o Howard will coordinate the naming of the new connector street with City and
              County staff.

            o KAI will incorporate meeting comments into Technical Memorandum #3.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                        Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                              Project #: 7930
September 28, 2006                                                                            Page 3
        2) IAMP 101 Presentation
         Marc presented an Interchange Area Management Plan (IAMP) background
        presentation highlighting the purpose and available tools. (see attached copy for
        reference)

         A similar presentation will be delivered at the first public workshop on November
        13th.


        3) Memo #4 - Future Conditions
         Technical Memorandum #4 will address future conditions in the IAMP study area.
        Key factors that will drive the future forecast are the potential development and
        redevelopment of land within the IAMP study area and projected growth based on
        development in the industrial zone land near the airport.

         The area around the airport will contribute a certain percentage of trips to the Barnhart
        Interchange if the connector is built. The group decided that a conservative estimate to
        move forward with was to include 100% of the trips currently travel to/from the Airport
        Road and old Airport Road intersections with US 30 intersection and I-84 west of the
        City of Pendleton's Urban Growth Boundary.

         City of Pendleton's Goal 9 Update - The City of Pendleton hopes to add a maximum of
        330 acres of industrial land in the vicinity of the airport through an on-going Goal 9
        update process. The IAMP must assume the adopted comprehensive plan land uses for
        the future conditions analysis but will evaluate the additional 330 acres of industrial land
        as an alternative.

         Action Items

             o Larry Dalrymple will provide KAI with information regarding the future
               development of the industrial lands near the airport.


        4) Future Meeting Locations
         All future PPMT meetings and Public Workshops will be held at the City of Pendleton
        City Hall in the Community Room located on the first floor at 501 SW Emigrant,
        Pendleton, Oregon.


        5) Goal Exception Process
         The IAMP and Goal Exception processes needs to be running simultaneously and
        will require a high level of coordination. Kittelson, Umatilla County, the City of
        Pendleton, and DLCD discussed coordination of these efforts further off-line. The City of
        Pendleton anticipates submitting the goal exception application in early December but
        will bring a refined schedule to PPMT#3 for further discussion.

        Action Items

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                       Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                            Project #: 7930
September 28, 2006                                                                          Page 4

            o Mike and Tamra will work on the goal exception and provide an updated schedule
              at the November 13th PPMT meeting.


        6) Goals and Objectives
         As requested by the DLCD, the City of Pendleton, Umatilla County, and the
        consultant team will engage DLCD early in the goal exception application process and
        with the roadway and IAMP alternatives.

                1. The IAMP should be clear about the objective(s) for constructing the Barnhart
                Road extension;
                2. The IAMP should provide a high level of assurance that those objectives are
                consistent with the design and use of the roadway; and
                3. The IAMP should identify design alternatives, deed restrictions and policy
                protections consistent with the land use objectives of an eventual exception(s).
        7) Alternative Land Use Study
         Based on the possible Barnhard Road alignments within the IAMP study area, it is
        possible that small areas of EFU land will become isolated and be bounded by I-84,
        Barnhart Road, and the existing County zoned industrial lands in the northeast quadrant
        of the interchange. As such, it was recommended that potential conversions of the land
        to industrial zoning be analyzed and quantified from a transportation perspective.

            Action Item

            o Kittelson & Associates will evaluate potential land use changes based on the
              potential rezoning of the EFU land that becomes isolated as part of the Barnhart
              Road alignment alternatives.


        8) Public Workshop and Notification
         The Notification list will be updated with combine efforts will KAI and the county
        for the obtaining the address information. The notification list will be combined with the
        TSP notification being handled by the city.

         Previously, in PPMT #1 the inclusion of property owners on the PPMT was discussed
        but the consensus was that they have been sufficiently informed throughout the roadway
        connector project, will continue to be informed by the City and County, and will have
        further opportunities to participate as stakeholders during the Public Workshops.

            Action Items

                o An updated Notification List will be provide by Tamra by Friday, October
                  27th




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                     Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                          Project #: 7930
September 28, 2006                                                                        Page 5


Summary of Action Items


       1. Howard Perry will coordinate the naming of the new connector road with County and
          City staff.

       2. Larry Dalrymple will provide information regarding the potential buildout of
          industrial lands near the airport.

       3. KAI will provide trip generation and operations alternative based on the land use
          alternatives

       4. The Notification List will be updated by the County by Friday, October 27th

       5. KAI will incorporate meeting comments into Technical Memorandum #3.

       6. Mike and Tamra will work on the goal exception and provide an updated schedule at
          the November 13th PPMT meeting..


Next Steps
PPMT Meeting #3 will be held in Pendleton, Oregon on Monday, November 13th, 2006 from
3:00 to 5:00 p.m. and will be followed that same evening by Public Workshop #1 from 7:00 to
9:00 p.m.

The preliminary agenda for PPMT #3 meeting is to review the future forecast land use and traffic
operations and brainstorm potential local circulation and access management alternatives for
each roadway alternative and the existing roadway system.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                   Portland, Oregon
                                                  Meeting Summary
                                                  I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP
                                                      PPMT Meeting #3
                                                          (11/13/06)


       Date: November 13, 2006                                                                  Project #: 7930

       To: I-84 Barnhart Road PPMT
     From: P.E., Marc Butorac, P.E., P.T.O.E. and Matt Wiesenfeld

          cc: Howard Perry, Anderson Perry and Associates, Inc


This memorandum documents the participants and discussion items from November 13, 2006 I-
84/Barnhart Road PPMT Meeting #3.

Participants:

          ODOT La Grand Office:
          Teresa Penninger, Region 5 Planning Manager
          Doug Wright, Federal Aid Specialist
          Don Fine ­Traffic Engineer
          ODOT District 12:
          George Ruby, District 12 Maintenance Manager
          Umatilla County:
          Tamra Mabbott, County Planning Director
          City of Pendleton:
          Mike Muller, City Planner
          Tim Simons, City Engineer
          Bob Patterson, Public Works Director
          Pete Wells, City Attorney/Planning Director
          DLCD:
          Darren Nichols, DLCD Representative for the City of Pendleton
          Consultants:
          Marc Butorac, Kittelson & Associates
FILENAME: H:\projfile\7930 - I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP\PPMT Meetings\PPMT #3\PPMT#3 Minutes.doc
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                           Project #: 7930
November 13, 2006                                                                          Page 2

        Matt Wiesenfeld, Kittelson & Associates
        Howard Perry, Anderson Perry & Associates Inc



Agenda Items:

        1) Review Technical Memorandum #4 ­ Future Conditions



         Marc Butorac presented the future conditions technical memorandum to the PPMT.
        The memorandum included discussions on the changes in development which could
        potentially occur in study area, future growth potential relevant to existing traffic
        volumes, and potential transportation infrastructure improvements that maybe required in
        the future. As part of this analysis, four scenarios were evaluated, including:

            o Scenario #0 ­ No Build. This scenario accounts for the highest expected growth
              without changing zoning and with no new roadway construction.

            o Scenario #1 ­ This scenario is identical to Scenario #0 except that the new
              connector is in-place. Appropriate volumes are redirected onto the connector.

            o Scenario #2 ­ This scenario includes all the prior growth associated with Scenario
              #1 as well as full build out of 330 additional acres of industrial land which could
              be added to the UGB in the proximity of the airport industrial area.

            o Scenario #3 ­ This scenario includes all the prior growth associated with
              Scenarios #1 and #2, and additional industrial growth on the 34 acres which could
              be isolated with the construction of the connector roadway near the existing
              interchange.

         Several issues were put forth by the PPMT, including:

            o The presumed full build out of industrial lands may be unrealistically aggressive
              and not representative of year 2025 conditions.

            o Scenario #3 includes the conversion of farm land to industrial land which is not
              consistent with the states land use goals.

            o Further scenarios may be needed to cover the full range of possibilities including
              the potential of growth in the Northwest Quadrant of the study area due to a
              Measure 37 claim.

            o Concerns were expressed that the identified mitigation measures, especially at the
              Westgate [Pendleton Highway (US 30)]/Airport Road intersection maybe difficult
              to achieve.


Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                    Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                            Project #: 7930
November 13, 2006                                                                           Page 3

           Action Items

            o The PPMT is to provide Kittelson & Associates, Inc. (KAI) with all additional
              Technical Memorandum #4 ­ Future Condition comments by Wednesday,
              November 23, 2006.

            o Bob Patterson will provide more detailed information on the available and
              developable industrial acreage, as well as information regarding changes in the
              UGB expansion plan.

            o KAI will provide growth projections in terms of number of employees.

            o Tamra Mabbott will provide a copy of the Measure 37 claim as well as a list of
              the allowed uses on the subject site per the previous code to KAI.

            o KAI will update Technical Memroandum #4 to include the following additional
              items:

                        The various scenarios will be numbered with the No-Build scenario being
                        referred to as Scenario #0.

                        A threshold analysis under Scenario #1 with a slower and/or lower
                        coverage ratio to determine if any changes would occur regarding
                        necessary mitigation measures.

                        A threshold analysis under Scenario #1 will be conducted to determine the
                        potential impacts of the Measure 37 claim in the northwest quadrant of the
                        I-84/Barnhart Road interchange.

                        Follow-up comments provided by the PPMT.


        2) Access Management 101 Presentation
         Marc presented on the importance of access management for both the safety and
        business.

            A similar presentation was delivered at the first public workshop.

        3) Discussion Workshop and Alternative Development
            Marc lead a workshop where each PPMT member present was provided an aerial
            photo of the interchange, a scale to measure access spacing and visual identify the
            1,320-foot spacing standard, and red and blue pens to illustrated potential public and
            private accesses along the new connector roadway.
            Each participant in the exercise was able to develop a possible alternative to be
            evaluated which balanced their representative considerations.


Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                     Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                                  Project #: 7930
November 13, 2006                                                                                 Page 4

        4) Provide an overview of the Goal Exception Discussion

        The city voiced concerned with moving forward in the goal exception process without a
        finalized roadway alignment.
        DLCD indicated that they would review any materials provided to date, but cannot make a
        decision until the final report is provided.
        DLCD requested that the exception document include at a minimum one alternative that does
        not impact EFU and provide information on why this alternative would potentially be
        inadequate before considering alternatives that do impact EFU.
        The PPMT agreed that the goal exception should include language that makes it clear that
        accesses to the new connector roadway from EFU properties will be farm use only accesses.
        Marc Butorac suggested that the City consider hiring a land use and/or legal consultant (i.e.,
        Mark Greenfield) to help either write or review the goal exception. The county and city felt the
        exception could be written internally.
        The ODOT requested that all alternatives with the required 1,320 feet of access spacing be
        proven inadequate before alternatives requiring variances are investigated.

        Action Item

            o   Mike Muller and Tamra Mabbott will produce a goal exception document that will fulfill
                the needs of the DLCD and ODOT.


        5) Technical Memorandum #5 ­ Alternative Analysis
         Marc described that Technical Memorandum #5 will address the possible access and
        approach alternatives within the IAMP study area. These alternatives will be initially
        seeded through those concepts developed during PPMT #3 and Public Workshop #1.

         As part of the alternatives analysis, each access and approach alternative will be
        reviewed against the adopted evaluation criteria to determine a preferred alternative. The
        evaluation will also include cost estimates regarding right-of-way and construction as
        well as the number of acres of EFU and industrial zoned property.

         Action Items

             o KAI and Anderson Perry will develop preliminary alternatives for the PPMT to
               review during the week of November 20th in order to determine if an appropriate
               range of alternatives have been explored.

             o Howard Perry will evaluate the cost, right of way impacts, and impacts to EFU
               and existing businesses.

             o KAI will evaluate the alternatives for operations, safety, and access.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                           Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                         Project #: 7930
November 13, 2006                                                                        Page 5
        Public Workshop #1 Summary
         The public workshop was attended and participation occurred. Marc Butorac
        presented on an array of topics helping educate the public on the nature of IAMPs, the
        importance of an IAMP and how an IAMP would affect the Barnhart to Airport
        Connector project. (see attached copy for reference) The presentation included:

                o   Project Need
                o   Project Elements
                o   Preliminary Alignment
                o   Goal Exception Process
                o   Interchange Area Management Plan
                o   Project Schedule
                o   Interchange Area Management Plan 101
                o   Access Management/Local Circulation 101
                o   Local Circulation/Access Workshop
         The local circulation/access workshop element was the participants opportunity to use
        the tools that were provided the PPMT earlier that day to design the roadway that they
        wished to see built and incorporate what had been taught earlier in the evening. The
        diagramed suggestions will be considered as part of the alternatives creation.

        Participants:
                Bill and Connie Caplinger
                Pete Wells
                Eli and Lavonne Stephens
                Michael Graves
                Larry Rew
                Richard and Coralee Courson
                Phillip W. Houk, Mayor
                Don Pinkerton
                Wes Grilley
                Phil Evert


        Summary of Action Items


            o The PPMT is to provide Kittelson & Associates, Inc. (KAI) with all additional
              Technical Memorandum #4 ­ Future Condition comments by Wednesday,
              November 23, 2006.

            o Bob Patterson will provide more detailed information on the available and
              developable industrial acreage, as well as information regarding changes in the
              UGB expansion plan.

            o KAI will provide growth projections in terms of number of employees.

            o Tamra Mabbott will provide a copy of the Measure 37 claim as well as a list of
              the allowed uses on the subject site per the previous code to KAI.

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                  Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                                Project #: 7930
November 13, 2006                                                                               Page 6

            o KAI will update Technical Memroandum #4 to include the following additional
              items:

                        The various scenarios will be numbered with the No-Build scenario being
                        referred to as Scenario #0.

                        A threshold analysis under Scenario #1 with a slower and/or lower
                        coverage ratio to determine if any changes would occur regarding
                        necessary mitigation measures.

                        A threshold analysis under Scenario #1 will be conducted to determine the
                        potential impacts of the Measure 37 claim in the northwest quadrant of the
                        I-84/Barnhart Road interchange.

                        Follow-up comments provided by the PPMT.


            o   Mike Muller and Tamra Mabbott will produce a goal exception document that will fulfill
                the needs of the DLCD and ODOT.
            o KAI and Anderson Perry will develop preliminary alternatives for the PPMT to
              review during the week of November 20th in order to determine if an appropriate
              range of alternatives have been explored.

            o Howard Perry will evaluate the cost, right of way impacts, and impacts to EFU
              and existing businesses.

            o KAI will evaluate the alternatives for operations, safety, and access.




Next Steps
PPMT Meeting #4 will be held in Pendleton, Oregon on Thursday, January 18th, 2007 at 1:30 to
3:30 p.m. and will be followed the same evening with the Public Workshop #2 at the same
location from 7:00 to 9:00 p.m.

The agenda for PPMT Meeting #4 meeting is to review the access and approach alternatives and
recommendations developed by the consultant team




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                         Portland, Oregon
                                                         Presentation Overview

                                                         · Barnhart Road-Airport Road Connector Project
I-84/Barnhart Road Interchange                              ­ Project Need
                                                            ­ Project Elements
    Area Management Plan                                         · Preliminary Alignment
                                                                 · Goal Exception Process
                                                                 · Interchange Area Management Plan
                 Public Workshop #1
                                                            ­ Project Schedule
                                                         · Interchange Area Management Plan 101
                                                         · Access Management/Local Circulation 101
                  November 13, 2006                      · Local Circulation/Access Workshop




  Project Need                                           Project Elements & Schedule

  · To provide a connection between the Airport          · Preliminary Alignments
    Industrial Area and the existing I-84/Barnhart       · Goal Exception Process
    Road interchange in order to facilitate industrial   · Interchange Area Management Plan
    development and to provide improved access to
    the interstate freeway due to the existing
    topographical constraints along the current          · Schedule
    Airport Road-Pendleton Highway route to I-84            ­   IAMP Completed and Adopted by May 2007
                                                            ­   Design Completed by November 2007
                                                            ­   Construction Initiated by Spring 2008
                                                            ­   Construction Complete by Fall 2008




                                                         Why Prepare an IAMP?

                                                         · Many interchanges were built 30 to 40 years ago
      Interchange Area                                     to serve low levels of development
                                                         · Many interchange areas were committed to
 Management Plan (IAMP) 101                                development before state land use program
                                                           created
                                                         · Existing, improved and new interchanges are
                                                           attractive locations for development and provide
                                                           access to market areas and increase land values
                                                         · Interchange issues stem from conflicting needs of
                                                           providing long-distance travel and accommodating
                                                           local growth demands
                                                         · There is a need to protect the significant state
                                                           investment in an interchange




                                                                                                               1
What is an IAMP?                                            What are the Objectives of an IAMP?

· Long-range (20+ year) plan, strategy and                  · Prolong the useful life of the state's investment
  agreement to protect function of highway                    in the interchange
  interchange and the major highway investment              · Balance the need for the interchange to support
· Process to make land use and transportation                 community development interests with the need
                                                              for safe and efficient operations within the
  decisions about how interchange will be managed
                                                              interchange area
  to protect the long-term function within the
                                                            · Establish the desired function of the interchange
  interchange area
                                                            · Establish agreements with local governments on
· Applied to new interchanges or major changes to             how to effectively manage the long-term function
  existing interchanges (OHP Policy 3C)                       of the interchange
· Incorporates the access management rule that              · Monitor how the interchange capacity is managed
  requires ODOT to develop plans for new                      through cooperation with local governments
  interchanges and major changes to interchanges            · Provide certainty for property and business
  (OAR 734-051)                                               owners and local governments




What are the Elements of an IAMP?                           Case Study Example

· Interchange Design                                        · Jackson School Road
  - Determine Function / Purpose of Interchange                 ­ North Plains, Oregon
  - Balance regional (through) traffic with local traffic
· Access Management
  - Significant tool to manage long-term function
  - Minimize conflicts in the influence area
· Land Use Compatibility
  - Serve land uses in Comprehensive Plan
  - Agreement to maintain compatible land uses
· Environmental Impacts
  - Provide early work for NEPA in project development
  - Identify needed land use actions to authorize project
· Agreement with local governments
  - Mutually adopted by OTC and local government(s)
  - Agreement to implement the IAMP




Jackson School Road/US Highway 26 (cont.)                   Jackson School Road/US Highway 26 (cont.)
                                                            The Jackson School Road IAMP was designed to:
                                                            · Protect the function of the Jackson School Road Interchange
                                                               to serve farm-to-market traffic and provide safe and
                                                               efficient access for long-distance, regional trips (e.g.,
                                                               between Hillsboro/North Plains and the Portland
                                                               metropolitan area)
                                                            · Provide capacity and safe operations to accommodate this
                                                               function over the twenty-year planning period
                                                            · Provide safe and efficient operations between connecting
                                                               roadways (i.e., US 26 and Jackson School Road)
                                                            · Ensure ODOT is involved in land use and transportation
                                                               decisions that could affect the function of the interchange.
                                                            · Provide ODOT a role in protecting resource lands and
                                                               preventing, to the extent possible, growth-induced
                                                               development on exception lands or UGB expansions in the
                                                               vicinity of the interchange.




                                                                                                                              2
Jackson School Road/US Highway 26 (cont.)                            Jackson School Road/US Highway 26 (cont.)
To protect the purpose and function of the Jackson School
Road Interchange, the following design elements were included:
· Rural interchange design
    ­ Four lanes (two 14-foot travel lanes and two side by side 12
       foot left turn lanes)
    ­ 8-foot shoulders on each side
    ­ "Tight Diamond Design"
· Access control for at least 1,320 feet north and south of
   ramp terminals
· Ramp meters installed on eastbound entrance ramp to US 26
· Existing Jackson School Road alignment south of US 26 will
   be used as a frontage road to connect with new alignment
· Frontage road access to the new Jackson School Road
   alignment will be at least 1,320 feet from interchange ramp
   terminals




Jackson School Road/US Highway 26 (cont.)                            I-84/Barnhart Road IAMP Possible Outcomes
· The IAMP:                                                          · Activities to Maintain Interchange Function
   ­ Developed in concert with affected local jurisdictions             ­ Comprehensive Plan and Transportation System Plan
   ­ Establishes the Purpose and Function of the JSR Interchange          policies and implementation strategies that support
   ­ Fully implements the OHP Access Standard                             interchange management
   ­ Requires Washington County, the cities of North Plains and         ­ Zoning / Land Division Ordinances / Conditions of
     Hillsboro, and Metro to coordinate with ODOT prior to any            Approval on future development to implement
     land use or transportation action that would affect the JSR
                                                                          interchange management measures
     Interchange
· The IAMP amended the US 26 Corridor Plan                              ­ Realignments of Barnhart Road and Clark Lane
   ­ Washington County adopted the IAMP strategies in its               ­ Local street network improvements to add capacity
     Transportation Plan                                                  for local trips off of the state system
   ­ North Plains amended its Transportation Plan to improve            ­ Local plans, ordinances and UGB amendments to
     east/west connectivity in new UGB areas                              maintain balance between land use and interchange
                                                                          capacity to serve future needs.




I-84/Barnhart Road IAMP Adoption

· The IAMP is adopted by the Oregon
  Transportation Commission and the affected local
  jurisdictions.                                                       Access Management 101
    ­ Adopted as a Facility Plan by the OTC.
    ­ Adopted as an element of the Umatilla County and
      City of Pendleton Transportation System Plans and
      possibly the comprehensive plan and local
      ordinances.
· Additional IGAs maybe needed to guide
  implementation of IAMP




                                                                                                                                3
   What is Access Management?                                                         The Purpose of Access Management?

                                          ­ Access management is                   ­ The purpose of Access
                                            the careful planning of                  Management is to provide
                                            the location, design, and                access to land
                                            operation of:                            development while
                                                    ·   Driveways                    preserving the safety and
                                                    ·   Median openings              efficiency of Oregon's
                                                    ·   Interchanges, and            highways, roadways, and
                                                    ·   Local street connections     city streets.




   The Benefits of Access Management?                                                      Different Road - Different Functions:
­ Reduces congestion and the
  potential for crashes.                                                                                Freeway ­ Interstate 84
­ Preserves road capacity
­ Reduces travel time                   Approximately one person dies each
                                        week in an intersection or driveway
­ Provides more efficient               related crash on Oregon's highways                                      Arterial ­ Pendleton Highway (US 30)
  movement to destinations
­ Can promote economic
                                                                                             Mobility



  development                                                                                                                     Collector ­ Barnhart Road
­ Ensures more timely
  movement of freight

                                                                                                                                      Local Street


                                                                                                             Access




   Different Road ­ Different Functions                                               Different Road ­ Different Functions

                                          Collector /
                                                                                          ­ Local Streets Emphasize Access
                                                                                            over Mobility
                                            Local
                                           Streets

                                Homes




                                         Businesses




                                                 Freeways



                    Arterials




                                                                                                                                                              4
    Different Road ­ Different Functions                               Different Road ­ Different Functions

       ­ Local                                                            ­ Arterials Emphasize Mobility over
         Streets                                                            Access




    Different Road ­ Different Functions                               Different Road ­ Different Functions


­ Arterial            Multiple Driveways   Consolidated Driveways   ­ Freeways
  Access                                                              maximize
                                                                      mobility
  · Avoid multiple
    contiguous
    driveways along
    an arterial.
  · Plan for
    consolidated or
    shared driveway
    locations that
    serve
    multiple
    properties.




    What Contributes to Unsafe Situations?                             What Contributes to Unsafe Situations?


­ Poorly designed                                                   ­ Of all
  or spaced                                                           driveway or
  driveways                                                           intersection
                                                                      crashes, 75%
                                                                      involve the
                                                                      two left-turn
                                                                      movements.




                                                                                                                5
   Access Management Tools and Techniques             Access Management Tools and Techniques
­ Aligned and Properly
  Spaced Intersections
­ Medians
                                                       ­ Types of Accesses
                                                                                     Before
­ Frontage and Backage
  Roads
                                                          · Full Access
­ Managed Access                                          · Left-in / Right-in /
­ Well Designed Local                                       Right-out                         11 Conflict Points
  Circulation Routes
­ Crossover Easements                                     · Right-in / Right-out
                                                          · Right-in Only             After



                                                                                              6 Conflict Points




Key Access Management Parameters for the Barnhart
Road Interchange
       ­ Functional Area Considerations
           · Reaction Time
           · Deceleration Needs
           · Queuing Needs

       ­ Factors to Evaluate When Locating Access
         Points
           · Adjacent Driveway Locations
           · Topographical Constraints

       ­ Access Spacing Requirements
           · ¼ mile Access Spacing from Interchange




Factors to Evaluate When Locating Access Points        Factors to Evaluate When Locating Access Points


­ Aligned                                              ­ Aligned
                                                       ­ Positive
                                                         Offset                                     Driveways Do
                                                                                                    Not Align, But
                                                                                                    There Are No
                                                                                                    Turning
                                                                                                    Movement
                                                                                                    Conflicts.




                                                                                                                     6
Factors to Evaluate When Locating Access Points                     Factors to Evaluate When Locating Access Points


­ Aligned                                                            ­ Vehicular
                                                                       Queuing
­ Positive
  Offset                                         Results in            · Existing
                                                 Turning
                                                 Movement
                                                                         Conditions
­ Negative                                       Conflicts and is
  Offset                                         Considered Poor
                                                 Design




                                                                       ODOT Interchange Access Spacing Requirements
Factors to Evaluate When Locating Access Points
                                                                           ­ 1999 Oregon Highway Plan ­ Policy 3C
                                                                              · "It is the policy of the State of Oregon to plan for and
 ­ Vehicular                                                                    manage grade-separated interchange areas to ensure
   Queuing                                                                      safe and efficient operation between connecting
                                                                                roadways.
                                                                              · It is the goal (at the time of any redevelopment, change
    · Future                                                                    of use, or highway construction, reconstruction or
      Conditions                                                                modernization of an interchange) to meet the
                                                                                appropriate spacing standards, if possible, but, at the
                                                                                very least, to improve the current conditions by moving
                                                                                in the direction of the spacing standards.




       ODOT Interchange Access Spacing Requirements



­ Minimum distance
  to first major                                                    Local Circulation/Access Workshop
  intersection ­ 1,320'

­ Minimum distance
  to first driveway
  beyond ramp                       750'
  terminal (limited to     1,320'

  right-in/right-out) ­
  750'.




                                                                                                                                           7
         Lets Create Some Local Circulation/Access Concepts for            Access and Local Circulation Tools
                  I-84/Barnhart Road Interchange Area
                                                                      ­   Median locations
                                                                      ­   Access locations
                                                                      ­   Types of Access
                                                                      ­   Access easements
                                                                      ­   Frontage / Backage roads
                                                                      ­   Pedestrian / Bike connections




Blue = Connector Road Alignment      Red = Access/Street Connection




        Access and Local Circulation Considerations
           ­ Existing and Future Land Uses
           ­ Future Traffic Volumes (735
             vehicles per hour weekday p.m.
             peak hour)
           ­ Location of Access
           ­ Types of Access
           ­ Existing and Plan Street Network
           ­ Access Spacing Standards
           ­ Impacted Property Access
           ­ Land Use Parameters (e.g., UGB)




                                                                                                                8
                                                  Meeting Summary
                                                  I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP
                                                      PPMT Meeting #4
                                                          (1/18/07)


       Date: January 29, 2007                                                                       Project #: 7930

       To: I-84/Barnhart Road PPMT
     From: Marc Butorac, P.E., P.T.O.E. and Matt Wiesenfeld

          cc: Howard Perry, Anderson Perry and Associates, Inc


This memorandum documents the participants and discussion items from January 18, 2007 I-
84/Barnhart Road PPMT Meeting #4.

Participants:

           ODOT La Grand Office:
           Teresa Penninger, Region 5 Planning Manager
           Doug Wright, Federal Aid Specialist
           Don Fine ­Traffic Engineer
           ODOT District 12:
           George Ruby, District 12 Maintenance Manager
           Umatilla County:
           Tamra Mabbott, County Planning Director
           Hal Philips, County Public Works Director, Roadmaster
           City of Pendleton:
           Mike Muller, City Planner
           Tim Simons, City Engineer
           Bob Patterson, Public Works Director
           Pete Wells, City Attorney/Planning Director
           DLCD:
           Jon Jinnings, DLCD Representative for the Umatilla County
           Bob Cortwright, DLCD Transportation Planning Coordinator (via telephone)

FILENAME: H:\projfile\7930 - I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP\PPMT Meetings\PPMT #4\PPMT#4 Minutes (2).doc
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                                 Project #: 7930
January 18, 2007                                                                                 Page 2
        Consultants:
        Marc Butorac, Kittelson & Associates
        Matt Wiesenfeld, Kittelson & Associates
        Howard Perry, Anderson Perry & Associates Inc

Agenda Items:

1) Review Technical Memorandum #5 ­ Opportunities and Constraints Analysis
        ·   Marc Butorac acknowledged that the PPMT was familiar with Technical
            Memorandum #5 and that the time could be better spent on a discussion of the Road
            Alignment and Access Concepts and Land Use Management Strategies based on
            team's understanding of the concepts. When questions were brought forth, details on
            each concept were re-visited to keep the team informed and refreshed on the material.


2) Public Workshop #2 Summary
        · The public workshop was well attended and participation occurred. Marc Butorac
            presented an update on the IAMP and other ongoing processes in the area. The
            presentation continued in discussing each of the new Connector Roadway's
            alignment and access concepts. The Connector Roadway's cross-section and short-
            and long-term traffic control devices and lane configurations were presented by Marc
            after the concepts. Matt Wiesenfeld presented on the Land Use Management
            Strategies which could be used potentially to mitigate the effects of the new roadway
            on current land uses. The presentation then moved into an open forum on each
            concept and allowed the public participants to comment on their concerns and
            consideration which are summarized in Attachment "A".
        Participants:
                Participants:
                Bill and Connie Caplinger
                Eli and Lavonne Stephens
                Terry and Jayne Clarke
                Rick Thomas
                Richard Courson

General Commentary on the Northern Concepts
At the Public Workshop concerns were voiced about the grade in the interchange area, the icy conditions
the Connector Roadway would likely face, and the need to accommodate trucks that will wish to `stack'
at the interchange during inclement weather conditions and wait for better driving conditions.

3) Review of the Alignment and Access Concepts


Concept # N8
        ·   Concept #N8 was not introduced during the public workshops as the PPMT was not yet
            familiar with this concept due to its late development.
        ·   The DLCD voiced concerns that the concept created a parcel that was:
            o Irregularly shaped
            o Smaller than desirable for farming practices

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                          Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                                       Project #: 7930
January 18, 2007                                                                                       Page 3

            o Likely to entice future rezoning and development applications
        ·   County Planning wanted it to be considered if it provided a better overall engineering
            solution. A conclusion was made by the PPMT that Concept #N8 was not superior to other
            existing concepts from a peer engineering perspective.
        ·   As a result, the PPMT recommended that the final IAMP document include Concept #N8 and
            note its characteristics.
        ·   Bob Cartwright via phone interjected that the goal exception needed to be based on an
            adequate concept and not necessarily the best concept.

Southerly Roadway Alignment and Access Concept Discussion

Concepts #S1 and #S2

The PPMT reached complete consensus that Concept #S1 be recommended as the preferred roadway
alignment and access concept for the southerly side of the interchange. Concept #S2 was determined to
be unacceptable from an access spacing perspective.

PREFERRED CONCEPT: Concept #S1

Northerly Roadway Alignment and Access Concept Discussion

To facilitate the discussion, Marc indicated that the Consultant Team recommendation indicated that
Concepts #N2A, #N2B and #N4 were the initial preferred concepts for the northerly side of the
interchange. The other Concepts were discussed as to their merit and then removed from further
consideration.

Concepts #N1A and #N1B failed primarily from a safety perspective due to the sharp horizontal curve at
the end of a long straight segment of the proposed Connector Roadway. These concepts were also
deemed less preferable due to the low design speed, rate of curvature, amount of industrial impacts, and
clear zone concerns from I-84.

Concept #N3 was deemed too impactive to EFU lands north of the industrial property. It also was less
preferable due to its higher cost that was associated with its length, cut and fill requirements, and the extra
main roadway intersection that would be created.

Concept #N5 failed on account of its impacts to the industrial land and its difficult grading aspects.
Although access spacing standards would be met, the intersection would be in a difficult location for
trucks, especially during inclement weather conditions.

Concept #N2B was discussed further and found to have no advantages when compared to Concept #N2A
beside that it exceeded ODOT spacing standard of 1,320 feet. Overall grade and cost concerns led the
team to remove it from the preferred list of concepts.

PREFERRED CONCEPT: Concept #N2A and #N4

Comparative Analysis of Concepts #N2A and #N4
    ·   Access spacing is a non-differentiating factor between the two concepts
    ·   Concept #N2A takes more EFU; Concept #N4 takes both EFU and Industrial Land
    ·   Concept #N4 requires the relocation of utilities and potentially requires removing contaminated
        soil within the northeastern quadrant of the existing industrial zoned property.

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                                     Project #: 7930
January 18, 2007                                                                                     Page 4

    ·   The cost differential between the two concepts was deemed a non-differentiating factor at this
        time.
    ·   In addition to the comparative analysis, Marc confirmed the extents of ODOT and the City of
        Pendleton's access control acquisition and also defined the points of access to the properties north
        of the interchange. Attachments "B" and "C" illustrate the access management characteristics of
        both designs. In addition, the attachments summarized the unresolved issues associated with
        zoning.

3) Land Use Management Strategy Discussion
    ·   Marc quickly summarized the following four land use strategies on the north side of the
        interchange:
        A.   No Change
        B.   Conversion of isolated EFU to RLI
        C.   Swapping of interchange RLI with EFU
        D.   Swapping of airport RLI with interchange EFU

                o   Strategy `D' was ruled out by all parties as unnecessary given the amount of acreage
                    affected under the preferred northerly roadway alignment and access concepts.
                o   Strategy `C' was deemed as a possible solution to be explored further
                o   Strategy `B' was deemed as a possible solution to be explored further
                o   Strategy `A' was deemed ideal but unlikely due to the preferred northerly roadway
                    alignment and access concepts being contemplated

The PPMT decided that the discussion of takings needed to include ODOT's Right-of-Way department
before further presumptions were made regarding the potential land use management strategies.

4) Roadway Cross-Section and Long-Term Traffic Control & Lane Configurations
Discussion
    ·   The Connector Roadway and subsequent minor road's cross-sections and long term traffic control
        and lane configurations, as presented in Technical Memorandum #5, were agreed upon as
        acceptable by the PPMT.


5) Land Use Management and Coordination Discussion
    ·   Either of the preferred concepts for the north side of the interchange would isolate pieces of both
        EFU land and segment the existing industrial property. Multiple possibilities were discussed, but
        the PPMT decided that ODOT's Right-of-Way group should be consulted before the options were
        evaluated further.


6) Project Schedule Discussion
    ·   The PPMT updated the project schedule and added several new items to the schedule which have
        been added to an updated version which can be found in Attachment "D".


7) Goal Exception and Travel Demand Modeling Update Discussion
    ·   The goal exception process is underway and Tamra Mabbott and Mike Muller should have the
        exception draft completed by the end of January. The travel demand model will require further
        assistance from Larry Daryrmple and Rich Arnold.


Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                             Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                          Project #: 7930
January 18, 2007                                                                          Page 5
8) Summary of Action Items
            a. The PPMT is to provide Kittelson & Associates, Inc. (KAI) with all additional
               Technical Memorandum #5 ­ Opportunities and Constraints Analysis comments
               by Friday, January 26, 2007.

            b. Howard Perry will provide further information regarding the land needed for the
               construction process and the land that will be detached from its current parcels
               under Concepts #N2A and #N4.

            c. KAI will follow up with Rich Arnold regarding the employment growth
               assumptions and new future year traffic modeling forecasts.

            d. ODOT will discuss the preferred concepts with the Right-of-Way department and
               determine the proper procedure for moving forward on either Concepts #N2A and
               #N4

            e. The city will contact the industrial land owner to ascertain his position to the
               preferred concepts. This piece should come after the ODOT discussion with the
               Right-of-Way department.

            f. Mike Muller and Tamra Mabbott will complete a draft of the goal exception
               document by the end of January, 2007.

            g. KAI will provide a draft summary IAMP plan document as well as Technical
               Memorandums #1 through #5 to Tamra Mabbott by February 1st in order for the
               County to issue the 45-day notice procedure


9) Next Steps
PPMT will meet by conference call on January 29, 2007 at 3:00 p.m. to discuss which of the
remaining two concepts will be the PPMT preferred concept.

Please see attached updated schedule for details regarding future meetings.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                   Portland, Oregon
                                                       Presentation Overview

                                                       · Barnhart Road-Airport Road Connector Project
I-84/Barnhart Road Interchange                         · Roadway Alignment and Access Concept
                                                         Development Process
    Area Management Plan                                  ­ Proposed Concepts
                                                          ­ Roadway Cross-Section
                Public Workshop #2                        ­ Land Use Management Strategies
                                                       · Workshop Session
                                                          ­ Identification of Each Concept's Advantages and
                                                            Disadvantages
                  January 17, 2007                     · Next Step
                                                          ­ Future PPMT Meetings
                                                          ­ Planning Commission Meetings




  Barnhart Road to Airport Road Connector              Proposed Alignment and Access Concepts

  · A roadway to link the industrial area near the     · Each Concept has unique advantages and
    airport with the I-84/Barnhart Road Interchange.     disadvantages that we will discuss tonight.
                                                       · 7 Concepts illustrate possible options for the
                                                         north side of the interchange
                                                       · 2 Concepts illustrate possible options for the
                                                         south side of the interchange
                                                       · The north and south-side concepts are
                                                         independent of each other.




  Concept N1A                                          Concept N1B




                                                                                                              1
Concept N2A   Concept N2B




Concept N3    Concept N4




Concept N5    Concept N6




                            2
Concept S1                                                   Concept S2




Roadway Cross-Sections                                       Future Traffic Control




Land Use Alternatives                                        Land Use Alternatives

· Land Use Management Strategy Alternatives                  · Land Use Management Strategy Alternatives
                                                                ­   A. No Change - The base strategy is to leave the zoning the same as it is today. Although this strategy is

                                                                    available for every Concept, it is the preferred strategy for Concepts #N1A, #N1B, and #N5.
   ­ A. No Change
   ­ B. Conversion of Isolated Exclusive Farm Use (EFU) to
     Rural Light Industrial (RLI)
   ­ C. Interchange Area Zone Swap
   ­ D. Interchange Area and Airport Industrial Area Zone
     Swap -




                                                                                                                                                                                 3
Land Use Alternatives                                                                                                Land Use Alternatives

· Land Use Management Strategy Alternatives                                                                          · Land Use Management Strategy Alternatives
   ­   B. Conversion of Isolated Exclusive Farm Use (EFU) to Rural Light Industrial (RLI) - This strategy accounts      ­   C. Interchange Area Zone Swap - This strategy would take land located north of the of the new Connector
       for the land which would become separated from current farming patterns and have limited or no viability             Roadway and currently zoned RLI and convert it to EFU under the Concepts which extend outs the RLI
       as future sustainable farm land. The quantity of land converted from EFU to RLI would have no appreciable            zoned land. Land currently zoned EFU and located between the new connector roadway and I-84 would be
       effect on the operation of the surrounding transportation facilities as documented in Technical                      converted to RLI as it would have potentially limited viability as future sustainable farm land. This strategy
       Memorandum #4. This strategy is most applicable for the Concepts #N2A, #N2B, #N3, and #N4.                           is most applicable for the Concepts #N2A, #N2B, and #N4.




Land Use Alternatives                                                                                                Workshop Session

· Land Use Management Strategy Alternatives                                                                          · Advantages and Disadvantages as seen by you.
   ­   D. Interchange Area and Airport Industrial Area Zone Swap - This strategy would allow EFU separated from
       current farming patterns by the new Connector Roadway in the vicinity of the interchange to be converted
       to RLI. To offset this impact and maintain the same amount of EFU land in the local area and within the
       extents of the Connecter Roadway, existing City controlled light industrial land of the same quantity near
       the airport would be converted back to EFU. This strategy is most applicable for the Concepts #N2A, #N2B,
       #N3, and #N4.




Next Steps

· PPMT Meetings
· Planning Commission Meetings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                  Meeting Summary
                                                  I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP
                                                      PPMT Meeting #5
                                                           (3/6/07)


       Date: March 6, 2007                                                                      Project #: 7930

       To: I-84/Barnhart Road PPMT
     From: Marc Butorac, P.E., P.T.O.E. and Susan Wright, P.E.

          cc: Howard Perry, Anderson Perry and Associates, Inc


This memorandum documents the participants and discussion items from March 6, 2007 I-
84/Barnhart Road PPMT Meeting #5.

Participants:

          ODOT La Grand Office:
          Teresa Penninger, Region 5 Planning Manager
          Doug Wright, Federal Aid Specialist
          Don Fine ­Traffic Engineer
          ODOT District 12:
          George Ruby, District 12 Maintenance Manager
          Umatilla County:
          Not Present
          City of Pendleton:
          Bob Patterson, Public Works Director
          Pete Wells, City Attorney/Planning Director
          DLCD:
          Jon Jinnings, DLCD Representative for the Umatilla County
          Bob Cortwright, DLCD Transportation Planning Coordinator
          Consultants:
          Marc Butorac, Kittelson & Associates
          Susan Wright, Kittelson & Associates
FILENAME: H:\projfile\7930 - I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP\PPMT Meetings\PPMT #5\PPMT#5 Minutes.doc
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                           Project #: 7930
March 6, 2007                                                                              Page 2

        Matt Wiesenfeld, Kittelson & Associates
        Howard Perry, Anderson Perry & Associates Inc

Agenda Items:

1) Discuss Recommendation to Planning Commission
        Recommending one northern alternative (instead of two: N2A2 and N4A) in the Draft
        IAMP and to the Planning Commission was discussed. However, the City would prefer to
        let the property owners and the DLCD present their case to the Planning Commission and
        let the Planning Commission make a determination without a staff recommendation.

2) Review Draft IAMP

        Chapters 6 and 7 of the Draft IAMP were reviewed and discussed. The following
        summarized the changes that will be made.

            o All Chapter 6 figures will be presented with a "6A" and "6B" version providing
              the information on a basemap for Alternative N2A2 and N4A.

            o Access NA5 will be modified throughout the report (including Table 6-3) to
              indicate that it will also provide access to the two remnant EFU parcels on the
              north and south side of the Woodpecker access road.

            o The left-turn lanes at NA2 and NA5 are not warranted from a volume perspective
              but were recommended by the Consultant due to the anticipated travel speeds and
              grades along the Connector Roadway. The City will discuss and make a
              determination about including the left-turn lanes as long-term projects that can be
              completed by development as opposed to short-term projects.

            o The roadway cross-section in Figure 6-2 will be modified to show a 14-foot
              median, include the 2-foot gravel shoulder, not show bicyclists, and to show some
              trucks as opposed to all passenger vehicles.

            o The ramp realignments will be called out on Figure 6-3 but will not be drawn out.

            o Figure 6-8 will be modified to remove the "Airport Road" title on a private road
              and modify the UGB boundary.

            o The reference to Oregon Highway Plan mobility standards will be updated per
              ODOT's current practice (Theresa to follow-up) and the current mobility standard
              will be identified.

            o The City still finds the creation of an SDC acceptable without the need to fund a
              traffic signal. This needs to be confirmed with the County.

            o ODOT will confirm the timeline for processing the access spacing deviation.


Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                    Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP                                                       Project #: 7930
March 6, 2007                                                                          Page 3

            o Discussed the need to update the development review standards for the
              City/County prior to adoption of the IAMP.


Next Steps
PPMT will provide additional comments to Kittelson & Associates by close of business Monday,
March 12th.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                Portland, Oregon
Attachment `A'


I-84/Barnhart Road Interchange Area Management Plan

Public Workshop #2 Summary


General Concerns Voiced By the Public:
       Will a new roadway cause further runoff directed to the north of the
       interchange?

          o The project will address runoff and it will maintain or enhance existing
            conditions.

       How will wildlife in the area be affected?

          o The project environment component will address wildlife needs in the
            area.

Discussion on Northerly Concepts:
Concept North 1A ­
       The tight curves along the new roadway would be difficult to navigate in icy conditions
       The roadside storage area for trucks in inclement weather would not be present.

Concept North 1B ­
       The need for an extra stop controlled intersection was disliked generally.
       The tight curves along the new roadway would be difficult to navigate in icy conditions
       The roadside storage area for trucks in inclement weather would not be present.

Concept North 2A ­
       This concept was generally well liked and was felt to fit well with land use alternative
       `C' the local area zone swaps.

Concept North 2B ­
       This alignment would require vehicles from the north to cross the lowest point in the
       terrain twice.
       The access spaces for this concept is the best
       The drainage for the Connector Roadway would be hampered by the northern minor
       road.
       The Connector Roadway/Barnhart Road intersection would be in a difficult location for
       sight distance.
Concept North 3 -
       The need for an extra stop controlled intersection was disliked generally.
       The location of the stop controlled intersection would make truck acceleration up the
       hill slower and more difficult than desired.
       The right-in/ right out access was generally unpopular.

Concept North 4 ­
       The corner of the industrial property might be too small for a roadway to come through
       without effecting existing structures.
       For general information it was added that the bays on the scrap building open on the
       east and west edges. It was further noted that this part of the property is used for scraps
       which have a low aesthetic value.
       Roadside storage for trucks waiting out inclement weather would be limited.

Concept North 5 -
       The Connector Roadway Alignment would require the moving of a building and fill
       near the additional stop.
       The need for an extra stop controlled intersection was disliked generally.
       The location of the stop controlled intersection would make truck acceleration up the
       hill slower and more difficult than desired.


Discussion on Southerly Concepts:
Concept South 1-
       No concerns were raised with this concept.

Concept South 2-
       Concern was voiced that trucks drivers in this area would not be in favor of the
       roundabout.
              Appendix B
Technical Memorandum #1
    Interagency and Public
      Involvement Program
                                        TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM

                           I-84 Barnhart Road Interchange Area Management Plan
                                              Technical Memo #1
                                 Interagency and Public Involvement Program


       Date: October 17, 2006                                                             Project #: 7930

       To: I-84 Barnhart Road PPMT
     From: Susan Wright, P.E., Marc Butorac, P.E., P.T.O.E., Matt Wiesenfeld

          cc: Howard Perry, Anderson Perry and Associates, Inc.


As part of the Barnhart Road-Airport Road Connector project, an Interchange Area Management
Plan (IAMP) is being conducted at the I-84/Barnhart Road interchange to ensure that the
interchange area continues to operate and function as designed with the new connection between
Barnhart Road and Airport Road. The following technical memorandum provides an overview of
the Interchange Area Management Plan (IAMP) study area, describes the members and activities
of the Project Planning Management Team (PPMT), provides an overview of the PPMT meeting
and overall project schedule, and provides draft project goals, objectives, and evaluation criteria
that will be revised following input from the first PPMT meeting.


INTERCHANGE AREA MANAGEMENT PLAN (IAMP) STUDY AREA
At a minimum, the IAMP study area is required to include all land uses and roadways located
within approximately 1,320 feet of the existing I-84 / Barnhart Road interchange. This distance
corresponds to the spacing standard outlined in the Oregon Administration Rule (OAR) 734,
Division 51 rules for interchanges. The Barnhart Road-Airport Road Connector alignment
alternatives and the roadway network and land use patterns surrounding the I-84/Barnhart Road
interchange were reviewed to determine the need to extend beyond the 1,320 feet minimum
requirement. Based on this review, the study area was extended to the north to include the most
northern potential alignment option and the EFU land that would become segmented between I-
84 and the new Barnhart Road-Airport Road Connector roadway alignment. The study area
roadways include Interstate-84, Barnhart Road, Clark Lane (north of the interchange), and
Fanshier Road (south of the interchange). The study roadways and properties included within the
proposed Barnhart Road IAMP study area are shown in Figure 1-1.




FILENAME: H:\projfile\7930 - I-84 Barnhart Road IAMP\memos\memo 1\Tech Memo 1 Final.doc
 I-84 Barnhart Rd. IAMP                                                                                                                                   August 2006




                                                                          Barnhart Rd
                                                                                         Clark Ln




                                                                                                                                                                          K:\Kittelson\Pendleton_IAMP\MXD\IAMP_Study_Area_081006_11x17.mxd, Date: August 14, 2006 10:25:17 AM
                                                           Fanshier Rd




                                                                                                                    Barnhart Rd
LEGEND
   IAMP Operations and Access Study Area
   Land Use Study Area
County Zoning Designations
   Exclusive Farm Use
   Rural Light Industrial                              0      200   400                 800         1,200   1,600                 2,000
                                                                                                                                            IAMP STUDY AREA      FIGURE



   Rural Tourist Commercial                                                                                                          Feet     PENDLETON, OR     0-1
      KITTELSON & ASSOCIATES, INC.
       TRANSPORTATION PLANNING / TRAFFIC ENGINEERING
  I-84 Barnhart Road Interchange Area Management Plan                                         Project #: 7930
  October 17, 2006                                                                                     Page 3


  PROJECT PLANNING MANAGEMENT TEAM
  The Planning Project Management Team (PPMT) has the responsibility for guiding the planning
  work of the Contractor and is responsible for reviewing all work projects, providing input on all
  planning recommendations such as the project study area, goals and objectives, level of public
  involvement, technical analysis, and the proposed alternatives, and ultimately helping to select
  the preferred local circulation/access, land use management, and coordination elements of the
  IAMP.
  A draft PPMT was established based on input from City, County, and ODOT representatives.
  The draft PPMT was presented at the August 8th, 2006 combined kick-off meeting for the
  Barnhart Road-Airport Road Connector and IAMP projects. Based on feedback from the
  participants of the combined kick-off meeting, the PPMT shown in Table 1-1 was established.

                           Table 1-1          Project Planning Management Team

       Agency                     Name                       Position/Title                      Role

                          Teresa Penninger             Region 5 Planning Manager         ODOT Project Manager

                            Doug Wright                   Federal Aid Specialist         ODOT Project Manager
ODOT ­
La Grand/Region 5           Tom Kuhlman                 Region 5 Traffic Engineer              Informed

                                 Craig Sipp             Assistant Traffic Manager              Informed

                                 Don Fine                    Traffic Engineer                PPMT member

ODOT-                       George Ruby             District 12 Maintenance Manager          PPMT member
Pendleton/District 12
                             Marilyn Holt                                                      Informed

                           Tamra Mabbott                County Planning Director         County Project Manager

Umatilla County              Hal Phillips                 Public Works Director              PPMT member

                           Dennis Doherty                    Commissioner                      Informed

                             Mike Muller                      City Planner                   PPMT member

                             Tim Simons                       City Engineer                  PPMT member
City of Pendleton
                            Bob Patterson                 Public Works Director              PPMT member

                             Pete Wells              City Attorney/Planning Director           Informed

                             Jon Jinings            Representative to Umatilla County        PPMT member

                           Darren Nichols          Representative to City of Pendleton       PPMT member
DLCD
                           Bob Cortwright          Transportation Planning Coordinator         Informed

                                 Matt Crall              Transportation Planner                Informed

DLCD ­ Department of Land Conservation and Development

  The PPMT members were selected in order to provide representation from planning and traffic
  engineering for agency involved. Team members identified as "Informed" will be copied on all
  PPMT project correspondence, review materials, and meeting notices and agendas. The
  informed members were included at the request of the respective agencies because their PPMT
  members may request their input, desire they attend PPMT meetings as an alternate, or will be
  requiring their approval of the final project. An outline of all of the PPMT meetings is included
  in the next section.

  Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                              Portland, Oregon
I-84 Barnhart Road Interchange Area Management Plan                                            Project #: 7930
October 17, 2006                                                                                        Page 4

Public Involvement Plan
To ensure that adequate project coordination and public participation occurs throughout the
development of the Barnhart Road Interchange Area Management Plan, a series of Project
Planning Management Team (PPMT) Meetings and Public Workshops (PW) will be held over
the course of the project. The public workshops will be combined stakeholder workshops and
public open houses due to the limited number of property owners within the study area. The
PPMT and Public Workshop meeting dates and objectives are summarized in Table 1-2.

In addition to the PPMT meetings and Public Workshops there will also be opportunities for
public comment during the IAMP adoption process at the Planning Commission Hearing, Board
of County Commissioners Hearings, and the Oregon Transportation Commission Hearing.

                                    Table 1-2    Meeting Summary

  Meeting Event            Date/Location                        Meeting Purpose/Objectives

                                                -Review Technical Memo #1: Interagency and Public
                                                Involvement Program

                                                -Review Technical Memo #2: Document Review
                       September 21st, 2006/    The purpose of the PPMT Meeting #1 is to introduce the I-
PPMT Meeting #1
                       Conference Call          84 Barnhart Road interchange project and the consultant
                                                team, review the project schedule, review the project goals,
                                                objectives, and evaluation criteria, confirm the study area,
                                                confirm the project schedule, and review the project's
                                                policy framework.

                                                -Presentation: IAMP 101

                                                -Review Technical Memo #3: Existing Conditions
                       October 19th, 2006/
PPMT Meeting #2
                       Pendleton                The purpose of PPMT Meeting #2 is to overview the IAMP
                                                process, review the existing land use and traffic operations,
                                                and adopt the evaluation criteria.

                                                -Presentation: Local Circulation/Access 101

                                                -Review Technical Memo #4: Future Conditions

                                                -Brainstorm     Local     Circulation/Access     Management
                       November 16, 2006/       Alternatives
PPMT Meeting #3
                       Pendleton
                                                The purpose of the PPMT #3 is to review the future forecast
                                                land use and traffic operations and brainstorm potential
                                                local circulation and access management alternatives for
                                                each roadway alternative and the existing roadway system.

                                                -Presentation: IAMP 101and Local Circulation/Access 101

                                                -Review Technical Memos #1-4

                                                -Brainstorm     Local     Circulation/Access     Management
                                                Alternatives,

                                                The purpose of the first stakeholder meeting/public
                                                workshop is to present the goals and objectives and
                       November 16, 2006/
Public Workshop #1                              findings to date, educate the public and stakeholders on
                       Pendleton
                                                the IAMP process and access management practices, and
                                                engage the participants to help develop potential local
                                                circulation and access management alternatives.




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                              Portland, Oregon
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                    Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd.--Clark Lane                                                                                                       QC JOB #: 10178203
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                        DATE: 7/13/2006

                                    2           1                                                                                    50.0       0.0
                                                                       Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                0        2          0                                                                               0.0     50.0 0.0


             0          0                                0        12             [ Clark Lane ]                0.0        0.0                          0.0         25.0

                        0               0.82             0                                                                0.0                          0.0

             0          0                                12       21                                           0.0        0.0                          25.0        14.3

                                0        1       21                                                                                 0.0     0.0 14.3


                                14              22                                                                                   28.6      13.6
                            [ Barnhart Rd. ]                                                                                    [ Barnhart Rd. ]

                                         0




                    0                                         0




                                            0                                                             NORTH




                                                                                                                                                              *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd.                         Barnhart Rd.            Clark Lane                  Clark Lane
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                          (Southbound)           (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                  HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                       TOTAL          TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                     Left Thru Right U     Left Thru Right U            Left Thru Right U
      7:00 AM                0     0      4                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           5
      7:05 AM                0     0      1                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           2
      7:10 AM                0     0      0                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           1
      7:15 AM                0     0      2                        0     1    0          0     0      0               0     0     0                           3
      7:20 AM                0     0      1                        0     0    0          0     0      0               0     0     0                           1
      7:25 AM                0     0      2                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           3
      7:30 AM                0     0      4                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           5
      7:35 AM                0     0      2                        0     0    0          0     0      0               0     0     0                           2
      7:40 AM                0     0      1                        0     0    0          0     0      0               0     0     0                           1
      7:45 AM                0     0      3                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           4
      7:50 AM                0     0      2                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           3
      7:55 AM                0     1      1                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           3           33
      8:00 AM                0     0      2                        0     0    0          0     0      0               0     0     0                           2           30
      8:05 AM                0     0      0                        0     0    0          0     0      0               4     0     0                           4           32
      8:10 AM                0     0      2                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           3           34
      8:15 AM                0     0      3                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           4           35
      8:20 AM                0     0      0                        0     1    0          0     0      0               0     0     0                           1           35
      8:25 AM                0     0      1                        0     1    0          0     0      0               2     0     0                           4           36
      8:30 AM                0     0      2                        0     0    0          0     0      0               0     0     0                           2           33
      8:35 AM                0     1      0                        0     0    0          0     0      0               1     0     0                           2           33
      8:40 AM                0     0      0                        0     0    0          0     0      0               0     0     0                           0           32
      8:45 AM                0     0      3                        0     0    0          0     0      0               0     0     0                           3           31
      8:50 AM                0     0      2                        0     0    0          0     0      0               0     0     0                           2           30
      8:55 AM                0     0      0                        0     0    0          0     0      0               4     0     0                           4           31
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                            Southbound             Eastbound                   Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U                     Left Thru Right U     Left Thru Right U            Left Thru Right U                            TOTAL

 All Vehicles               0           0           20            0     0    0           0        0   0              24         0         0                         44
 Heavy Trucks               0           0           4             0     0    0           0        0   0              4          0         0                         8
 Pedestrians                            0                               0                         0                             0                                   0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/13/2006                                                                                 SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd--I-84 WB off ramps                                                                                                      QC JOB #: 10178101
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                             DATE: 7/12/2006

                                    13           25                                                                                       30.8      28.0
                                                                        Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                6         7          0                                                                                   50.0 14.3 0.0


             7          0                                 20       27             [ I-84 WB off ramps ]            57.1        0.0                          20.0       29.6

                        0                0.87             1                                                                    0.0                          100.0

             0          0                                 6        0                                                0.0        0.0                          50.0        0.0

                                0         5          0                                                                                   0.0     60.0 0.0


                                13               5                                                                                        30.8      60.0
                            [ Barnhart Rd ]                                                                                          [ Barnhart Rd ]

                                          0




                    0                                          0




                                             0                                                                NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                    *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd                            Barnhart Rd            I-84 WB off ramps             I-84 WB off ramps
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                           (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                   (Westbound)                               HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                             TOTAL        TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                      Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U
      7:00 AM                0     0     0                          0     2     3            0      0     0                3      0     3                      11             46
      7:05 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              46
      7:10 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              46
      7:15 AM                0     0     0                          0     2     0            0      0     0                0      0     5                      7              47
      7:20 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              47
      7:25 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              47
      7:30 AM                0     4     0                          0     0     1            0      0     0                0      0     5                      10             43
      7:35 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              43
      7:40 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              43
      7:45 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     2            0      0     0                3      1     7                      13             41
      7:50 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              41
      7:55 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              41
      8:00 AM                0     1     0                          0     4     1            0      0     0                1      0     3                      10             40
      8:05 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              40
      8:10 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              40
      8:15 AM                0     0     0                          0     3     2            0      0     0                2      0     5                      12             45
      8:20 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              45
      8:25 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              45
      8:30 AM                2     0     0                          0     1     1            0      0     0                1      2     2                      9              44
      8:35 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              44
      8:40 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              44
      8:45 AM                1     1     0                          0     1     2            0      0     0                1      2     4                      12             43
      8:50 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              43
      8:55 AM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0              43
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                             Southbound                 Eastbound                     Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U                      Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U                          TOTAL

 All Vehicles               0            0            0            0     0    8              0     0      0               12         4         28                        52
 Heavy Trucks               0            0            0            0     0    4              0     0      0               8          4         4                         20
 Pedestrians                             0                               0                         0                                 0                                   0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/14/2006                                                                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd--I-84 EB Ramps                                                                                                        QC JOB #: 10178102
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                           DATE: 7/12/2006

                                    11           3                                                                                 0.0            0.0
                                                                      Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                0         4          7                                                                            0.0       0.0    0.0


             0          3                                0       0              [ I-84 EB Ramps ]            0.0       0.0                               0.0        0.0

                        0                0.69            0                                                             0.0                               0.0

             6          3                                0       12                                         33.3       66.7                              0.0        8.3

                                0         0          5                                                                            0.0     0.0 20.0


                                    7            5                                                                                 28.6           20.0
                            [ Barnhart Rd ]                                                                                   [ Barnhart Rd ]

                                          0




                    0                                        0




                                             0                                                          NORTH




                                                                                                                                                               *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd                          Barnhart Rd           I-84 EB Ramps              I-84 EB Ramps
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                         (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                   HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                         TOTAL        TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                    Left Thru Right U      Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      7:00 AM                0     0     0                        1     1     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             2           33
      7:05 AM                0     0     0                        0     1     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             1           31
      7:10 AM                0     0     0                        0     1     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             1           30
      7:15 AM                0     0     0                        1     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             1           29
      7:20 AM                0     0     0                        0     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             0           28
      7:25 AM                0     0     0                        1     0     0          0      0     1             0      0     0                             2           30
      7:30 AM                0     0     2                        0     0     0          1      0     0             0      0     0                             3           29
      7:35 AM                0     0     0                        0     0     0          1      0     0             0      0     0                             1           25
      7:40 AM                0     0     2                        0     0     0          1      0     0             0      0     0                             3           24
      7:45 AM                0     0     1                        0     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             1           24
      7:50 AM                0     0     0                        0     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             0           19
      7:55 AM                0     0     0                        0     1     0          0      0     1             0      0     0                             2           17
      8:00 AM                0     0     0                        1     1     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             2           17
      8:05 AM                0     0     0                        2     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             2           18
      8:10 AM                0     0     0                        1     0     0          0      0     1             0      0     0                             2           19
      8:15 AM                0     0     0                        2     2     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             4           22
      8:20 AM                0     0     0                        0     0     0          0      0     1             0      0     0                             1           23
      8:25 AM                0     0     0                        1     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             1           22
      8:30 AM                0     1     1                        0     1     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             3           22
      8:35 AM                0     0     0                        1     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             1           22
      8:40 AM                0     1     0                        0     1     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             2           21
      8:45 AM                0     0     0                        0     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                             0           20
      8:50 AM                0     0     0                        0     2     0          1      0     0             0      0     0                             3           23
      8:55 AM                0     2     0                        1     0     0          0      0     1             0      0     0                             4           25
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                           Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U                    Left Thru Right U      Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles               0            0           0           20    8    0            0     0    4              0          0         0                            32
 Heavy Trucks               0            0           0           0     0    0            0     0    4              0          0         0                            4
 Pedestrians                             0                             0                       0                              0                                      0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 8/30/2006                                                                               SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd.--Parking Lot                                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10178201
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                                  DATE: 7/13/2006

                                     6           4                                                                                       16.7            25.0
                                                                        Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                 3        1          2                                                                                  33.3       0.0    0.0


             3          2                                1       1                [ Parking Lot ]               33.3          0.0                               100.0       100.0

                        0                0.83            0                                                                    0.0                                0.0

             2          0                                0       2                                               0.0          0.0                                0.0        0.0

                                 0        1          0                                                                                  0.0     0.0       0.0


                                     1           1                                                                                       0.0             0.0
                            [ Barnhart Rd. ]                                                                                        [ Barnhart Rd. ]

                                          0




                    0                                        0




                                             0                                                              NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                        *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd.                        Barnhart Rd.              Parking Lot                  Parking Lot
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                         (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                         HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                                 TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                    Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U            Left Thru Right U
      7:00 AM                0     0      0                       2     1    0             0     0     0                0     0     0                                  3
      7:15 AM                0     0      0                       1     0    0             0     0     0                0     0     0                                  1
      7:30 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             2     0     0                0     0     1                                  3
      7:45 AM                0     1      0                       0     1    1             0     0     0                0     0     0                                  3            10
      8:00 AM                0     0      0                       1     0    0             0     0     0                0     0     0                                  1            8
      8:15 AM                0     0      0                       1     0    2             0     0     0                0     0     0                                  3            10
      8:30 AM                0     1      0                       1     0    1             2     0     0                0     0     0                                  5            12
      8:45 AM                0     2      0                       1     0    1             0     0     0                0     0     0                                  4            13




  PEAK 15-MIN                        Northbound                         Southbound               Eastbound                     Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left     Thru Right U                Left    Thru Right U     Left   Thru Right U          Left    Thru Right U                                TOTAL

 All Vehicles                0           0           0           0       0    0            8        0   0               0           0          4                             12
 Heavy Trucks                0           0           0           0       0    0            0        0   0               0           0          4                             4
 Pedestrians                             0                               0                          0                               0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/28/2006                                                                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd.--Fanshier Rd.                                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10178205
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                                   DATE: 7/13/2006

                                     1           1                                                                                        0.0             0.0
                                                                        Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                 0        0          1                                                                                   0.0        0.0    0.0


             0          1                                0       0                [ Fanshier Rd. ]                0.0          0.0                               0.0        0.0

                        0                0.25            0                                                                     0.0                               0.0

             1          0                                0       1                                                0.0          0.0                               0.0        0.0

                                 0        0          0                                                                                   0.0    0.0        0.0


                                     0           0                                                                                        0.0             0.0
                            [ Barnhart Rd. ]                                                                                         [ Barnhart Rd. ]

                                          0




                    0                                        0




                                             0                                                               NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                       *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd.                        Barnhart Rd.              Fanshier Rd.                 Fanshier Rd.
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                         (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                       HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                                 TOTAL        TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                    Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U
      7:00 AM                0     0      0                       1     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 1
      7:15 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     1                                 1
      7:30 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0
      7:45 AM                0     0      0                       1     0    0             1     0     0                 0     0     0                                 2           4
      8:00 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0           3
      8:15 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0           2
      8:30 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     1                                 1           3
      8:45 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     1                                 1           2




  PEAK 15-MIN                        Northbound                         Southbound               Eastbound                      Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left     Thru Right U                Left    Thru Right U     Left   Thru Right U           Left    Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles                0           0           0           4       0    0            4         0   0               0           0          0                            8
 Heavy Trucks                0           0           0           0       0    0            0         0   0               0           0          0                            0
 Pedestrians                             0                               0                           0                               0                                       0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/28/2006                                                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd.--Fanshier Rd.                                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10178207
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                                   DATE: 7/13/2006

                                     0           0                                                                                        0.0             0.0
                                                                        Peak-Hour: 7:30 AM -- 8:30 AM
                                 0        0          0                                                                                   0.0        0.0    0.0


             0          0                                0       0                [ Fanshier Rd. ]                0.0          0.0                               0.0        0.0

                        0                0.25            0                                                                     0.0                               0.0

             1          1                                0       0                                                0.0          0.0                               0.0        0.0

                                 0        0          0                                                                                   0.0    0.0        0.0


                                     1           0                                                                                        0.0             0.0
                            [ Barnhart Rd. ]                                                                                         [ Barnhart Rd. ]

                                          0




                    0                                        0




                                             0                                                               NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                       *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd.                        Barnhart Rd.              Fanshier Rd.                 Fanshier Rd.
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                         (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                       HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                                 TOTAL        TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                    Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U
      7:00 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     1                 0     0     0                                 1
      7:15 AM                1     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 1
      7:30 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0
      7:45 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     1                 0     0     0                                 1           3
      8:00 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0           2
      8:15 AM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0           1
      8:30 AM                1     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 1           2
      8:45 AM                1     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 1           2




  PEAK 15-MIN                        Northbound                         Southbound               Eastbound                      Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left     Thru Right U                Left    Thru Right U     Left   Thru Right U           Left    Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles                0           0           0           0       0    0            0         0   4               0           0          0                            4
 Heavy Trucks                0           0           0           0       0    0            0         0   0               0           0          0                            0
 Pedestrians                             0                               0                           0                               0                                       0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/28/2006                                                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd.--Clark Lane                                                                                                                 QC JOB #: 10178204
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                                  DATE: 7/12/2006

                                     1           1                                                                                        0.0            100.0
                                                                          Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                 0        1          0                                                                                   0.0       0.0     0.0


             0          0                                 0        34               [ Clark Lane ]                0.0          0.0                               0.0         11.8

                        0                0.78             0                                                                    0.0                               0.0

             0          0                                 34       11                                             0.0          0.0                               11.8        36.4

                                 0        1       11                                                                                     0.0 100.0 36.4


                                   35            12                                                                                      11.4            41.7
                            [ Barnhart Rd. ]                                                                                         [ Barnhart Rd. ]

                                          0




                    0                                          0




                                             0                                                               NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                        *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd.                          Barnhart Rd.              Clark Lane                  Clark Lane
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                           (Southbound)             (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                         HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                                 TOTAL          TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                      Left Thru Right U       Left Thru Right U            Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                0     0      2                         0     0    0            0     0      0               3     0     0                                 5
      4:15 PM                0     0      3                         0     0    0            0     0      0               3     0     0                                 6
      4:30 PM                0     0      5                         0     1    0            0     0      0               3     0     0                                 9
      4:45 PM                0     0      1                         0     0    0            0     0      0               8     0     0                                 9            29
      5:00 PM                0     0      4                         0     1    0            0     0      0               10    0     0                                 15           39
      5:15 PM                0     1      2                         0     0    0            0     0      0               8     0     0                                 11           44
      5:30 PM                0     0      4                         0     0    0            0     0      0               8     0     0                                 12           47
      5:45 PM                0     0      2                         0     0    0            0     0      0               7     0     0                                 9            47




  PEAK 15-MIN                        Northbound                           Southbound              Eastbound                     Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left     Thru Right U                  Left    Thru Right U    Left   Thru Right U          Left    Thru Right U                                TOTAL

 All Vehicles                0           0           16            0       4    0           0        0   0              40           0         0                              60
 Heavy Trucks                0           0           8             0       0    0           0        0   0              0            0         0                              8
 Pedestrians                             0                                 0                         0                               0                                        0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/28/2006                                                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd--I-84 WB off ramps                                                                                                   QC JOB #: 10178101
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                          DATE: 7/12/2006

                                    41           16                                                                                       22.0   25.0
                                                                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                7        34          0                                                                                  28.6 20.6 0.0


            10          0                                 11       17             [ I-84 WB off ramps ]            40.0       0.0                        27.3        23.5

                        0                0.80             2                                                                   0.0                        50.0

             0          0                                 4        0                                                0.0       0.0                        0.0         0.0

                                1         5          0                                                                                  100.0 20.0 0.0


                                38               6                                                                                       18.4    33.3
                            [ Barnhart Rd ]                                                                                         [ Barnhart Rd ]

                                          0




                    0                                          0




                                             0                                                                NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd                            Barnhart Rd            I-84 WB off ramps             I-84 WB off ramps
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                           (Southbound)               (Eastbound)                   (Westbound)                            HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                         TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                      Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U
      2:15 PM                1     5     0                          0     2     1            0      0     0                2      1     4                      16           60
      2:30 PM                1     0     0                          0     4     0            0      0     0                1      3     1                      10           50
      2:45 PM                1     1     0                          0     8     1            0      0     0                2      0     4                      17           58
      3:00 PM                1     2     0                          0     3     1            0      0     0                3      0     3                      13           56
      3:15 PM                3     2     0                          0     4     0            0      0     0                3      3     1                      16           56
      3:30 PM                0     2     0                          0    13     0            0      0     0                3      1     0                      19           65
      3:45 PM                0     2     0                          0     4     2            0      0     0                0      2     2                      12           60
      4:00 PM                0     0     0                          0     1     0            0      0     0                0      0     4                      5            52
      4:15 PM                0     4     0                          0     5     2            0      0     0                1      1     5                      18           54
      4:30 PM                0     2     0                          0     5     2            0      0     0                1      0     5                      15           50
      4:45 PM                1     1     0                          0     9     1            0      0     0                1      0     2                      15           53
      5:00 PM                0     1     0                          0     6     1            0      0     0                0      0     1                      9            57
      5:15 PM                0     1     0                          0    11     2            0      0     0                2      2     2                      20           59
      5:30 PM                0     2     0                          0     8     3            0      0     0                1      0     6                      20           64
      5:45 PM                0     1     0                          0     2     3            0      0     0                0      1     1                      8            57
      6:00 PM                2     1     0                          0     7     4            0      0     0                3      0     3                      20           68
      6:15 PM                1     0     0                          0     5     5            0      0     0                2      1     2                      16           64
      6:30 PM                1     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      1     0                      2            46
      6:45 PM                0     0     0                          0     3     1            0      0     0                0      1     1                      6            44
      7:00 PM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                1      1     1                      3            27
      7:15 PM                1     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      1            12
      7:30 PM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                1      0     1                      2            12
      7:45 PM                0     1     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                2      0     2                      5            11
      8:00 PM                0     0     0                          0     0     0            0      0     0                0      0     0                      0            8
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                             Southbound                 Eastbound                     Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U                      Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U                         TOTAL

 All Vehicles               0            4            0            0     44   8              0     0      0               8         8        8                        80
 Heavy Trucks               0            0            0            0     8    4              0     0      0               0         4        0                        16
 Pedestrians                             0                               0                         0                                0                                 0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/28/2006                                                                                      SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                   Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd--I-84 EB Ramps                                                                                                      QC JOB #: 10178102
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                         DATE: 7/12/2006

                                    33           5                                                                                 12.1         0.0
                                                                       Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                0         5      28                                                                               0.0     20.0 10.7


             0          4                                 0       0              [ I-84 EB Ramps ]            0.0       0.0                            0.0         0.0

                        1                0.72             0                                                             0.0                            0.0

             7          2                                 0       34                                          0.0       0.0                            0.0         8.8

                                0         1          5                                                                            0.0     0.0    0.0


                                    7            6                                                                                 14.3         0.0
                            [ Barnhart Rd ]                                                                                   [ Barnhart Rd ]

                                          0




                    0                                         0




                                             0                                                           NORTH




                                                                                                                                                             *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd                           Barnhart Rd           I-84 EB Ramps              I-84 EB Ramps
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                          (Southbound)             (Eastbound)               (Westbound)                                 HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                       TOTAL         TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                     Left Thru Right U      Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U
      2:00 PM                0     1     0                         9     0     0          3      0     0             0      0     0                          13           44
      2:15 PM                0     2     0                         2     2     0          4      0     0             0      0     0                          10           45
      2:30 PM                0     1     4                         4     0     0          0      0     2             0      0     0                          11           43
      2:45 PM                0     1     2                         7     3     0          1      0     1             0      0     0                          15           49
      3:00 PM                0     2     0                         5     2     0          1      0     0             0      0     0                          10           46
      3:15 PM                0     1     0                         3     3     0          1      0     1             0      0     0                          9            45
      3:30 PM                0     3     3                         11    1     0          1      1     0             0      0     0                          20           54
      3:45 PM                0     1     2                         5     2     0          1      0     1             0      0     0                          12           51
      4:00 PM                0     0     3                         1     1     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                          5            46
      4:15 PM                0     0     5                         4     2     0          4      0     3             0      0     0                          18           55
      4:30 PM                0     1     2                         2     3     0          1      0     1             0      0     0                          10           45
      4:45 PM                0     1     3                         8     1     0          1      0     2             0      0     0                          16           49
      5:00 PM                0     0     2                         5     1     0          1      1     0             0      0     0                          10           54
      5:15 PM                0     0     0                         9     2     0          1      0     0             0      0     0                          12           48
      5:30 PM                0     0     0                         6     1     0          1      0     0             0      0     0                          8            46
      5:45 PM                0     0     0                         1     0     0          1      0     0             0      0     0                          2            32
      6:00 PM                0     2     0                         7     2     0          1      0     0             0      0     0                          12           34
      6:15 PM                0     0     1                         5     1     0          0      1     1             0      0     0                          9            31
      6:30 PM                0     1     1                         0     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                          2            25
      6:45 PM                0     0     0                         2     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                          2            25
      7:00 PM                0     0     0                         1     0     0          0      0     0             0      0     0                          1            14
      7:15 PM                0     1     1                         0     0     0          0      0     1             0      0     0                          3            8
      7:30 PM                0     0     0                         0     1     0          2      0     0             0      0     0                          3            9
      7:45 PM                0     1     0                         0     1     0          0      0     1             0      0     0                          3            10
  PEAK 15-MIN                    Northbound                            Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left Thru Right U                     Left Thru Right U      Left Thru Right U          Left Thru Right U                             TOTAL

 All Vehicles               0            4           12           32    4    0            4     0    8              0         0         0                           64
 Heavy Trucks               0            0           0            8     0    0            0     0    0              0         0         0                           8
 Pedestrians                             0                              0                       0                             0                                     0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/28/2006                                                                                SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                      Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd--Parking Lot                                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10178202
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                               DATE: 7/12/2006

                                     4           6                                                                                       25.0         0.0
                                                                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                 0        2          2                                                                                  0.0     50.0 0.0


             0          2                                2       2                [ Parking Lot ]                0.0          0.0                            0.0        0.0

                        0                0.83            0                                                                    0.0                            0.0

             2          0                                0       2                                               0.0          0.0                            0.0        0.0

                                 0        2          0                                                                                  0.0     0.0    0.0


                                     2           2                                                                                       50.0         0.0
                            [ Barnhart Rd ]                                                                                         [ Barnhart Rd ]

                                          0




                    0                                        0




                                             0                                                              NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                   *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd                          Barnhart Rd              Parking Lot                  Parking Lot
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                         (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                    HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                             TOTAL        TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                    Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U            Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                0     1     0                        0     0     0            0     0     0                0     0     3                              4
      4:15 PM                0     0     0                        0     0     0            0     0     0                0     0     2                              2
      4:30 PM                0     2     0                        1     1     1            2     0     0                0     0     1                              8
      4:45 PM                0     0     0                        0     0     0            1     0     0                0     0     0                              1           15
      5:00 PM                0     2     0                        0     0     0            1     0     0                0     0     0                              3           14
      5:15 PM                0     0     0                        1     2     0            0     0     0                0     0     0                              3           15
      5:30 PM                0     0     0                        1     0     0            0     0     0                0     0     2                              3           10
      5:45 PM                0     0     0                        1     0     0            1     0     0                0     0     1                              3           12




  PEAK 15-MIN                        Northbound                         Southbound               Eastbound                     Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left     Thru Right U                Left    Thru Right U     Left   Thru Right U          Left    Thru Right U                            TOTAL

 All Vehicles                0           8           0           0       0    0            4        0   0               0           0         0                          12
 Heavy Trucks                0           0           0           0       0    0            0        0   0               0           0         0                          0
 Pedestrians                             0                               0                          0                               0                                    0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/28/2006                                                                                   SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd.--Fanshier Rd.                                                                                                                QC JOB #: 10178206
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                                   DATE: 7/12/2006

                                     2           2                                                                                        0.0             0.0
                                                                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                 1        0          1                                                                                   0.0        0.0    0.0


             1          1                                1       1                [ Fanshier Rd. ]                0.0          0.0                               0.0        0.0

                        0                0.50            0                                                                     0.0                               0.0

             1          0                                0       1                                                0.0          0.0                               0.0        0.0

                                 0        0          0                                                                                   0.0    0.0        0.0


                                     0           0                                                                                        0.0             0.0
                            [ Barnhart Rd. ]                                                                                         [ Barnhart Rd. ]

                                          0




                    0                                        0




                                             0                                                               NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                       *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd.                        Barnhart Rd.              Fanshier Rd.                 Fanshier Rd.
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                         (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                       HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                                 TOTAL        TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                    Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0
      4:15 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0
      4:30 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    1             2     0     0                 0     0     0                                 3
      4:45 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0           3
      5:00 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             1     0     0                 0     0     1                                 2           5
      5:15 PM                0     0      0                       1     0    1             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 2           7
      5:30 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0           4
      5:45 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                 0           4




  PEAK 15-MIN                        Northbound                         Southbound               Eastbound                      Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left     Thru Right U                Left    Thru Right U     Left   Thru Right U           Left    Thru Right U                               TOTAL

 All Vehicles                0           0           0           0       0    0            4         0   0               0           0          4                            8
 Heavy Trucks                0           0           0           0       0    0            0         0   0               0           0          0                            0
 Pedestrians                             0                               0                           0                               0                                       0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/28/2006                                                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User Defined                                                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
  INTERSECTION: Barnhart Rd.--Fanshier Rd.                                                                                                               QC JOB #: 10178208
  WEATHER:                                                                                                                                                  DATE: 7/12/2006

                                     0           0                                                                                        0.0            0.0
                                                                        Peak-Hour: 4:45 PM -- 5:45 PM
                                 0        0          0                                                                                   0.0       0.0    0.0


             1          0                                0       0                [ Fanshier Rd. ]                0.0          0.0                              0.0        0.0

                        0                0.50            0                                                                     0.0                              0.0

             1          1                                0       0                                               100.0       100.0                              0.0        0.0

                                 1        0          0                                                                                   0.0     0.0      0.0


                                     1           1                                                                                       100.0           0.0
                            [ Barnhart Rd. ]                                                                                         [ Barnhart Rd. ]

                                          0




                    0                                        0




                                             0                                                               NORTH




                                                                                                                                                                      *SEE LEGEND SHEET

   5-MIN COUNT                   Barnhart Rd.                        Barnhart Rd.              Fanshier Rd.                 Fanshier Rd.
      PERIOD                    (Northbound)                         (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                  (Westbound)                                      HOURLY
                                                                                                                                                                TOTAL        TOTALS
  BEGINNING AT              Left Thru Right U                    Left Thru Right U        Left Thru Right U             Left Thru Right U
      4:00 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                0
      4:15 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                0
      4:30 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                0
      4:45 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                0
      5:00 PM                1     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                1           1
      5:15 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     1                 0     0     0                                1           2
      5:30 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                0           2
      5:45 PM                0     0      0                       0     0    0             0     0     0                 0     0     0                                0           2




  PEAK 15-MIN                        Northbound                         Southbound               Eastbound                      Westbound
  FLOW RATES                Left     Thru Right U                Left    Thru Right U     Left   Thru Right U           Left    Thru Right U                              TOTAL

 All Vehicles                4           0           0           0       0    0            0         0   0               0           0         0                            4
 Heavy Trucks                0           0           0           0       0    0            0         0   0               0           0         0                            0
 Pedestrians                             0                               0                           0                               0                                      0
 Bicycles
 Railroad
 Stopped Buses
  Counter Comments:


Report generated on 9/28/2006                                                                                    SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
