Walla Walla Police Department                                                                    Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                               Page 2


conditions  and  while  maintaining  safety  on  the  surrounding  transportation  system  provided  that 
minor  striping  modifications  are  made  upon  buildout  of  the  police  department  building.  No 
geometric  or  intersection  control  modifications  are  recommended  as  part  of  this  project.  The 
detailed study findings and recommendations are summarized as follows: 


FINDINGS


Year 2010 Existing Conditions

        All  study  intersections  currently  operate  at  acceptable  levels  of  service  during  the 
         weekday p.m. peak hour according to City of Walla Walla TIA Guidelines. 
        The  intersection  of  2nd  Avenue/Rose  Street  had  25  crashes  over  the  most  recent  five  year 
         period,  almost  half  of  which  were  rearend  collisions.  Exactly  half  of  the  crashes  at  the  2nd 
         Avenue/Main Street intersection were rearend collisions as well. 

Year 2011 & 2031 Background Traffic Conditions

        No  transportation  improvements  are  planned  on  the  system  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
         proposed police department building prior to the nearterm buildout year 2011 or prior to 
         the longterm horizon year 2031. 
        Based  on  discussions  with  City  staff  and  historical  ADT  values  in  the  area,  a  1.5percent 
         annual growth rate, was applied to existing traffic volumes to develop both year 2011 and 
         year 2031 background traffic volumes. 
        Future  traffic  from  the  Washington  State  Penitentiary  site,  not  already  inplace  on  the 
         transportation  system,  was  incorporated  into  the  year  2031  background  traffic  volumes 
         based  on  an  estimated  buildout  year  of  2015  for  the  final  phase  of  the  penitentiary 
         expansion. 
        Under  year  2011  background  traffic  conditions  (i.e.,  future  conditions  not  assuming  the 
         proposed  project  in  place),  all  study  intersections  are  forecast  to  operate  at  acceptable 
         levels of service during the weekday p.m. peak hour. 
        Under  year  2031  background  traffic  conditions  (i.e.,  future  conditions  not  assuming  the 
         proposed  project  in  place),  all  of  the  study  intersections  are  forecast  to  operate  at 
         acceptable levels of service during the weekday p.m. peak hour with one exception: 
             o    The  minorstreet  westbound  leftturn  movement  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue 
                  intersection  is  forecast  to  operate  at  a  levelofservice  "F,"  but  under  capacity 
                  during the weekday p.m. peak hour. 

Proposed Development Plan

        Based  on  the  trip  generation  characteristics  observed  at  a  similar  police  department 
         facility,  the  proposed  Walla  Walla  Police  Department  is  anticipated  to  generate  a  total  of 
         85 weekday p.m. peak hour trip ends (20 inbound trips, and 65 outbound trips). 
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                           Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                     Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                                Page 3


Year 2011 Total Traffic Conditions

        Under year 2011 total traffic conditions (i.e., future conditions with the proposed project in 
         place),  all  of  the  study  intersections  are  forecast  to  operate  at  acceptable  levels  of  service 
         during the weekday p.m. peak hour. 
             o    With  the  inclusion  of  the  police  department  building  traffic,  the  level  of  service  for 
                  the  minorstreet  westbound  leftturn  movement  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue 
                  intersection  changes  from  "D"  to  "E"  and  the  delay  for  this  movement  increases 
                  from  25  seconds  per  vehicle  under  year  2011  background  traffic  conditions  to  44 
                  seconds per vehicle under year 2011 total traffic conditions. 

Year 2031 Total Traffic Conditions

        Under year 2031 total traffic conditions (i.e., future conditions with the proposed project in 
         place),  all  of  the  study  intersections  are  forecast  to  operate  at  acceptable  levels  of  service 
         during the weekday p.m. peak hour with one exception: 
             o    As  under  year  2031  background  conditions,  the  minorstreet  westbound  leftturn 
                  movement  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  is  forecast  to  operate  at  a 
                  level  of  service  "F."  The  delay  for  this  movement  increases  from  76  seconds  per 
                  vehicle  under  year  2031  background  traffic  conditions  to  greater  than  100  seconds 
                  per vehicle under year 2031 total traffic conditions. 

95th Percentile Queuing Analysis

        At  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection,  the  westbound  95th  percentile  queue  is 
         expected  to  increase  by  approximately  30  feet  (approximately  one  vehicle  length)  due  to 
         traffic generated by the proposed police department development. 
        The northbound through movement at the Rose Street/2nd Avenue intersection is expected 
         to exceed the length of available storage under both year 2031 background and total traffic 
         conditions,  indicating  that  general  traffic  growth  in  the  longterm  could  result  in  queue 
         spillback  through  the  Main  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  Adjustments  to  signal  timings 
         and/or  lane  configurations  should  be  considered  in  the  future  at  the  Rose  Street/2nd 
         Avenue intersection in order to accommodate the general growth of traffic in the area. 

Evaluation of Potential Improvement Options

        Increases  in  delay  of  20  seconds  or  more  were  calculated  for  the  westbound  movement  at 
         the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  under  both  year  2011  and  year  2031  traffic 
         conditions, triggering the need for the evaluation of potential improvement options at this 
         intersection. 
        The  northbound  approach  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  was  evaluated 
         assuming the inside northbound through lane is modified to be a leftturn only lane while 
         the  right  lane  remains  as  a  through  plus  rightturn  lane.  Small  operational  improvements 
         are recognized under all traffic conditions scenarios assuming this modification is made. 
Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                            Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                   Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                              Page 4


        An  operational  evaluation  assuming  rerouting  of  the  City  of  Walla  Walla  Engineering  & 
         Maintenance Division facility employee and maintenance vehicle traffic onto Rees Avenue 
         was  conducted.  The  analysis  shows  that  the  critical  westbound  leftturn  movement  at  the 
         Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  improves  by  one  levelofservice  under  year  2011 
         background  traffic,  year  2011  total  traffic,  and  year  2031  background  traffic.  The  Moore 
         Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  is  still  forecast  to  operate  at  a  levelofservice  "F"  under 
         year  2031  total  traffic  conditions;  however,  this  improvement  is  sufficient  to  allow  the 
         critical movement to operate under capacity for the foreseeable future even with inclusion 
         of the Police Department traffic. 
        A preliminary signal warrant analysis at the Moore Street/2nd Avenue intersection showed 
         that none of the three volumebased signal warrants were met under year 2011 total traffic 
         conditions. 
        Under  year  2031  total  traffic  conditions,  only  the  peak  hour  signal  warrant  was  met  at  the 
         Moore Street/2nd Avenue intersection. 
        A  singlelane roundabout was also evaluated for the Moore Street/2nd Avenue intersection 
         under  year  2011  and  year  2031  total  traffic  conditions  and  is  forecast  to  operate  with  less 
         than 10 seconds of delay on all approaches and with volumetocapacity ratios of less than 
         0.50 for all approaches under both nearterm and longterm buildout conditions. 
        This  study  did  not  indicate  any  operational  need  for  converting  the  existing  crosssection 
         of  2nd  Avenue  (between  Oak  Street  and  Moore  Street)  to  three  lanes  with  bike  lanes,  but  it 
         also does not preclude the City from pursuing that option in the future if so desired.  

On-Site Circulation/Site Access Considerations

        A  95th  percentile  queue  length  of  approximately  100  ft  for  the  westbound  approach  at  the 
         Moore Street/2nd Avenue intersection is forecast under year 2031 total traffic conditions. 
        A  WB50  truck  turn  template  for  a  leftturn  into  and  rightturn  out  of  the  City  of  Walla 
         Walla  facility  main  access  on  the  north  side  of  Moore  Street  illustrates  that  neither  the 
         proposed  parallel  parking  configuration  nor  the  alternative  perpendicular  parking 
         configuration  on  Moore  Street  will  interfere  with  heavy  vehicle  traffic  into  and  out  of  this 
         access. 
        Pedestrian and bicyclist connectivity through the site was evaluated given that an existing 
         multiuse  pathway  connects  into  the  site  at  the  culdesac  at  the  east  end  of  Moore  Street. 
         Our  understanding  is  that  a  connection  of  this  multiuse  pathway  to  2nd  Avenue  is  being 
         discussed with the City. 
        The  City  has  expressed  concern  regarding  vehicles  mistakenly  turning  onto  Moore  Street 
         from 2nd Avenue assuming that Moore Street is an access ramp to US 12. 
Table  1 summarizes the operational analyses under all five traffic conditions scenarios during the 
weekday  p.m.  peak  hour,  and  also  displays  operational  analysis  results  for  the  different 
improvement options. 



Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                          Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                              Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                                         Page 5


        Table 1        Summary of Intersection Level of Service Analysis (Weekday PM Peak Hour)

                                                                      Traffic Conditions Scenarios2

                                  Traffic      Year 2010        Year 2011        Year 2011        Year 2031        Year 2031
        Intersection             Control1       Existing       Background          Total         Background          Total

                                   TWSC          B / 0.11         B / 0.11         B / 0.12         B / 0.14         B / 0.16
4th Avenue / Rees Avenue
                                  TWSC
                                                                  B / 0.12         B / 0.13         B / 0.17         B / 0.18
                                RE-ROUTE

                                   TWSC          B / 0.07         B / 0.07         B / 0.07         B / 0.09         B / 0.09
4th Avenue / Moore Street
                                  TWSC
                                                                  B / 0.07         B / 0.07         B / 0.09         B / 0.09
                                RE-ROUTE

                                   TWSC          C / 0.23         D / 0.25         E / 0.61         F / 0.66         F / >1.0

                                  TWSC
                                                                  C / 0.23         E / 0.55         F / 0.56         F / >1.0
                                NBLT LANE

2nd Avenue / Moore Street         TWSC
                                                                  C / 0.08         D / 0.44         E / 0.21         F / 0.94
                                RE-ROUTE

                                  SIGNAL                                           A / 0.36         A / 0.40         A / 0.47

                                 SL RDBT                                           A / 0.34         A / 0.45         A / 0.48

2nd Avenue / US 12 EB              TWSC          B / 0.21         B / 0.22         B / 0.25         C / 0.43         D / 0.49
Ramps

2nd Avenue / Pine Street          SIGNAL         A / 0.31         B / 0.32         B / 0.33         B / 0.43         B / 0.44

2nd Avenue / Rose Street          SIGNAL         C / 0.59         C / 0.57         C / 0.57         C / 0.84         C / 0.87

2nd Avenue / Main Street          SIGNAL         B / 0.43         B / 0.44         B / 0.46         B / 0.61         B / 0.63
1
  TWSC = Two-Way, Stop-Controlled
  TWSC RE-ROUTE = Two-Way, Stop-Controlled with City facility traffic re-routed to Rees Ave
  TWSC NBLT LANE = Two-Way, Stop-Controlled with a separate northbound left-turn lane and one through plus right-turn lane.
  SIGNAL = Traffic Signal
  SL RDBT = Single-Lane Roundabout
2
  Level of Service / Volume-to-Capacity Ratio (For TWSC, V/C Ratio is reported for the critical movement)




RECOMMENDATIONS


General

         It  is  recommended  that  the  City  explore  options  for  using  the  existing  gated  access  onto 
          Rees  Avenue  as  the  primary  entrance  into  the  City  facility  for  employee  and  maintenance 
          vehicle  traffic  in  order  to  alleviate  some  of  the  westbound  leftturning  traffic  at  the  Moore 
          Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  It  is  recommended  that  a  card  or  pinactivated  automatic 
          gate  be  installed  at  the  City  facility's  access  to  Rees  Avenue  to  allow  for  easier  access  for 
          employees, yet still provide security for the facility. It is also recommended that this access 
          be improved from the existing gravel surface to an asphalt surface. A specific cost estimate 
          for  purchase  and  installation  of  an  automatic  gate  could  not  be  obtained;  therefore,  we 
          assumed a conservative cost of $5,000 for this specific improvement. The estimated cost of 
          making all of these improvements, based on a planninglevel assessment, is $20,000. These 
          improvements,  and  their  associated  costs,  are  not  attributable  to  the  police  department 
          development. 

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                      Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                 Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                            Page 6


        With  the  exception  of  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue,  no  project  specific  mitigations  are 
         warranted at any other study intersection. 
        The  City  may  want  to  investigate  lowcost  mitigation  treatments  at  the  2nd  Avenue/Rose 
         Street  intersection  and  the  2nd  Avenue/Main  Street  intersection  to  attempt  to  reduce  the 
         number  of  rearend  crashes  at  these  intersections.  Examples  of  such  type  treatments 
         include  implementing/refining  dilemma  zone  detection  zones  or  adjusting  yellow  change 
         interval times. 
        A connection should be provided either along the south side of Moore Street or a crossing 
         of  Moore  Street  be  striped  near  the  terminus  of  the  path  in  the  culdesac  to  connect  the 
         pedestrians  to  the  existing  sidewalk  on  the  north  side  of  Moore  Street.  This  improvement 
         should be made by the police department development. 

Moore Street/2nd Avenue

        No  intersection  control  mitigation  is  recommended  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue 
         intersection  with  buildout  of  the  proposed  police  department  site,  but  the  operational 
         performance  of  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  should  be  monitored  in  the 
         future  and  signal  warrants  and/or  other  mitigations  should  be  revisited  at  a  later  time  if 
         deemed necessary. 
        A  separate  leftturn  lane,  approximately  100  feet  in  length,  should  be  striped  for  the 
         westbound movement at Moore Street/2nd Avenue. Given the nearly 50foot existing width 
         of  Moore  Street  at  its  intersection  with  2nd  Avenue,  the  striping  can  be  implemented 
         without any physical modifications to Moore Street. 
        Provide  enhanced  identification  of  the  BNSF  railroad  crossing  approximately  75  feet  east 
         of  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  One  example  is  to  place  stop  bar  striping 
         prior  to  and  following  the  railroad  tracks,  with  a  "Do  Not  Block  Tracks"  sign  installed 
         upstream of the tracks on westbound Moore Street. 
        The  estimated  cost  of  making  the  above  signing  &  striping  improvements  is 
         approximately  $2,500.  These  improvements,  and  their  associated  costs,  are  attributable  to 
         the police department development. 
        It  is  recommended  that  the  City  restripe  the  inside  northbound  through  plus  leftturn 
         lane  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  to  be  a  leftturn  only  lane  while 
         maintaining  the  outside  northbound  lane  as  a  through  plus  rightturn  lane.  Signing 
         should  also  be  installed  on  this  approach  warning  drivers  that  the  inside  lane  becomes  a 
         leftturn  only  lane  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  The  estimated  cost  of 
         making  this  signing  and  striping  improvement  is  approximately  $1,000.  This 
         improvement,  and  the  associated  cost,  is  not  attributable  to  the  police  department 
         development. 
        It is recommended that the City explore options for providing signage for northbound and 
         southbound  traffic  on  2nd  Avenue  in  the  vicinity  of  Moore  Street  that  would  clarify  that 
         Moore  Street  does  not  provide  access  to  US  12.  The  estimated  cost  of  making  this  signing 


Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                         Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                    Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                               Page 7


         improvement  is  approximately  $500.  This  improvement,  and  the  associated  cost,  is  not 
         attributable to the police department development. 


Introduction

PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The  City  of  Walla  Walla  has  proposed  to  relocate  the  Police  Department  facility  from  its  current 
location  within  the  Walla  Walla  City  Hall  (corner  of  the  3rd  Street/Main  Street  intersection)  to  an 
approximate  2acre  vacant  lot  on  the  southeast  corner  of  the  US  12  WB  Ramps/Moore  Street/2nd 
Avenue  intersection  (from  here  on  referred  to  as  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection).  The 
new  police  department  building  is  proposed  to  be  constructed  as  a  singlestory  building, 
approximately  30,325  squarefeet  in  size,  with  approximately  100  parking  stalls  both  around  the 
building and on Moore Street.  

Our  understanding  is  that  Moore  Street  is  proposed  to  be  vacated  along  the  police  department 
property,  but  an  approximate  200foot  section  of  Moore  Street  from  its  intersection  with  2nd 
Avenue to the west police department property line will remain as a public street. The zoning for 
the  vacant  lot  is  Highway  Commercial  (CH)  according  to  the  2008  Walla  Walla  Urban  Area 
Comprehensive  Plan  and  the  assumed  buildout  year  for  the  development  is  year  2011.  Access  to 
the  site  is  proposed  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection,  with  access  to  parking  being  via 
a  front  entrance  access  on  the  west  end  of  the  site  (adjacent  to  the  City  of  Walla  Walla  facility's 
west access) and one gated, service access on the east end of the site, approximately 25 feet east of 
the  existing  City  of  Walla  Walla  facility's  east  access.  Figure  1  illustrates  the  site  location  and 
surrounding vicinity. Figure 2 provides the latest site plan for the project. 


SCOPE OF THE REPORT

This  analysis  determined  the  transportationrelated  impacts  associated  with  the  proposed  Walla 
Walla  Police  Department  and  was  prepared  in  accordance  with  the  City  of  Walla  Walla 
Transportation  Impact  Analysis  (TIA)  Guidelines  (Reference  1)  and  in  collaboration  with  the 
Washington  State  Department  of  Transportation  (WSDOT)  South  Central  Region  Office.  The 
scope  of  this  project  and  all  key  assumptions  were  documented  in  the  January  13,  2010 
memorandum  provided  to  City  of  Walla  Walla  staff  (Reference  2).  Additionally,  several  follow
up  phone  conversations  and  emails  occurred  in  January  and  February  2010  with  both  City  and 
WSDOT  staff  to  confirm  additional  assumptions  and  provide  preliminary  results  and 
recommendations. 




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                            Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                    Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                              Page 10


The TIS evaluates the operation and safety of the following study intersections and roadways: 

             US 12 EB Ramps / 2nd Avenue                               4th Avenue / Rees Avenue 
             Moore Street / 2nd Avenue                                 2nd Avenue / Rose Street 
             4th Avenue / Moore Street                                 2nd Avenue / Main Street 
             2nd Avenue / Pine Street 
This memorandum evaluates these transportation issues: 

           Year  2010  existing  landuse  and  transportationsystem  conditions  within  the  site  vicinity 
            during the weekday p.m. peak period; 
           A  review  and  summary  of  the  past  five  years  of  crash  data  at  the  study  intersections  and 
            on 2nd Avenue between the US 12 ramp terminals; 
           Approved  and  planned  developments  and  transportation  improvements  in  the  study 
            area; 
           Year  2011  background  traffic  conditions  (future  conditions  without  the  proposed  Walla 
            Walla Police Department in place) during the weekday p.m. peak period; 
           Trip  generation  and  distribution  estimates  for  the  proposed  Walla  Walla  Police 
            Department; 
           Buildout  year  2011  total  traffic  conditions  (future  conditions  with  the  Walla  Walla  Police 
            Department) during the weekday p.m. peak period; 
           Horizon  year  2031  background  traffic  conditions  (future  conditions  without  the  proposed 
            Walla Walla Police Department in place) during the weekday p.m. peak period; 
           Horizon  year  2031  total  traffic  conditions  (future  conditions  with  the  Walla  Walla  Police 
            Department in place) during the weekday p.m. peak period; 
           Analysis of queuing and signal warrants at the Moore Street/2nd Avenue intersection; 
           A  qualitative  assessment  of  the  onsite  circulation,  the  parking  layout,  conflicts  with  the 
            existing BNSF rail line, and pedestrian and bicycle facilities within the site. 


Existing Conditions
The  existing  conditions  analysis  identifies  the  site  conditions  and  current  operational  and 
geometric  characteristics  of  the  roadways  within  the  study  area.  These  conditions  will  be 
compared with future conditions later in this report.  

Kittelson  &  Associates,  Inc.  (KAI)  staff  visited  and  inventoried  the  proposed  Walla  Walla  Police 
Department  site  and  surrounding  study  area  in  February  2010.  At  that  time,  KAI  collected 
information  regarding  site  conditions,  adjacent  land  uses,  existing  traffic  operations,  and 
transportation facilities in the study area. 



Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                            Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                           Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                                     Page 11


SITE CONDITIONS AND ADJACENT LAND USES

The  subject  site  consists  of  an  approximate  2acre  parcel  of  vacant  land  and  is  located  within  the 
Walla  Walla  city  limits.  The  site  is  currently  zoned  as  Highway  Commercial  (CH)  (Reference  3). 
Adjacent land uses include the City of Walla Walla Engineering & Maintenance Division facilities 
north of the site and primarily industrial uses farther north of the site. Residential neighborhoods 
surround  the  site  on  the  west,  east,  and  south  sides  and  the  US  12/2nd  Avenue  interchange  is 
located immediately southwest of the site. 

TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES

Table  2  identifies  the  existing  transportation  facilities  and  roadway  characteristics  in  the  site 
vicinity. 

                Table 2         Existing Transportation Facilities and Roadway Characteristics

                            Functional           Cross        Posted Speed                           Bicycle      On-Street
     Roadway               Classification       Section          (mph)              Sidewalks        Lanes         Parking

    4th Avenue              Minor Arterial       2 lanes             30                  No            No            Yes1

    2nd Avenue             Principal Arterial   2-4 lanes2         25-303               Yes           Yes4            No

    Rees Avenue             Minor Arterial       2 lanes             30                  No            No             No

    Moore Street           Local Roadway         2 lanes             NP                 Yes5           No            Yes6

     Pine Street            Minor Arterial       2 lanes             30                 Yes            No             No
                                                                          7
    Rose Street            Principal Arterial    2 lanes           25-30                Yes            No            Yes8

    Main Street             Minor Arterial       2 lanes             20                 Yes            No             Yes
1                     th
  On-street parking on 4 Avenue north of Rees Avenue.
2
  Two lanes on 2nd Avenue north of Moore Street/US 12 WB Ramps; four lanes from Moore Street/US 12 WB Ramps through Pine
Street; and three lanes south of Pine Street.
3
  Posted speed on 2nd Avenue is 25 mph south of Pine Street and 30 mph north of Pine Street.
4
  Bicycle lanes on 2nd Avenue south of Pine Street.
5
  Sidewalk only on north side of Moore Street east of 2nd Avenue.
6
  On-street parking on Moore Street west of 4th Avenue.
7
  Posted speed on Rose Street is 30 mph west of 2nd Avenue and 25 mph east of 2nd Avenue.
8
  On-street parking on the south side of Rose Street east of 2nd Avenue.


Roadway Facilities

As  indicated  in  Figure  2,  the  proposed  Walla  Walla  Police  Department  is  directly  adjacent  to 
Moore Street and 2nd Avenue, and near US 12, a WSDOT owned limitedaccess roadway. Figure 3 
illustrates the existing lane configurations and traffic control devices at the study intersections. 

Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities

In  addition  to  the  sidewalks  and  bicycle  lanes  on  the  roadway  facilities  outlined  in  Table  2,  a 
multiuse  path  exists  within  the  study  area.  The  path  runs  parallel  to  US  12  east  of  the  site  and 
connects  to  the  culdesac  at  the  east  end  of  Moore  Street.  The  path  continues  adjacent  to  US  12 
west  of  2nd  Avenue.  An  incomplete  connection  for  pedestrians  between  the  two  parts  of  the  path 
is  currently  provided  by  a  sidewalk  on  the  north  side  of  Moore  Street  east  of  2nd  Avenue.  Users 
can then access the path west of 2nd Avenue from various residential streets south of Moore Street. 


Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                   Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                      Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                                Page 13




Transit and Railroad Facilities

Local  transit  service  is  provided  in  the  area  by  Valley  Transit.  Route  9  operates  along  2nd  Avenue 
to  Pine  Street  in  the  study  area  then  travels  on  9th  Street  to  Moore  Street.  The  route  continues 
along  Moore  Street  to  4th  Avenue  near  the  proposed  site  and  then  to  Rees  Avenue  before 
completing a loop to the west of the study area. Route 3 operates along 2nd Avenue south of Main 
Street, serving the Walla Walla General Hospital and Walla Walla High School to the south of the 
study area (Reference 4). 

In  addition,  the  BNSF  Railroad  operates  very  infrequent  one  to  five  car  rail  trips  on  the  existing 
railroad  line  running  parallel  to  2nd  Avenue.  The  rail  line  crosses  Moore  Street  at  a  point 
approximately 75 feet west of the Moore Street/2nd Avenue intersection. 


TRAFFIC VOLUMES AND PEAK HOUR OPERATIONS

In  February  2010,  turning  movement  counts  were  conducted  during  a  midweek  day  p.m.  peak 
period  (4:00  p.m.  to  6:00  p.m.,  with  the  exception  of  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection 
which  was  counted  from  3:00  p.m.  to  6:00  p.m.)  at  all  study  intersections.  The  systemwide  peak 
hour  occurred  from  4:10  p.m.  to  5:10  p.m.  and  the  existing  conditions  analysis  reflects  traffic 
operations  during  this  peak  hour  at  all  of  the  study  intersections  except  the  Moore  Street/2nd 
Avenue  intersection,  where  the  peak  hour  occurred  from  3:40  p.m.  to  4:40  p.m.  Figure  4  provides 
a  summary  of  the  year  2010  weekday  p.m.  peak  hour  turningmovement  counts,  which  are 
rounded to the nearest five vehicles per hour. Attachment "A" contains the year 2010 traffic counts. 


Current Levels of Service

All  level  of  service  analyses  described  in  this  report  were  performed  in  accordance  with  the 
procedures stated in the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual (Reference 5). A description of level of service 
and  the  criteria  by  which  they  are  determined  is  presented  in  Attachment  "B".  This  appendix  also 
indicates  how  level  of  service  is  measured  and  what  is  generally  considered  the  acceptable  range 
of  level  of  service.  Intersection  level  of  service  (LOS)  is  analogous  to  the  letter  grades  in  a  school 
report  card.  Motorists  using  an  intersection  that  operates  at  LOS  "A"  experience  very  little  delay, 
while  those  using  an  intersection  that  operates  at  LOS  "F"  will  experience  what  most  consider  to 
be unacceptable delays. 

The  City  of  Walla  Walla  has  adopted  levelofservice  standards  for  signalized  and  unsignalized 
intersections.  The  City  of  Walla  Walla TIA Guidelines state, "An overall intersection LOS `D' will be 
considered acceptable for all signalized intersections and for all critical movements of an arterial or collector 
unsignalized intersection." (Reference 1) 




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                              Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                                          Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                                                    Page 15


The  City  of  Walla  Walla  TIA  Guidelines  also  state,  "An  LOS  E  will  be  acceptable  for  all  critical 
movements  at  local  roadways.  In  addition,  no  existing  intersection  or  critical  movement  should  worsen  by 
more  than  two  levels  of  service...If  an  existing  or  nobuild  condition  intersection  or  critical  movement  is 
operating  at  an  acceptable  or  less  than  acceptable  LOS  than  any  proposed  additional  traffic  must  not 
increase  the  delay  by  more  than  10  seconds"  (Reference  1).  For  2nd  Avenue  through  movements 
(excluding the CBD) the guidelines state, "an LOS "C" will be considered acceptable" (Reference 1). 

All intersection levelofservice evaluations used the peak 15minute flow rate. Using the peak 15
minute  flow  rate  ensures  that  this  analysis  is  based  on  a  worstcase  scenario.  For  this  reason,  the 
analysis  reflects  conditions  that  are  only  likely  to  occur  for  15  minutes  out  of  each  average  peak 
hour.  During  all  other  times  periods  the  transportation  system  will  likely  operate  under 
conditions better than those described in this report. 

Figure  4  illustrates  the  2010  existing  conditions  level  of  service  analysis  during  the  weekday  p.m. 
peak  hour  at  the  study  intersections.  All  study  intersections  and  all  2nd  Avenue  through 
movements  currently  operate  under  capacity  and  at  acceptable  levels  of  service  during  the 
weekday  p.m.  peak  hour  according  to  City  of  Walla  Walla  TIA  Guidelines.  Attachment  "C" 
includes the levelofservice worksheets for year 2010 existing traffic conditions. 


TRAFFIC SAFETY

The  crash  history  at  the  study  intersections  was  reviewed  to  identify  potential  safety  issues. 
WSDOT  provided  crash  records  at  the  study  intersections  and  along  2nd  Avenue  between  the  US 
12  ramp  terminals  for  the  most recent fiveyear period, from the year 2004 through the year 2008. 
Table 3 summarizes the crash data at each of the study intersections during this period. 

                          Table 3    Study Intersections Crash Summary (2004-2008)

                                                                     Crash Type                                      Severity
                                                                                    Pedestrian/
                                                               Rear-End


                                                                          Turning




                                                                                                          Fatality
                                                                                      Bicycle




                                                                                                                        Injury
                                                       Angle




                                                                                                  Other




                                                                                                                                 PDO1

                                                                                                                                        Total

                      Intersection

4th Avenue / Rees Avenue                                0       0          0           0          0        0             0        0      0

4th Avenue / Moore Street                              0        1          0           0          2        0             1        2      3
    nd
2        Avenue / US 12 WB Ramps / Moore Street         0       1          0           0           0       0             1        0      1
    nd
2        Avenue / US 12 EB Ramps                       1        4          0           0          0        0             2        3      5

2nd Avenue / Pine Street                               0        3          0           0          0        0             0        3      3
    nd
2        Avenue / Rose Street                          4       12          4           2          3        0             6       19      25
    nd
2        Avenue / Main Street                          2        7          3           1          1        0             6        8      14
1
    PDO = Property Damage Only

As  shown  in  Table  3,  a  relatively  small  amount  of  crashes  occurred  at  the  study  intersections 
along 2nd Avenue from Rees Avenue to Pine Street. The intersection of 2nd Avenue/Rose Street had 
the  most  crashes,  due  in  large  part  to  this  intersection  having  the  highest  total  entering  volume. 

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                                     Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                          Page 16


Almost half of the crashes at this intersection were rearend collisions, and nine of the 12 rearend 
crashes  occurred  on  Rose  Street.  Half  of  the  crashes  at  2nd  Avenue/Main  Street  were  rearend 
collisions  as  well,  with  these  crashes  being  fairly  evenly  distributed  across  all  approaches.  The 
City  may  want  to  investigate  lowcost  mitigation  treatments  to  attempt  to  reduce  the  number  of 
rearend  crashes  at  these  intersections.  Examples  of  such  type  treatments  include 
implementing/refining  dilemma  zone  detection  zones  or  adjusting  yellow  change  interval  times. 
As  most  of  the  rearend  collisions at the 2nd Avenue/Rose Street intersection occurred on the Rose 
Street  approaches,  the  City  could  focus  improvement  efforts  on  those  approaches.  No  crashes 
occurred  within  the  past  five  years  on  the  segment  of  2nd  Avenue  between  the  US  12  ramp 
terminals. Attachment "D" provides the crash data sheets. 


Transportation Impact Analysis
The  transportation  impact  analysis  identifies  how  the  study  area's  transportation  system  will 
operate  in  the  assumed  development  buildout  year  2011  and  also  the  longterm  horizon  year 
2031.  The  impact  of  the  traffic  generated  by  the  proposed  Walla  Walla  Police  Department  during 
a typical weekday p.m. peak hour was examined as follows: 

        Inprocess  developments  (Washington  State  Penitentiary)  and  planned  transportation 
         improvements  in  the  site  vicinity  were  identified  and  a  1.5percent  annual  growth  rate 
         was assumed for developing year 2011 and year 2031 background traffic volumes. 
        Year  2011  background  traffic  conditions  (future  conditions  without  the  proposed 
         development)  were  analyzed  at  each  of  the  study  intersections  during  the  weekday  p.m. 
         peak hour. 
        Sitegenerated  trips  were  estimated  for  buildout  of  the  proposed  police  department 
         building. 
        Sitegenerated trips were distributed and assigned to the transportation network. 
        Year  2011 total traffic conditions (future conditions with the proposed development) were 
         analyzed at each of the study intersections during the weekday p.m. peak hour. 
        Year  2031  background  traffic  conditions  (future  conditions  without  the  proposed 
         development)  were  analyzed  at  each  of  the  study  intersections  during  the  weekday  p.m. 
         peak hour. 
        Year  2031 total traffic conditions (future conditions with the proposed development) were 
         analyzed at each of the study intersections during the weekday p.m. peak hour. 
        Queuing  and  signal  warrants  were  analyzed  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection 
         as appropriate. 
        An  onsite  evaluation  of  access,  circulation,  parking,  and  pedestrian  and  bicycle  facilities 
         was performed. 




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                       Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                  Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                            Page 17


YEAR 2011 BACKGROUND TRAFFIC CONDITIONS

The  year  2011  background  traffic  analysis  identifies  how  the  study  area's  transportation  system 
will operate in the future year without the proposed Walla Walla Police Department in place. The 
purpose  of  this  analysis  is  to  provide  a  baseline  for  comparison  in  evaluating  project  specific 
impacts.  This  analysis  includes  traffic  attributed  to  other  planned  developments  within  the  study 
area  and  from  general  growth  in  the  region,  but  does  not  include  traffic  from  the  proposed 
development  itself.  Because  no  planned  transportation  improvements  in  the  study  area  were 
identified,  the  year  2011  background  traffic  conditions  lane  configurations  and  traffic  control 
devices  are  assumed  to  be  identical  to  those  in  the  year  2010  as  shown  for  existing  conditions  in 
Figure 3. 


Planned Transportation System Improvements & Future Traffic Volumes

The  Walla  Walla/College  Place  Traffic  Circulation  Study  performed  by  the  BentonFranklin 
Council  of  Governments  (BFCOG)  was  reviewed  to  identify  any  proposed  transportationsystem 
improvements  in  the  nearterm  or  longterm.  None  were  identified  in  the  plan  for  the  study  area 
or  in  discussions  with  City  staff.  WSDOT  staff  were  also  consulted  and  no  programmed 
improvements are identified in the future at the US 12/2nd Avenue interchange. 

Based  on  discussions  with  City  staff,  the  only  ongoing  inprocess  development  affecting  the 
study  area  is  the  expansion  of  the  Washington  State  Penitentiary  site,  northwest  of  the  proposed 
Walla  Walla  Police  Department.  The  TIA  from  this  development  was  reviewed  and  future  traffic 
not already inplace on the system was incorporated in the horizon year (year 2031) analysis only, 
as buildout for the final phase of this development is forecast for the year 2015. 

Year  2011  background  traffic  volumes  were  developed  by  applying  a  1.5percent  growth  rate  to 
all  turning  movement  volumes  at  all  study  intersections  shown  in  Figure  4.  A  1.5percent  growth 
rate for this area of Walla Walla was decided on through discussion with City staff. This rate was 
verified  as  appropriate  based  on  historical  average  daily  traffic  (ADT)  volumes  from  the  Walla 
Walla  County  traffic  count  database.  Figure  5  illustrates  the  year  2011  background  conditions 
weekday p.m. peak hour traffic volumes. 


Intersection Level-of-Service Analysis

The  weekday  p.m.  peakhour  turningmovement  volumes  shown  in  Figure  5  were  used  to 
conduct an operational analysis at each study intersection to determine the year 2011 background 
traffic  conditions  levels  of  service.  As  indicated  in  Figure  5,  the  2011  background  traffic  analysis 
determined  that  all  of  the  study  intersections  are  forecast  to  operate  under  capacity  and  at 
acceptable  levels  of  service  during  the  weekday  p.m.  peak  hour.  Attachment  "E"  provides  the  year 
2011 background traffic conditions level of service worksheets. The worksheets provided in Attachment 
"E"  illustrate  that  all  2nd  Avenue  through  movements  will  also  operate  at  acceptable  levels  of 
service under year 2011 background traffic conditions. 



Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                         Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                  Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                            Page 19




PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT PLAN

The  City  of  Walla  Walla  has  proposed  to  relocate  the  Police  Department  facility  from  its  current 
location  within  the  Walla  Walla  City  Hall  (corner  of  the  3rd  Street/Main  Street  intersection)  to  an 
approximate 2acre vacant lot on the southeast corner of the Moore Street/2nd Avenue intersection. 
The  new  police  department  is  proposed  to  be  constructed  as  a  singlestory  building, 
approximately  30,325  squarefeet  in  size,  with  approximately  100  parking  stalls  around  the 
building  and  on  Moore  Street.  Figure  2  provides  an  illustration  of  the  current  development  site 
plan. 

Our  understanding  is  that  Moore  Street  is  proposed  to  be  vacated  along  the  police  department 
property,  but  an  approximate  200foot  section  of  Moore  Street  from  its  intersection  with  2nd 
Avenue  to  the  police  department  property  line  will  remain  as  a  public  street.  The  access  to  the 
visitor  and  front  area  parking  lot  is  proposed  as  a  full  movement  access  to  be  located 
approximately  225feet  east  of  the  2nd  Avenue/Moore  Street  intersection  on  the vacated portion of 
Moore  Street.  This  access  is  proposed  to  be  located  adjacent  to  the  westernmost  existing  City  of 
Walla Walla facility access on the north side of Moore Street.  

A  service  access  with  a  security  gate  is  proposed  to  be  located  approximately  775feet  east  of  the 
2nd  Avenue/Moore  Street  intersection  on  the  vacated  portion  of  Moore  Street.  This  access  is 
proposed  to  be  offset  approximately  25  feet  east  of  the  existing  City  of  Walla  Walla  facility  main 
access on the north side of Moore Street. 


Trip Generation

The  Trip  Generation  Manual  published  by  the  Institute  of  Transportation  Engineers  (ITE)  does  not 
provide  trip  generation  characteristics  for  police  department  buildings  or  any  type  of  similar 
facility.  The  existing  police  department  in  Walla  Walla  is  located  within  the  City  Hall  building; 
therefore,  it  is  difficult  to  isolate  the  number  of  trips  the  existing  police  department  generates. 
After  discussions  with  City  staff,  KAI  conducted  a  trip  generation  study  at  an  existing  police 
station  in  Meridian,  Idaho,  which  is  of  similar  size  and  character  and  serves  a  community  of 
similar size, to the proposed police department building in Walla Walla. 

Data  was  collected  at  the  Meridian  Police  Station  during  the  weekday  p.m.  peak  period  in 
December 2009. A trip rate of 2.73 trips per 1,000 squarefeet was derived from this data and used 
to  calculate  the  estimated  weekday  p.m.  peak  hour  trip  ends for the proposed Walla Walla Police 
Department  development.  Also,  the  data  showed  a  directional  split  of  approximately  25percent 
inbound and 75percent outbound trips during the weekday p.m. peak hour. Table 4 summarizes 
the  estimated  site  trip  generation  for  the  proposed  Walla  Walla  Police  Department  during  a 
typical  weekday  p.m.  peak  hour.  Attachment  "F"  provides  the  Meridian  Police  Station  trip  generation 
worksheet. 




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                         Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                 Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                           Page 20


                                 Table 4      Estimated Trip Generation

                                                           Weekday PM Peak Hour Trips
                                       Size (Sq.      Trip Rate (per
                      Land Use            Ft.)        1,000 sq. ft.)       In      Out     Total

                 Police Department       30,325             2.73           20      65       85

 
Table 4 shows that the proposed police department development is anticipated to generate a total 
of 85 weekday p.m. peak hour trip ends (20 inbound trips, and 65 outbound trips). 


Site Trip Distribution/Trip Assignment

The  distribution  of  sitegenerated  trips  through  the  study  intersections  was  developed  based  on 
discussions  with  City  staff,  transportation  analysis  zone  land  use  forecasts  contained  in  the 
BFCOG  Walla  Walla/College  Place  Traffic  Circulation  Study,  and  distribution  analysis  shown  in 
the Washington State Penitentiary expansion traffic study. Figure 6 provides an illustration of the 
assumed trip distribution pattern. 

The  estimated  sitegenerated  trips  were  then  assigned  to  the  transportation  network  by 
distributing  the  trips  shown  in  Table  4  according  to  the  trip  distribution  pattern  shown  in  Figure 
6.  Figure  7  illustrates  the  resultant  weekday  p.m.  peak  hour  sitegenerated  trips  at  the  study 
intersections. 


YEAR 2011 TOTAL TRAFFIC CONDTIONS

The  year  2011  total  traffic  conditions  analysis  forecasts  how  the  study  area's  transportation 
system  will  operate  in  the  future  buildout  year  with  the  inclusion  traffic  generated  by  the 
proposed  Walla  Walla  Police  Department.  As  under  year  2011  background  traffic  conditions,  the 
year  2011  total  traffic  conditions  lane  configurations  and  traffic control devices are assumed to be 
identical  to  those  in  the  year  2010  existing  conditions  as  shown  in  Figure  3.  The  year  2011 
background  traffic  volumes  for  the  weekday  p.m.  peak  hour  (shown  in  Figure  5)  were  added  to 
the  sitegenerated  traffic  volumes,  shown  in  Figure  7,  to  arrive  at  the  year  2011  total  traffic 
volumes shown in Figure 8. 




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                         Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                   Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                             Page 24




Intersection Level of Service Analysis

The  weekday  p.m.  peakhour  turningmovement  volumes  shown  in  Figure  8  were  used  to 
conduct  an  operational  analysis  at  each  study  intersection  to  determine  the  year  2011  total  traffic 
levels of service. As indicated in Figure 8, the total traffic analysis determined that all of the study 
intersections  are  forecast  to  operate  under  capacity  and  at  acceptable  levels  of  service  during  the 
weekday p.m. peak hour. The minorstreet westbound leftturn movement at the Moore Street/2nd 
Avenue  intersection  is  forecast  to  operate  at  a  levelofservice  "E"  and  the  delay  for  this 
movement  increases  from  25  seconds  per  vehicle  under  year  2011  background  traffic  conditions 
to  44  seconds  per  vehicle  under  year  2011  total  traffic  conditions.  Attachment  "G"  provides  the  year 
2011  total  traffic  conditions  levelofservice  worksheets.  The  worksheets  provided  in  Attachment  "G" 
illustrate  that  all  2nd  Avenue  through  movements  will  also  operate  at  acceptable  levels  of  service 
under year 2011 total traffic conditions. 


YEAR 2031 BACKGROUND TRAFFIC CONDITIONS

The  year  2031  background  traffic  analysis  identifies  how  the  study  area's  transportation  system 
will  operate  in  the  longterm  future  without  traffic from the specific proposed Walla Walla Police 
Department development. This analysis includes traffic attributed to other planned developments 
within the study area and from general growth in the region, but does not include traffic from the 
proposed  development.  The  year  2031  background  traffic  conditions  lane  configurations  and 
traffic control devices are assumed to be identical to the year 2010 existing conditions as shown in 
Figure  3  as  there  were  no  identified  planned  transportation  system  improvements  in  the  site 
vicinity. 


Planned Transportation System Improvements & Future Traffic Volumes

As  mentioned  previously,  no  planned  longterm  transportationsystem  improvements  have  been 
identified  within  the  study  area.  Year  2031  background  traffic  volumes  were  developed  by 
applying  a  1.5percent  annual  growth  rate  to  the  year  2011  background  volumes  at  all  study 
intersections  shown  in  Figure  5.  Also,  as  mentioned  previously,  the  traffic  forecast  to  be 
generated  by  the  Washington  State  Penitentiary  (WSP)  was  added  to  the  existing  traffic  volumes 
shown  in  Figure  4.  Traffic  generated  by  the  final  phase  of  expansion  of  the  WSP  site  is  very 
minimal  at  the  study  intersections  in  this  study,  amounting  to  only  three  southbound  through 
vehicles  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  and  three  southbound  rightturn  vehicles  at 
the  US  12  EB  Ramps/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  This  traffic  was  added  to  the  year  2031  background 
traffic  volumes  derived  from  the  annual  growth  rate  to  arrive  at  the  final  year  2031  background 
traffic volumes for the weekday p.m. peak hour shown in Figure 9.  




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                          Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                   Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                             Page 26




Intersection Level of Service Analysis

The  weekday  p.m.  peakhour  turningmovement  volumes  shown  in  Figure  9  were  used  to 
conduct an operational analysis at each study intersection to determine the year 2031 background 
traffic  levels  of  service.  As  indicated  in  Figure  9,  the  background  traffic  analysis  determined  that 
all  of  the  study  intersections  are  forecast  to  operate  under  capacity  and  at  acceptable  levels  of 
service  during  the  weekday  p.m.  peak  hour  except  for  the  minorstreet  westbound  leftturn 
movement  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  While  this  movement  is  forecast  to 
operate  under  capacity,  it  is  forecast  to  operate  at  a  levelofservice  "F"  during  the  weekday  p.m. 
peak  hour,  which  occurs  without  adding  any  traffic  from  the  proposed  development.  Attachment 
"H" provides the year 2031 background traffic conditions levelofservice worksheets.  

The  worksheets  provided  in  Attachment  "H"  illustrate  that  the  southbound  through  movement 
at the Rose Street/2nd Avenue intersection is forecast to operate at a levelofservice "D"; however, 
given  that  this  intersection  is  located  within  the  CBD,  a  levelofservice  "D"  is  considered 
acceptable for this movement. All other 2nd Avenue through movements are forecast to operate at 
a levelofservice "C" or better under year 2031 background traffic conditions. 


YEAR 2031 TOTAL TRAFFIC CONDTIONS

The  year  2031  total  traffic  conditions  analysis  forecasts  how  the  study  area's  transportation 
system  will  operate  in  the  longterm  future  with  the  traffic  generated  by  the  proposed  Walla 
Walla  Police  Department.  Again,  the  year  2031  total  traffic  conditions  lane  configurations  and 
traffic control devices are assumed to be identical to the year 2010 existing conditions as shown in 
Figure  3.  The  year  2031  background  traffic  volumes  for  the  weekday  p.m.  peak  hour  (shown  in 
Figure 9) were added to the sitegenerated traffic volumes, shown in Figure 7, to arrive at the year 
2031 total traffic volumes shown in Figure 10. 


Intersection Level of Service Analysis

The  weekday  p.m.  peakhour  turningmovement  volumes  shown  in  Figure  10  were  used  to 
conduct  an  operational  analysis  at  each  study  intersection  to  determine  the  year  2031  total  traffic 
levels  of  service.  As  indicated  in  Figure  10,  the  total  traffic  analysis  determined  that  all  of  the 
study  intersections  are  forecast  to  operate  under  capacity  and  at  acceptable  levels  of  service 
during the weekday p.m. peak hour except for the minorstreet westbound leftturn movement at 
the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  With  inclusion  of  the  traffic  from  the  proposed  police 
department,  this  movement  is  forecast  to  operate  at  a  levelofservice  "F,"  as  in  the  year  2031 
background  traffic  conditions,  and  at  a  volumetocapacity  ratio  of  greater  than  1.0.  Also,  the 
delay  for  this  movement  increases  from  76  seconds  per  vehicle  under  year  2031  background 
traffic  conditions  to  greater  than  100  seconds  per  vehicle  under  year  2031  total  traffic  conditions. 
Attachment "I" provides the year 2031 total traffic conditions levelofservice worksheets. 




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                          Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                               Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                                         Page 28


The  worksheets  provided  in  Attachment  "I"  illustrate  that,  as  under year 2031 background traffic 
conditions,  the  southbound  through  movement  at  the  Rose  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  is 
forecast to operate at a levelofservice "D"; however, given that this intersection is located within 
the  CBD,  a  levelofservice  "D"  is  considered  acceptable  for  this  movement.  All  other  2nd  Avenue 
through  movements  are  forecast  to  operate  at  a  levelofservice  "C"  or  better  under  year  2031 
total traffic conditions. 


95TH PERCENTILE QUEUING ANALYSES

A  95th  percentile  queuing  analysis  was  performed  for  movements  of  concern  at  the  Moore 
Street/2nd  Avenue,  Rose  Street/2nd  Avenue,  and  Main  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersections  assuming 
year  2031  background  and  total  traffic  conditions  lane  configurations  and  traffic  volumes.  The 
purpose  of  this  analysis  was  to  evaluate  both  potential  storage  and  design  issues  under  the  long
term  scenario.  Table  5  summarizes  the  95th  percentile  queues  for  year  2031  background  and  total 
traffic  conditions  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue,  Rose  Street/2nd  Avenue,  and  Main  Street/2nd 
Avenue intersections, during the weekday p.m. peak hour. 

Table 5       95th Percentile Queuing Analysis  Year 2031 Traffic Conditions, Weekday PM Peak Hour

                                                                              Year 2031 95th Percentile Queue

                                                                      Background Traffic                Total Traffic
                                                   Existing               Conditions                     Conditions
                                                   Storage
      Intersection             Movement          Lengths (Ft)          Feet        Vehicles1         Feet        Vehicles1

  Moore St/ 2nd                Eastbound               N/A              85              4             90              4
  Avenue
                               Westbound               N/A              60              3             90              4

                               Northbound
                                                       270              65              3             60              3
  Rose Street/ 2  nd            Left-Turn
  Avenue
                               Northbound                              290             12            270              11
                                                       270
                                Through                                2752            112           2752             112

                               Southbound
                                                       270              55              3             55              3
  Main Street/ 2nd              Left-Turn
  Avenue
                               Southbound
                                                       270              220             9             230             10
                                Through
  1
   Assumes the length of each vehicle is 25 feet.
  2
   Highway Capacity Manual queue estimation values reported due to counterintuitive results from SimTraffic queuing
  estimation.

 
Table 5 shows an increase in queue length of approximately 30 feet (approximately one vehicle) at 
the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  between  the  year  2031  background  and  year  2031  total 
traffic  conditions.  This  increase  represents  the  direct  impact  of  forecast  police  department  traffic 
on  the  necessary  storage  at  this  intersection.  All  other  movements  of  concern  are  expected  to 
require  storage  lengths  that  are  approximately  equal  to  year  2031  background  traffic  conditions, 
which  indicates  insignificant  impact  of  the  police  department  traffic.  Mitigation  options  to 
manage this queue are discussed in the following section of this report. 



Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                                      Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                          Page 29


Finally, the northbound through movement at the Rose Street/2nd Avenue intersection is expected 
to  exceed  the  length  of  available  storage  under  both  year  2031  background  and  total  traffic 
conditions,  indicating  that  general  traffic  growth  in  the  longterm  could  result  in  queue  spillback 
through  the  Main  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  Adjustments  to  signal  timings  and/or  lane 
configurations  should  be  considered  in  the  future  at  the  Rose  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  in 
order to accommodate the general growth of traffic in the area. Attachment "J" provides the queuing 
analysis worksheets from SimTraffic. 


EVALUATION OF POTENTIAL IMPROVEMENT OPTIONS

The  intersection  operational  analyses  and  queuing  evaluation  performed  as  part  of  this  study 
provides  the  basis  for  further  investigation  of  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  In 
addition,  City  staff  have  identified  the  idea  of  potentially  providing  bike  lanes  and  a  threelane 
crosssection on 2nd Avenue from Oak Street to Moore Street. 


Moore Street/2nd Avenue

The  year  2011  total  traffic  analysis  showed  an increase in delay of approximately 20 seconds over 
year  2011  background  traffic  conditions  for  the  Moore  Street  westbound  leftturn  movement  at 
the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  In  addition,  the  year  2031  total  traffic  analysis  showed 
an  even  larger  increase  in  delay  for  the  same  movement  over  the  year  2031  background  traffic 
conditions. 

As mentioned previously, the City of Walla Walla TIS Guidelines state that additional traffic must 
not  increase  the  delay  for  a  movement  by  more  than  10  seconds.  Due  to  the  more  than  10  second 
increase in delay for the westbound movement at the Moore Street/2nd Avenue intersection under 
both  year  2011  and  year  2031  total  traffic  conditions,  an  evaluation  of  potential  mitigation 
alternatives was explored. 


Northbound Approach

The  northbound  approach  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  was  evaluated  assuming 
the inside northbound through plus leftturn lane is modified to be a leftturn only lane while the 
outside  lane  remains  as  a  through  plus  rightturn  lane.  The  operational  analysis  demonstrates 
that  small  operational  improvements  are  recognized  under  all  traffic  conditions  scenarios 
assuming  this  modification  is  made.  While  the  operational  improvements  realized  may  be  small, 
this  improvement  is  expected  to  provide  a  significant  safety  benefit  as  the  receiving  approach  for 
northbound  2nd  Avenue  traffic  has  only  one  lane.  Creating  the  exclusive  leftturn  lane  would 
eliminate  the  merge  into  one  lane  that  through  vehicles  must  make  as  they  pass  through  the 
Moore Street/2nd Avenue intersection. 




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                        Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                   Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                             Page 30


Re-Routing of City Facility Traffic

Discussions  with  City  staff  have  indicated  a  willingness  to  remove  as  much  of  the  City  facility 
traffic  (particularly  heavy  vehicles)  from  Moore  Street  as  possible.  One  viable  alternative  to 
remove  the  majority  of  this  traffic  would  be  to  use  the  existing  gated  access  onto  Rees  Avenue  as 
the  primary  entrance  for  employee  and  maintenance  vehicle  traffic.  This  would  provide  some 
alleviation  for  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection,  removing  most  of  the  background  traffic 
on the westbound approach. 

An  operational  evaluation  assuming  rerouting  of  the  employee  and  maintenance  vehicle  traffic 
onto  Rees  Avenue  shows  that  the  critical  westbound  leftturn  movement  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd 
Avenue  intersection  improves  by  one  levelofservice  under  year  2011  background  traffic,  year 
2011  total  traffic,  and  year  2031  background  traffic.  The  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  is 
still  forecast  to  operate  at  a  levelofservice  "F"  under  year  2031  total  traffic  conditions,  but  now 
under  capacity  as  compared  to  the  operation  of  this  intersection  without  the  rerouting  of  traffic. 
The Rees Avenue/4th Avenue intersection, where the rerouted traffic would now pass through, is 
forecast to experience only very minor increases in delay and volumetocapacity ratio. 

Providing  a  viable  access  onto  Rees  Avenue  would  require  modification  to  the  type  of  gate  used 
at  this  access.  Currently,  a  manually  operated,  swinging  gate  is  in  use  at  this  access.  It  is 
recommended  that  a  card  or  pinactivated  automatic  gate  be  installed  to  allow  for  easier  access 
for  employees,  yet  still  provide  security  for  the  facility.  It  is also recommended that this access be 
improved  from  an  existing  gravel  surface  to  an  asphalt  surface.  The  main  access  for  visitors 
would still remain on Moore Street, but all employee and maintenance traffic would be encourage 
to use the gated access onto Rees Avenue.  


Preliminary Signal Warrant Analysis

A  preliminary  signal  warrant  analysis  was  also  conducted  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue 
intersection  under  year  2011  total  traffic  conditions,  year  2031  background  traffic  conditions,  and 
year  2031  total  traffic  conditions.  Table  6  shows  the  results  of  the  preliminary  signal  warrant 
analysis. 

        Table 6       Preliminary Signal Warrant Analysis, Moore Street/2nd Avenue Intersection

                                                                   Warrant Met?

                                                Year 2011            Year 2031            Year 2031
                                               Total Traffic        Background           Total Traffic
                        Warrant                 Conditions       Traffic Conditions       Conditions

            Warrant 1  8-Hour Volume                No                   No                   No

            Warrant 2  4-Hour Volume                No                   No                   No

            Warrant 3  Peak Hour Volume             No                   No                  Yes

 
As  shown  in  Table  6,  a  signal  is  not  warranted  under  year  2011  total  traffic  conditions;  therefore, 
no  mitigation  is  recommended  at  this  intersection  with  buildout  of  the  proposed  police 
department  building.  Table  6  also  shows  that  the  peak  hour  warrant  (and  only  the  peak  hour 

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                             Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                          Page 31


warrant)  was  met  under  year  2031  total  traffic  conditions.  Based  on  this,  it  is  recommended  that 
the  operational  performance  of  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  be  monitored  in  the 
future and that the signal warrants or other mitigations be revisited at a later time as appropriate. 
An  operational  analysis  of  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  under  year  2031  total  traffic 
conditions  demonstrates  that  this  intersection  would  operate  at  a  levelofservice  "A"  as  an 
actuateduncoordinated  signalized  intersection.  Attachment  "K"  provides  the  signal  warrant  analysis 
worksheets as well as the Synchro worksheets for Moore Street/2nd Avenue signalized intersection analysis. 


Preliminary Roundabout Analysis

Also,  a  roundabout  analysis  was  performed  per  National  Cooperative  Highway  Research 
Program  (NCHRP)  Report  572  procedures  (Reference  6),  which  will  be  the  adopted  roundabout 
analysis  procedure  in  the  upcoming  2010  Highway  Capacity  Manual.  Similar  to  the  signal 
warrant  analyses,  this  analysis  was  performed  under  year  2011  total  traffic  and  year  2031 
background  and  total  traffic  conditions.  A  singlelane  roundabout  was  assumed  for  analysis 
purposes. Table 7 provides the results of this analysis. 

         Table 7          NCHRP 572 Roundabout Analysis, Moore Street/2nd Avenue Intersection

                                                             Year 2031
                                     Year 2011 Total     Background Traffic       Year 2031 Total
                                    Traffic Conditions       Conditions          Traffic Conditions

               Intersection        Average       V/C1     Average      V/C1     Average        V/C1
                Approach          Delay (sec)    Ratio   Delay (sec)   Ratio   Delay (sec)     Ratio

           Eastbound                      2.9     0.25       4.6       0.35         5.2         0.38

           Westbound                      1.6     0.15       1.1       0.10         2.1         0.19

           Northbound                     2.6     0.26       3.6       0.35         3.6         0.35

           Southbound                     3.8     0.34       5.7       0.45         6.6         0.48
           1
               V/C = Volume-to Capacity

 
The roundabout analysis shown in Table 7 demonstrates that a singlelane roundabout is forecast 
to  operate  with  less  than  10  seconds  of  delay  on  all  approaches  and  with  volumetocapacity 
ratios  of  less  than  0.50  for  all  approaches  under  nearterm  buildout  conditions  and  longterm 
background  and  buildout  conditions.  A  roundabout  could  be  another  potential  mitigation 
strategy  to  address  longterm  operational  needs  at  the  intersection  if  necessary  in  the  future. 
Attachment  "L"  provides  the  NCHRP  572  worksheets  for  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  roundabout 
intersection analysis. 


2nd Avenue Cross-Section

As  mentioned  previously,  City  staff  have  identified  the  idea  of  potentially  providing  bike  lanes 
and a threelane crosssection on 2nd Avenue from Oak Street to Moore Street to match the current 
crosssection  on  2nd  Avenue  to  the  south  of  Oak  Street.  The  operational  analysis  performed  as  a 
part  of  this  study  did  not  identify  any  operational  deficiencies  that  would  warrant  this  change, 


Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                       Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                    Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                              Page 32


however,  the  proposed  development  and  mitigations  do  not  preclude  the  City  from 
implementing this change in the future if desired. 


ON-SITE CIRCULATION/SITE ACCESS CONSIDERATIONS

Circulation  and  site  access  points  were  evaluated  for  the  proposed  police  department  site,  with 
consideration  for  access  and  circulation  for  the  existing  City  facilities  to  the  north  of Moore Street 
as  well.  This  evaluation  was  done  to  ensure  that  the  site  provides  satisfactory  onsite  circulation 
and  access  for  both  pedestrian  movements  and  internal  vehicular  traffic.  Refer  to  Figure  2  for  an 
illustration of the current proposed development plan. 


Moore Street/2nd Avenue Intersection

Based  on  the  queuing  analysis  performed  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection,  a  95th 
percentile  queue  length  of  approximately  90  feet  for  the  westbound  approach  is  forecast  under 
year  2031  total  traffic  conditions.  It  is  recommended  that  a  separate  leftturn  lane  of 
approximately 100 feet be striped for the westbound movement of Moore Street.  Given the nearly 
50foot  existing  width  of  Moore  Street  at  its  intersection  with  2nd  Avenue,  this  allows  for  the 
striping to be done without any physical modifications to Moore Street. 

In  addition,  the  BNSF  Railroad  operates  very  infrequent  one  to  five  car  rail  trips  on  the  existing 
railroad  line  located  approximately  75  feet  west  of  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection. 
While  this  is  not  a  railroad  line  with  daily  activity  or  long  trains,  enhanced  identification  of  the 
railroad  crossing  is  recommended.  One  example  of  enhanced  identification  that  would  be 
appropriate  in  this  case  is  stopbar  type  striping  prior  to  and  following  the  railroad  tracks,  with a 
"Do Not Block Tracks" sign installed upstream of the tracks on westbound Moore Street. 

Finally,  the  City  has  expressed  concern  regarding  vehicles  mistakenly  turning  onto  Moore  Street 
from  2nd  Avenue  assuming  that  Moore  Street  is  an  access  ramp  to  US  12.  It  is  recommended  that 
the  City  explore  options  for  providing  signage  for  northbound  and  southbound  traffic  on  2nd 
Avenue  in  the  vicinity  of  Moore  Street  that  would  clarify  that  Moore  Street  does  not  provide 
access  to  US  12.  "Dead  End"  signs  and/or  signs  stating  "No  Access  to  US  12"  could  be  installed 
on 2nd Avenue within 100 to 200 feet of the Moore Street/2nd Avenue to attempt to prevent drivers 
from mistaking Moore Street as an access ramp to US 12. 


City of Walla Walla Facility - Maintenance Vehicle Accessibility

City  staff  expressed  a  desire  to  examine  the  ability  to  maintain  sufficient  accessibility  for  the 
maintenance vehicles coming into and out of the City facilities to the north of Moore Street. Truck 
turn  templates,  assuming  a  WB50  design  vehicle  to  represent  the  largest  City  maintenance 
vehicle,  were  evaluated  for  a  leftturn  into  and  rightturn  out  of  the  City  facility's  main  access 
point,  approximately  25  feet  to  the  west  of  the  proposed  service  access  point  for  the  police 
department  building.  Attachment  "M"  provides  the  turn  templates  for  these  movements, 
illustrating  that  neither  the  proposed  parallel  parking  configuration  nor  the  alternative 

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                           Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                     Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                               Page 33


perpendicular  parking  configuration  on  Moore  Street will interfere with heavy vehicle traffic into 
and  out  of  this  access.  However,  it  is  recommended  that  options  for  routing  all  or  most  of  the 
maintenance  vehicles  in  and  out  of  the  Rees  Avenue  access  to  the  City  facility  be  explored  in 
order  to  minimize  the  heavy  vehicle  traffic  on  Moore  Street  passing  in  front  of  the  proposed 
police  department  building  and  parking  areas  and  the  number  of  westbound  leftturn  vehicles  at 
the Moore Street/2nd Avenue intersection. 


Multi-Use Pathway Connectivity

As  described  under  the  "Existing  Conditions"  section  of  this  report,  an  existing  multiuse 
pathway  connects  into  the  site  at  the  culdesac  at  the  east  end  of  Moore  Street.  It  is  important  to 
consider  the  routing  of  pedestrians  from  this  point  to  2nd  Avenue  in  order  to  provide  continuous 
connectivity.  It  is  recommended  that  a  connection  be  provided  either  along  the  south  side  of 
Moore Street or that a crossing of Moore Street be striped near the terminus of the path in the cul
desac to connect the pedestrians to the existing sidewalk on the north side of Moore Street. 


Key Conclusions
In  summary,  the  key  conclusions  from  the  transportation  impact  study  performed  for  the 
proposed Walla Walla Police Department development are: 

        Within  the  site,  provide  a  pedestrian/bicyclist  connection  from  the  existing  multiuse  path 
         terminus  in  the  culdesac  on  the  east  side  of  Moore  Street  to  2nd  Avenue.  This 
         improvement should be made by the police department development. 
        It  is  recommended  that  the  City  explore  options  for  using  the  existing  gated  access  onto 
         Rees  Avenue  as  the  primary  entrance  into  the  City  facility  for  employee  and  maintenance 
         vehicle  traffic  in  order  to  alleviate  some  of  the  westbound  leftturning  traffic  at  the  Moore 
         Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  It  is  recommended  that  a  card  or  pinactivated  automatic 
         gate  be  installed  at  the  City  facility's  access  to  Rees  Avenue  to  allow  for  easier  access  for 
         employees, yet still provide security for the facility. It is also recommended that this access 
         be improved from the existing gravel surface to an asphalt surface. A specific cost estimate 
         for  purchase  and  installation  of  an  automatic  gate  could  not  be  obtained;  therefore,  we 
         assumed a conservative cost of $5,000 for this specific improvement. The estimated cost of 
         making all of these improvements, based on a planninglevel assessment, is $20,000. These 
         improvements,  and  their  associated  costs,  are  not  attributable  to  the  police  department 
         development. Attachment "N" provides the planninglevel cost estimate worksheets. 
        2nd Avenue/Moore Street Intersection  
             o    NearTerm BuildOut Year 
                           Based  on  the  queuing  analysis,  we  recommend  striping  of  a  separate  left
                           turn  lane  100  feet  in  length  for  the  westbound  movement  on  Moore  Street. 
                           This  striping  can  be  accommodated  within  the  existing  width  of  Moore 
                           Street. 

Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                             Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                   Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                             Page 34


                           Provide  enhanced  identification  of  the  BNSF  railroad  crossing  on  Moore 
                           Street  in  order  to  warn  drivers  not  to  stop  on  the  railroad  tracks  in  the 
                           event  of  a  queue  of  more  than  three  vehicles.  One  example  is  to  place  stop 
                           bar  striping  prior  to  and  following  the  railroad  tracks,  with  a  "Do  Not 
                           Block  Tracks"  sign  installed  upstream  of  the  tracks  on  westbound  Moore 
                           Street. 
                           The estimated cost of making the above signing & striping improvements is 
                           approximately  $2,500.  These  improvements,  and  their  associated  costs,  are 
                           attributable  to  the police department development. Attachment "N" provides 
                           the planninglevel cost estimate worksheets. 
                           It  is  recommended  that  the  City  restripe  the  inside  northbound  through 
                           plus  leftturn  lane  at  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection  to  be  a  left
                           turn only lane while maintaining the outside northbound lane as a through 
                           plus  rightturn  lane.  Signing  should  also  be  installed  on  this  approach 
                           warning  drivers  that  the  inside  lane  becomes  a  leftturn  only  lane  at  the 
                           Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue  intersection.  The  estimated  cost  of  making  this 
                           signing  and  striping  improvement  is  approximately  $1,000.  This 
                           improvement,  and  the  associated  cost,  is  not  attributable  to  the  police 
                           department  development.  Attachment  "N"  provides  the  planninglevel  cost 
                           estimate worksheets. 
                           It  is  recommended  that  the  City  explore  options  for  providing  signage  for 
                           northbound  and  southbound  traffic  on  2nd  Avenue  in  the  vicinity  of  Moore 
                           Street  that  would  clarify  that  Moore  Street  does  not  provide  access  to  US 
                           12.  The  estimated  cost  of  making  this  signing  improvement  is 
                           approximately  $500.  This  improvement,  and  the  associated  cost,  is  not 
                           attributable  to  the police department development. Attachment "N" provides 
                           the planninglevel cost estimate worksheets. 
             o    LongTerm Horizon Year 
                           Monitor  the  operational  performance  of  the  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue 
                           intersection  in  the  future  and  signal  warrants  and/or  other  mitigations 
                           should be revisited at a later time, if deemed necessary.
        With  the  exception  of  Moore  Street/2nd  Avenue,  no  project  specific  mitigations  are 
         warranted at any other study intersection. 
We  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  perform  the  Walla  Walla  Police  Department  TIA.  We  trust  that 
this  memorandum  provides  the  City  of  Walla  Walla  and  WSDOT  with  the  appropriate  level  of 
analysis  and  with  feasible  recommendations  to  ensure  that  the  proposed  police  department  can 
be  developed  while  maintaining  acceptable  levels  of  service  and  safety  on  the  surrounding 
transportation system. Please don't hesitate to contact Sonia Hennum or Yuri Mereszczak at (208) 
3382683 if you have any questions. 




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                          Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                          Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                    Page 35



References
1.     City of Walla Walla Engineering Division. Walla Walla Urban Area Transportation Impact 
       Analysis Guidelines. January 2007. 

2.     Kittelson & Associates, Inc. Estimated Trip Generation and Proposed Scope of Work for the Walla 
       Walla Police Station Transportation Impact Study. January 13, 2010. 

3.     City of Walla Walla. The Walla Walla Urban Area Comprehensive Plan  Zoning Map. 2008. 

4.     Valley Transit.  http://www.valleytransit.com. 2009 

5.     Transportation Research Board. Highway Capacity Manual. 2000. 

6.     Transportation Research Board. NCHRP Report 572: Roundabouts in the United States. 2007. 




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                 Boise, Idaho
Attachment A
Year 2010 Existing
Conditions Traffic Counts
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N 4th Ave -- W Rees Ave                                                                                             QC JOB #: 10477501
 CITY/STATE: Walla Walla, WA                                                                                                   DATE: 1/28/2010
                       23 0.64 13                                 Peak-Hour: 4:10 PM -- 5:10 PM                                 8.7       7.7

                           4    17    2
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 4:10 PM -- 4:25 PM
                                                                                                                                25.0 5.9 0.0

       71      4                            1     89
                                                                                                                   2.8   0.0                      0.0      2.2
        0.78   22              0.78        39   0.64
                                                                                                                         9.1                      0.0
       147     121                         49     45
                                                                                                                   2.7   1.7                      4.1      6.7

                       28       8     21
                                                                                                                                3.6 12.5 4.8

                       187 0.68 57
                                                                                                                                2.7       5.3



                                1




               0                            0




                                0




 5-Min Count                     N 4th Ave                      N 4th Ave               W Rees Ave                   W Rees Ave
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                               Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                    Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                       Totals
     4:00 PM          1           1       3    0         0       0      0    0     1      1      8      0     7        2      0       0          24
     4:05 PM          2           0       2    0         0       1      0    0     0      0     10      0     0        6      0       0          21
     4:10 PM          3           3       1    0         0       3      1    0     0      0     12      0     5        5      1       0          34
     4:15 PM          5           1       3    0         0       1      0    0     0      3     13      0     3        2      0       0          31
     4:20 PM          2           0       3    0         1       1      2    0     1      3     15      0     6        2      0       0          36
     4:25 PM          3           1       2    0         0       2      0    0     0      2     10      0     4        5      0       0          29
     4:30 PM          1           0       1    0         0       0      0    0     0      2      6      0     4        7      0       0          21
     4:35 PM          6           0       1    0         0       2      0    0     0      3      8      0     7        8      0       0          35
     4:40 PM          1           0       2    0         0       3      0    0     1      0     12      0     0        0      0       0          19
     4:45 PM          2           0       1    0         0       0      0    0     0      2      8      0     6        2      0       0          21
     4:50 PM          0           2       1    0         0       1      0    0     0      1      6      0     5        3      0       0          19
     4:55 PM          3           1       1    0         1       1      0    0     1      2      8      0     3        1      0       0          22              312
     5:00 PM          0           0       1    0         0       3      0    0     1      2     15      0     5        2      0       0          29              317
     5:05 PM          2           0       4    0         0       0      1    0     0      2      8      0     1        2      0       0          20              316
     5:10 PM          5           1       3    0         0       0      0    0     0      4     13      0     4        1      0       0          31              313
     5:15 PM          2           0       5    0         0       0      1    0     0      1      9      0     2        3      0       0          23              305
     5:20 PM          3           1       1    0         0       2      1    0     0      0      9      0     3        0      0       0          20              289
     5:25 PM          3           1       0    0         0       0      0    0     0      0      6      0     4        4      0       0          18              278
     5:30 PM          1           1       0    0         0       1      0    0     0      1      9      0     2        6      0       0          21              278
     5:35 PM          3           0       1    0         0       0      0    0     0      0      4      0     2        1      0       0          11              254
     5:40 PM          3           1       2    0         0       1      0    0     0      1      5      0     3        3      0       0          19              254
     5:45 PM          2           0       0    0         0       0      0    0     1      1      4      0     0        3      0       0          11              244
     5:50 PM          1           0       1    0         0       0      0    0     0      0      1      0     1        2      0       0           6              231
     5:55 PM          5           0       1    0         0       0      0    0     0      0      4      0     2        3      0       0          15              224
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                        Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       40          16      28    0         4      20     12    0     4     24    160      0    56       36      4       0                 404
 Heavy Trucks         0           0       0              0       0      4          0      0      8            0        0      0                         12
  Pedestrians                     0                              0                        0                            0                                 0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/5/2010 3:33 PM                                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                                  Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N 4th Ave -- W Moore St                                                                                              QC JOB #: 10477502
 CITY/STATE: Walla Walla, WA                                                                                                    DATE: 1/28/2010
                       217 0.89 64                                Peak-Hour: 4:10 PM -- 5:10 PM                                   2.8       4.7

                           3   214    0
                                                                 Peak 15-Min: 4:10 PM -- 4:25 PM
                                                                                                                                  33.3 2.3 0.0

       48      1                          0        0
                                                                                                                   14.6   100.0                     0.0      0.0
        0.81   0               0.82       0   0.00
                                                                                                                          0.0                       0.0
       42      41                         0        0
                                                                                                                   9.5    7.3                       0.0      0.0

                       45       63    0
                                                                                                                                  13.3 3.2 0.0

                       255 0.69 108
                                                                                                                                  3.1       7.4



                                0




               0                          0




                                0




 5-Min Count                     N 4th Ave                      N 4th Ave                W Moore St                  W Moore St
     Period                    (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                                 Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                      Total
                    Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U                       Totals
     4:00 PM          5           5      0     0         0      16      0    0     1      0      9      0     0        0      0         0          36
     4:05 PM          1           4      0     0         0      20      1    0     0      0      6      0     0        0      0         0          32
     4:10 PM          4           8      0     0         0      17      0    0     0      0      6      0     0        0      0         0          35
     4:15 PM          7          10      0     0         0      20      0    0     0      0      1      0     0        0      0         0          38
     4:20 PM          4           6      0     0         0      23      0    0     0      0      6      0     0        0      0         0          39
     4:25 PM          4           5      0     0         0      18      0    0     1      0      4      0     0        0      0         0          32
     4:30 PM          5           4      0     0         0      15      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          24
     4:35 PM          1           8      0     0         0      23      2    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          34
     4:40 PM          6           2      0     0         0      13      0    0     0      0      4      0     0        0      0         0          25
     4:45 PM          1           3      0     0         0      18      1    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0         0          25
     4:50 PM          3           6      0     0         0      16      0    0     0      0      5      0     0        0      0         0          30
     4:55 PM          1           5      0     0         0      14      0    0     0      0      5      0     0        0      0         0          25              375
     5:00 PM          7           1      0     0         0      25      0    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0         0          35              374
     5:05 PM          2           5      0     0         0      12      0    0     0      0      6      0     0        0      0         0          25              367
     5:10 PM          2           9      0     0         0      18      0    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0         0          31              363
     5:15 PM          3           7      0     0         0      12      0    0     0      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          22              347
     5:20 PM          4           6      0     0         0      15      0    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0         0          27              335
     5:25 PM          4           2      0     0         0       7      1    0     1      0      1      0     0        0      0         0          16              319
     5:30 PM          5           2      0     0         0      12      1    0     0      0      6      0     0        0      0         0          26              321
     5:35 PM          0           4      0     0         0       6      0    0     0      0      3      0     0        0      0         0          13              300
     5:40 PM          1           5      0     0         0       9      0    0     1      0      0      0     0        0      0         0          16              291
     5:45 PM          2           2      0     0         0       6      0    0     0      0      3      0     0        0      0         0          13              279
     5:50 PM          2           2      0     0         0       2      0    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0         0           8              257
     5:55 PM          4           7      0     0         0       6      0    0     0      0      2      0     0        0      0         0          19              251
 Peak 15-Min                        Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                          Total
  Flowrates         Left        Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles       60          96      0     0         0     240      0    0     0      0     52      0     0        0      0         0                 448
 Heavy Trucks         4           0      0               0       8      0          0      0      4            0        0      0                           16
  Pedestrians                     0                              0                        0                            0                                   0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/5/2010 3:33 PM                                                         SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: Intersection Peak                                       Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N 2nd Ave -- W Moore St/US 12 WB Ramps                                                                     QC JOB #: 10477507
 CITY/STATE: Walla Walla, WA                                                                                          DATE: 1/28/2010
                      260 0.86 126                          Peak-Hour: 3:40 PM -- 4:40 PM                              4.2      7.9

                      16 242     2
                                                           Peak 15-Min: 3:55 PM -- 4:10 PM
                                                                                                                       12.5 3.7 0.0

       122     5                      7     52
                                                                                                          6.6   0.0                   0.0    3.8
        0.81   0          0.93       10   0.73
                                                                                                                0.0                   0.0
       167     162                   35     18
                                                                                                          4.2   4.3                   5.7   33.3

                      96 114 16
                                                                                                                       6.3 8.8 37.5

                      439 0.77 226
                                                                                                                       4.1      9.7



                           0




               1                      1




                           0




 5-Min Count                N 2nd Ave                     N 2nd Ave
     Period                                                                 W Moore St/US 12 WB RampsW Moore St/US 12 WB Ramps
                          (Northbound)                  (Southbound)                                                                    Hourly
Beginning At                                                                    (Eastbound)             (Westbound)          Total
                   Left    Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right     U   Left Thru Right      U               Totals
     3:10 PM        10       3       2    0        0      10      1    0     0    0     17     0     3     1      0     0      47
     3:15 PM        11       5       0    0        1      22      2    0     1    1      8     0     2     1      0     0      54
     3:20 PM         3       9       1    0        2      17      0    0     0    0      9     0     1     0      0     0      42
     3:25 PM         9       5       2    0        0      21      1    0     1    0      9     0     4     0      0     0      52
     3:30 PM        11      12       2    0        1      17      0    0     1    0     11     0     3     0      0     0      58
     3:35 PM         9       9       2    0        1      14      1    0     0    0      8     0     6     0      1     0      51
     3:40 PM         9      13       1    0        0      12      3    0     0    0      8     0     3     3      1     0      53
     3:45 PM         3       6       2    0        0      20      0    0     0    0     16     0     2     1      1     0      51
     3:50 PM         8       8       1    0        0      16      1    0     0    0     18     0     3     1      1     0      57
     3:55 PM         5       9       2    0        0      25      0    0     0    0     17     0     2     0      2     0      62        627
     4:00 PM        10      10       1    0        0      24      3    0     1    0     16     0     4     0      0     0      69        648
     4:05 PM         8       6       1    0        1      22      1    0     0    0     15     0     4     1      0     0      59        655
     4:10 PM         6      10       1    0        0      22      4    0     1    0     15     0     1     0      0     0      60        668
     4:15 PM         6      15       1    0        0      19      1    0     2    0     12     0     1     0      0     0      57        671
     4:20 PM         8      11       3    0        0      26      2    0     0    0      8     0     2     0      0     0      60        689
     4:25 PM         7       8       2    0        1      21      0    0     0    0      9     0     5     0      2     0      55        692
     4:30 PM        14       9       0    0        0      13      1    0     1    0     10     0     8     3      0     0      59        693
     4:35 PM        12       9       1    0        0      22      0    0     0    0     18     0     0     1      0     0      63        705
     4:40 PM         7       7       1    0        0      17      1    0     0    0      9     0     0     0      0     0      42        694
     4:45 PM        13       5       0    0        1      14      4    0     0    0     12     0     1     0      0     0      50        693
     4:50 PM        12       7       1    0        0      18      3    0     0    1     14     0     3     0      1     0      60        696
     4:55 PM         9       7       0    0        0      18      0    0     0    1     13     0     1     0      0     0      49        683
     5:00 PM         7       8       1    0        0      25      2    0     0    0      6     0     6     1      0     0      56        670
     5:05 PM        16       8       1    0        0      17      0    0     0    0     15     0     3     3      0     0      63        674
 Peak 15-Min                   Northbound                   Southbound              Eastbound                Westbound
                                                                                                                                   Total
  Flowrates        Left    Thru Right     U      Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right     U   Left Thru Right      U
  All Vehicles      92     100      16    0        4     284     16    0     4    0    192     0    40     4      8     0           760
 Heavy Trucks       16      12       4             0       8      4          0    0     12           4     0      0                 60
  Pedestrians                0                             0                      0                        4                         4
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/8/2010 2:36 PM                                                  SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                        Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N 2nd Ave -- US 12 EB Ramps                                                                             QC JOB #: 10477503
 CITY/STATE: Walla Walla, WA                                                                                       DATE: 1/28/2010
                   401 0.89 232                          Peak-Hour: 4:10 PM -- 5:10 PM                              2.2       8.6

                   79 322    0
                                                        Peak 15-Min: 4:25 PM -- 4:40 PM
                                                                                                                    3.8 1.9 0.0

      293     13                  0       0
                                                                                                      3.1   15.4                      0.0      0.0
       0.71   0       0.94        0   0.00
                                                                                                            0.0                       0.0
      110     97                  0       0
                                                                                                      6.4   5.2                       0.0      0.0

                   214 219   0
                                                                                                                    2.8 8.2 0.0

                   419 0.93 433
                                                                                                                    2.6       5.5



                        0




              1                   0




                        0




 5-Min Count            N 2nd Ave                      N 2nd Ave            US 12 EB Ramps            US 12 EB Ramps
     Period           (Northbound)                   (Southbound)             (Eastbound)              (Westbound)                              Hourly
Beginning At Left                                                                                                                   Total
                       Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U                     Totals
     4:00 PM    20      18      0     0         0      32      9    0     0     0      6      0     0     0      0        0          85
     4:05 PM    25      21      0     0         0      37      4    0     0     0      7      0     0     0      0        0          94
     4:10 PM    21      14      0     0         0      32      6    0     0     0      4      0     0     0      0        0          77
     4:15 PM    18      16      0     0         0      23      3    0     2     0      8      0     0     0      0        0          70
     4:20 PM    18      23      0     0         0      28      7    0     2     0      5      0     0     0      0        0          83
     4:25 PM    10      20      0     0         0      30      9    0     1     0      5      0     0     0      0        0          75
     4:30 PM    18      18      0     0         0      27     12    0     0     0      8      0     0     0      0        0          83
     4:35 PM    25      18      0     0         0      25      5    0     0     0     21      0     0     0      0        0          94
     4:40 PM    17      16      0     0         0      19      7    0     0     0      9      0     0     0      0        0          68
     4:45 PM    14      23      0     0         0      30      7    0     4     0      5      0     0     0      0        0          83
     4:50 PM    12      16      0     0         0      24      8    0     0     0      8      0     0     0      0        0          68
     4:55 PM    15      13      0     0         0      21      6    0     1     0      6      0     0     0      0        0          62              942
     5:00 PM    18      17      0     0         0      32      7    0     2     0      7      0     0     0      0        0          83              940
     5:05 PM    28      25      0     0         0      31      2    0     1     0     11      0     0     0      0        0          98              944
     5:10 PM    21      26      0     0         0      17      7    0     1     0      6      0     0     0      0        0          78              945
     5:15 PM    22      25      0     0         0      24      4    0     0     0      6      0     0     0      0        0          81              956
     5:20 PM    20      17      0     0         0      16      2    0     0     0     10      0     0     0      0        0          65              938
     5:25 PM    14      20      0     0         0      21      1    0     0     0      6      0     0     0      0        0          62              925
     5:30 PM    17      12      0     0         0      18      5    0     0     0     10      0     0     0      0        0          62              904
     5:35 PM    12      10      0     0         0      11      1    0     0     0     10      0     0     0      0        0          44              854
     5:40 PM    19       7      0     0         0      21      0    0     1     0      8      0     0     0      0        0          56              842
     5:45 PM    10      17      0     0         0      13      1    0     0     0     10      0     0     0      0        0          51              810
     5:50 PM     9       7      0     0         0      16      2    0     0     0      3      0     0     0      0        0          37              779
     5:55 PM    10      12      0     0         0      20      1    0     1     0     11      0     0     0      0        0          55              772
 Peak 15-Min               Northbound                    Southbound               Eastbound                 Westbound
                                                                                                                                            Total
  Flowrates    Left    Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left Thru Right       U   Left Thru Right         U
  All Vehicles 212     224      0     0         0     328    104    0     4     0    136      0     0     0      0        0                 1008
 Heavy Trucks    8      24      0               0       4      4          0     0     12            0     0      0                           52
  Pedestrians            0                              0                       4                         0                                   4
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/5/2010 3:33 PM                                               SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N 2nd Ave -- W Pine St                                                                                          QC JOB #: 10477504
 CITY/STATE: Walla Walla, WA                                                                                               DATE: 1/28/2010
                       423 0.93 437                           Peak-Hour: 4:10 PM -- 5:10 PM                                 2.8       3.9

                       83 340     0
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 4:30 PM -- 4:45 PM
                                                                                                                            6.0 2.1 0.0

       140     132                    0        0
                                                                                                               5.0   4.5                      0.0      0.0
        0.91   0           0.92       0   0.00
                                                                                                                     0.0                      0.0
       208     76                     0        0
                                                                                                               4.3   3.9                      0.0      0.0

                       57 305     0
                                                                                                                            3.5 3.6 0.0

                       416 0.88 362
                                                                                                                            2.4       3.6



                            0




               0                      0




                            2




 5-Min Count                 N 2nd Ave                      N 2nd Ave                W Pine St                    W Pine St
     Period                (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                    Left    Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
     4:00 PM          3      25      0     0         0      26     15    0    15      0      5      0     0        0      0       0          89
     4:05 PM          8      26      0     0         0      36      5    0    15      0      4      0     0        0      0       0          94
     4:10 PM          5      27      0     0         0      28      7    0    15      0      8      0     0        0      0       0          90
     4:15 PM          6      21      0     0         0      25      8    0    14      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          76
     4:20 PM          7      30      0     0         0      29      9    0    10      0      6      0     0        0      0       0          91
     4:25 PM          4      17      0     0         0      25      5    0    10      0      9      0     0        0      0       0          70
     4:30 PM          5      29      0     0         0      27      5    0     8      0      6      0     0        0      0       0          80
     4:35 PM          9      31      0     0         0      37     12    0    11      0     13      0     0        0      0       0         113
     4:40 PM          4      25      0     0         0      25      8    0    10      0      6      0     0        0      0       0          78
     4:45 PM          1      21      0     0         0      23      7    0    12      0      3      0     0        0      0       0          67
     4:50 PM          4      20      0     0         0      28      1    0     9      0      5      0     0        0      0       0          67
     4:55 PM          6      26      0     0         0      27      7    0     7      0      4      0     0        0      0       0          77              992
     5:00 PM          2      24      0     0         0      31      5    0    10      0      9      0     0        0      0       0          81              984
     5:05 PM          4      34      0     0         0      35      9    0    16      0      5      0     0        0      0       0         103              993
     5:10 PM          6      37      0     0         0      20      1    0    16      0      7      0     0        0      0       0          87              990
     5:15 PM          4      41      0     0         0      23      3    0    10      0      4      0     0        0      0       0          85              999
     5:20 PM          4      21      0     0         0      24      4    0    10      0      4      0     0        0      0       0          67              975
     5:25 PM          6      29      0     0         0      21      8    0     6      0      5      0     0        0      0       0          75              980
     5:30 PM          1      18      0     0         0      19      5    0     8      0      5      0     0        0      0       0          56              956
     5:35 PM          1      20      0     0         0      19      3    0     6      0      4      0     0        0      0       0          53              896
     5:40 PM          5      21      0     0         0      14      6    0     9      0      5      0     0        0      0       0          60              878
     5:45 PM          3      15      0     0         0      19      4    0     6      0      2      0     0        0      0       0          49              860
     5:50 PM          6      17      0     0         0      19      1    0     6      0      6      0     0        0      0       0          55              848
     5:55 PM          5      26      0     0         0      11      3    0     6      0      5      0     0        0      0       0          56              827
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates         Left    Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       72     340      0     0         0     356    100    0   116      0    100      0     0        0      0       0                 1084
 Heavy Trucks         0      16      0               0       8      8          0      0      4            0        0      0                          36
  Pedestrians                 0                              0                        0                            0                                  0
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/5/2010 3:33 PM                                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N 2nd Ave -- E Rose St                                                                                          QC JOB #: 10477505
 CITY/STATE: Walla Walla, WA                                                                                               DATE: 1/28/2010
                       428 0.94 434                           Peak-Hour: 4:10 PM -- 5:10 PM                                 1.9       2.3

                       57 319 52
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 4:55 PM -- 5:10 PM
                                                                                                                            0.0 2.5 0.0

       374     121                     33    373
                                                                                                               2.4   1.7                      9.1      3.2
        0.75   302         0.89       269   0.90
                                                                                                                     1.3                      3.3
       476     53                      71    421
                                                                                                               1.7   3.8                      0.0      1.0

                       48 280 67
                                                                                                                            0.0 1.8 0.0

                       443 0.93 395
                                                                                                                            2.3       1.3



                            10




               10                      22




                            4




 5-Min Count                 N 2nd Ave                      N 2nd Ave                E Rose St                    E Rose St
     Period                (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                    Left    Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
     4:00 PM          6      25       3    0         3      24      3    0    14     29     10      0     7       16      5       0         145
     4:05 PM          5      23       5    0         3      37      2    0     9     39      8      0     4       21      2       0         158
     4:10 PM          8      23       6    0         7      27      7    0    16     30      7      0     6       25      0       0         162
     4:15 PM          3      25       6    0         5      29      9    0     7     32      4      0     5       23      3       0         151
     4:20 PM          4      22       3    0         3      24      3    0     9     22      6      0     5       17      3       0         121
     4:25 PM          2      23       3    0         5      25      7    0     6     12      1      0     8       21      3       0         116
     4:30 PM          2      23       6    0         3      27      3    0    12     20      2      0     6       22      3       0         129
     4:35 PM          5      32       3    0         2      28      4    0     3     29      1      0     1       23      1       0         132
     4:40 PM          5      19       7    0         7      24      4    0     7     25      4      0     5       23      5       0         135
     4:45 PM          2      22       7    0         3      26      2    0    10     21      2      0     7       31      2       0         135
     4:50 PM          4      16       8    0         2      25      7    0     9     17      4      0     8       18      5       0         123
     4:55 PM          3      28       2    0         5      22      2    0    10     32      9      0     4       20      3       0         140             1647
     5:00 PM          7      17       8    0         4      31      2    0    17     31     10      0     8       19      1       0         155             1657
     5:05 PM          3      30       8    0         6      31      7    0    15     31      3      0     8       27      4       0         173             1672
     5:10 PM          6      29       9    0         2      22      2    0    11     35      3      0     8       25      3       0         155             1665
     5:15 PM          6      31       6    0         5      29      2    0    14     30      2      0     5       24      1       0         155             1669
     5:20 PM          4      20       9    0         4      29      2    0     6     18      3      0     5       17      6       0         123             1671
     5:25 PM          3      12       2    0         5      22      1    0    10     11      4      0     5       16      6       0          97             1652
     5:30 PM          5      15       7    0         0       7      5    0     4     28      4      0     5       30      4       0         114             1637
     5:35 PM          5      13       6    0         4      18      3    0     9     15      4      0     3       20      5       0         105             1610
     5:40 PM          5      19       5    0         4      23      1    0     3     19      5      0     3       11      4       0         102             1577
     5:45 PM          2       6       3    0         2      21      1    0     5     28      4      0     7       25      2       0         106             1548
     5:50 PM          5       9       7    0         0      17      8    0     7     20      4      0     3       17      7       0         104             1529
     5:55 PM          4      23       2    0         2      18      4    0     2     16      2      0     2       16      3       0          94             1483
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates         Left    Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles       52     300      72    0        60     336     44    0   168    376     88      0    80      264     32       0                 1872
 Heavy Trucks         0       8       0              0       8      0          0      0      0            0        4      0                          20
  Pedestrians                 4                              4                        4                           16                                 28
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/5/2010 3:33 PM                                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Type of peak hour being reported: User-Defined                                              Method for determining peak hour: Total Entering Volume
 LOCATION: N 2nd Ave -- E Main St                                                                                          QC JOB #: 10477506
 CITY/STATE: Walla Walla, WA                                                                                               DATE: 1/28/2010
                       445 0.86 392                           Peak-Hour: 4:10 PM -- 5:10 PM                                 2.0       1.5

                       33 382 30
                                                             Peak 15-Min: 4:55 PM -- 5:10 PM
                                                                                                                            3.0 2.1 0.0

       191     22                      42    228
                                                                                                               1.6   0.0                      0.0      0.9
        0.81   113         0.93       137   0.81
                                                                                                                     2.7                      1.5
       168     33                      49    200
                                                                                                               1.8   0.0                      0.0      1.5

                       21 328 57
                                                                                                                            0.0 1.8 0.0

                       464 0.90 406
                                                                                                                            1.7       1.5



                            25




               29                      26




                            0




 5-Min Count                 N 2nd Ave                      N 2nd Ave                E Main St                    E Main St
     Period                (Northbound)                   (Southbound)              (Eastbound)                 (Westbound)                             Hourly
Beginning At                                                                                                                                Total
                    Left    Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U                     Totals
     4:00 PM          1      32       0    0         6      30      7    0     2     13      2      0     8       14      3       0         118
     4:05 PM          1      28       5    0         3      39      6    0     4     11      6      0     3       16      2       0         124
     4:10 PM          2      31       6    0         3      34      3    0     3     12      2      0     4       19      4       0         123
     4:15 PM          3      24       7    0         3      35      3    0     1     11      3      0     6        9      5       0         110
     4:20 PM          3      25       4    0         2      33      1    0     0      9      1      0     7       13      3       0         101
     4:25 PM          3      24       7    0         0      30      3    0     2      9      3      0     2       12      2       0          97
     4:30 PM          3      26       4    0         0      34      2    0     2      8      4      0     1       14      4       0         102
     4:35 PM          3      39       4    0         4      26      1    0     2      8      5      0     4       10      2       0         108
     4:40 PM          1      24       6    0         2      23      4    0     1      5      3      0     2       14      4       0          89
     4:45 PM          0      24       4    0         5      27      1    0     1      5      1      0     5       11      4       0          88
     4:50 PM          2      21       2    0         2      31      4    0     6      8      1      0     5        9      3       0          94
     4:55 PM          0      30       3    0         4      34      1    0     1      8      2      0     2       12      4       0         101             1255
     5:00 PM          0      28       4    0         1      35      5    0     1     14      4      0     5        9      4       0         110             1247
     5:05 PM          1      32       6    0         4      40      5    0     2     16      4      0     6        5      3       0         124             1247
     5:10 PM          0      44       4    0         5      31      1    0     2      3      2      0     4       13      3       0         112             1236
     5:15 PM          3      34       2    0         3      33      1    0     3      8      1      0     4       10      4       0         106             1232
     5:20 PM          0      27       1    0         1      30      4    0     3      5      1      0     2        9      2       0          85             1216
     5:25 PM          4      17       5    0         1      29      2    0     0      8      0      0     3        9      3       0          81             1200
     5:30 PM          0      17       4    0         2      16      2    0     0      2      0      0     6       10      6       0          65             1163
     5:35 PM          0      28       0    0         6      18      1    0     0      3      2      0     1        2      1       0          62             1117
     5:40 PM          1      22       3    0         1      25      0    0     1      8      2      0     3        9      1       0          76             1104
     5:45 PM          0      10       5    0         3      30      2    0     1      6      2      0     4        6      1       0          70             1086
     5:50 PM          0      17       2    0         5      19      1    0     0     12      0      0     2       11      3       0          72             1064
     5:55 PM          1      23       2    0         1      20      0    0     0      7      2      0     1        9      3       0          69             1032
 Peak 15-Min                    Northbound                    Southbound                Eastbound                    Westbound
                                                                                                                                                    Total
  Flowrates         Left    Thru Right     U       Left    Thru Right    U   Left   Thru Right      U   Left     Thru Right       U
  All Vehicles        4     360      52    0        36     436     44    0    16    152     40      0    52      104     44       0                 1340
 Heavy Trucks         0       8       0              0       8      0          0      4      0            0        0      0                          20
  Pedestrians                 0                             16                       28                           24                                 68
   Bicycles
   Railroad
Stopped Buses
 Comments:
Report generated on 2/5/2010 3:33 PM                                                     SOURCE: Quality Counts, LLC (http://www.qualitycounts.net)
Attachment B
Description of Level-of-
Service Methods and Criteria
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                       Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                                  Page 2




Level-of-Service Concept
Level  of  service  (LOS)  is  a  concept  developed  to  quantify  the  degree  of  comfort  (including  such 
elements  as  travel  time,  number  of  stops,  total  amount  of  stopped  delay,  and  impediments  caused 
by  other  vehicles)  afforded  to  drivers  as  they  travel  through  an  intersection  or  roadway  segment. 
Six grades are used to denote the various level of service from "A" to "F".1 


SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS

The  six  levelofservice  grades  are  described  qualitatively  for  signalized  intersections  in  Table  B1. 
Additionally, Table B2 identifies the relationship between level of service and average control delay 
per  vehicle.  Control  delay  is  defined  to  include  initial  deceleration  delay,  queue  moveup  time, 
stopped  delay,  and  final  acceleration  delay.  Using  this  definition,  Level  of  Service  "D"  is  generally 
considered to represent the minimum acceptable design standard. 

                     Table B-1         Level-of-Service Definitions (Signalized Intersections)

    Level of
    Service                                             Average Delay per Vehicle

A               Very low average control delay, less than 10 seconds per vehicle. This occurs when progression is
                extremely favorable, and most vehicles arrive during the green phase. Most vehicles do not stop at all.
                Short cycle lengths may also contribute to low delay.

B               Average control delay is greater than 10 seconds per vehicle and less than or equal to 20 seconds per
                vehicle. This generally occurs with good progression and/or short cycle lengths. More vehicles stop than
                for a level of service A, causing higher levels of average delay.

C               Average control delay is greater than 20 seconds per vehicle and less than or equal to 35 seconds per
                vehicle. These higher delays may result from fair progression and/or longer cycle lengths. Individual
                cycle failures may begin to appear at this level. The number of vehicles stopping is significant at this
                level, although many still pass through the intersection without stopping.

D               Average control delay is greater than 35 seconds per vehicle and less than or equal to 55 seconds per
                vehicle. The influence of congestion becomes more noticeable. Longer delays may result from some
                combination of unfavorable progression, long cycle length, or high volume/capacity ratios. Many
                vehicles stop, and the proportion of vehicles not stopping declines. Individual cycle failures are
                noticeable.

E               Average control delay is greater than 55 seconds per vehicle and less than or equal to 80 seconds per
                vehicle. This is usually considered to be the limit of acceptable delay. These high delay values generally
                (but not always) indicate poor progression, long cycle lengths, and high volume/capacity ratios.
                Individual cycle failures are frequent occurrences.

F               Average control delay is in excess of 80 seconds per vehicle. This is considered to be unacceptable to
                most drivers. This condition often occurs with oversaturation. It may also occur at high volume/capacity
                ratios below 1.0 with many individual cycle failures. Poor progression and long cycle lengths may also
                contribute to such high delay values.

 

1 Most of the material in this appendix is adapted from the Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual,
(2000).




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                               Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                     Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                                Page 3


                      Table B2           Level-of-Service Criteria for Signalized Intersections

                            Level of   Average Control Delay per Vehicle (Seconds)
                            Service

                        A              <10.0

                        B              >10 and 20

                        C              >20 and 35

                        D              >35 and 55

                        E              >55 and 80

                        F              >80


UNSIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS

Unsignalized  intersections  include  twoway  stopcontrolled  (TWSC)  and  allway  stopcontrolled 
(AWSC)  intersections.  The  2000  Highway  Capacity  Manual  (HCM)  provides  models  for  estimating 
control  delay  at  both  TWSC  and  AWSC  intersections.  A  qualitative  description  of  the  various 
service  levels  associated  with  an  unsignalized  intersection  is  presented  in  Table  B3.  A  quantitative 
definition  of  level  of  service  for  unsignalized  intersections  is  presented  in  Table  B4.  Using  this 
definition, Level of Service "E" is generally considered to represent the minimum acceptable design 
standard. 

                     Table B3           Level-of-Service Criteria for Unsignalized Intersections

    Level of
    Service                                       Average Delay per Vehicle to Minor Street

                Nearly all drivers find freedom of operation.
       A
                Very seldom is there more than one vehicle in queue.

                Some drivers begin to consider the delay an inconvenience.
       B
                Occasionally there is more than one vehicle in queue.

                Many times there is more than one vehicle in queue.
       C
                Most drivers feel restricted, but not objectionably so.

                Often there is more than one vehicle in queue.
       D
                Drivers feel quite restricted.

                Represents a condition in which the demand is near or equal to the probable maximum number of
                 vehicles that can be accommodated by the movement.
       E
                There is almost always more than one vehicle in queue.

                Drivers find the delays approaching intolerable levels.

                Forced flow.
       F        Represents an intersection failure condition that is caused by geometric and/or operational constraints
                 external to the intersection.

 




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                             Boise, Idaho
Walla Walla Police Department                                                                   Project #: 10628.0
March 17, 2010                                                                                              Page 4


                     Table B4         Level-of-Service Criteria for Unsignalized Intersections
                           Level of      Average Control Delay per Vehicle (Seconds)
                           Service

                                A       <10.0

                                B       >10.0 and  15.0
 
                                C       >15.0 and  25.0

                                D       >25.0 and  35.0

                                E       >35.0 and  50.0
 
                                F       >50.0

 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  levelofservice  criteria  for  unsignalized  intersections  are  somewhat 
different than the criteria used for signalized intersections. The primary reason for this difference is 
that  drivers  expect  different  levels  of  performance  from  different  kinds  of  transportation  facilities. 
The  expectation  is  that  a  signalized  intersection  is  designed  to  carry  higher  traffic  volumes  than  an 
unsignalized  intersection.  Additionally,  there  are  a  number  of  driver  behavior  considerations  that 
combine  to  make  delays  at  signalized  intersections  less  galling  than  at  unsignalized  intersections. 
For  example,  drivers  at  signalized  intersections  are  able  to  relax  during  the  red  interval,  while 
drivers  on  the  minor  street  approaches  to  TWSC  intersections  must  remain  attentive  to  the  task  of 
identifying  acceptable  gaps  and  vehicle  conflicts.  Also,  there  is  often  much  more  variability  in  the 
amount  of  delay  experienced  by  individual  drivers  at  unsignalized  intersections  than  signalized 
intersections.  For  these  reasons,  it  is  considered  that  the  control  delay  threshold  for  any  given  level 
of  service  is  less  for  an  unsignalized  intersection  than  for  a  signalized  intersection.  While  overall 
intersection  level  of  service  is  calculated  for  AWSC  intersections,  level  of  service  is  only  calculated 
for the minor approaches and the major street left turn movements at TWSC intersections. No delay 
is assumed to the major street through movements. For TWSC intersections, the overall intersection 
level of service remains undefined: level of service is only calculated for each minor street lane. 

In  the  performance  evaluation  of  TWSC  intersections,  it  is  important  to  consider  other  measures  of 
effectiveness  (MOEs)  in  addition  to  delay,  such  as  v/c  ratios  for  individual  movements,  average 
queue  lengths,  and  95thpercentile  queue  lengths.  By  focusing  on  a  single  MOE  for  the  worst 
movement  only,  such  as  delay  for  the  minorstreet  left  turn,  users  may  make  inappropriate  traffic 
control  decisions.  The  potential  for  making  such  inappropriate  decisions  is  likely  to  be  particularly 
pronounced  when  the  HCM  levelofservice  thresholds  are  adopted  as  legal  standards,  as  is  the 
case in many public agencies.  




Kittelson & Associates, Inc.                                                                           Boise, Idaho
Attachment C
Year 2010 Existing
Conditions Level-of-Service
Worksheets
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
2: 2nd Avenue & Moore St                                                                                                    3/4/2010



Movement                            SEL      SET     SER     NWL    NWT     NWR        NEL    NET    NER    SWL    SWT         SWR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                         2     242       16     96     125       16        5       0   162     35       10          7
Sign Control                                Free                    Free                      Stop                  Stop
Grade                                        0%                      0%                        0%                    0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.93    0.93     0.93    0.93   0.93     0.93      0.93   0.93   0.93   0.93    0.93       0.93
Hourly flow rate (vph)                 2     260       17    103     134       17         5      0    174     38      11          8
Pedestrians                                                                                      1                     1
Lane Width (ft)                                                                               12.0                  12.0
Walking Speed (ft/s)                                                                           4.0                   4.0
Percent Blockage                                                                                 0                     0
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                 None                    None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)                                                1092
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume               153                     278                       561    633    270    798      633         77
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   153                     278                       561    633    270    798      633         77
tC, single (s)                        4.2                     4.3                       7.6    6.6    7.0    7.6      6.6        7.0
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                2.2                     2.3                       3.5    4.0    3.3    3.5      4.0        3.3
p0 queue free %                      100                       92                       99    100     76     81       97         99
cM capacity (veh/h)                 1410                     1224                      367    357    721    193      357        961
Direction, Lane #                   SE 1    NW 1    NW 2     NE 1   SW 1
Volume Total                         280     170       84     180      56
Volume Left                            2      103       0       5      38
Volume Right                          17        0      17     174       8
cSH                                 1410    1224    1700      701     241
Volume to Capacity                  0.00     0.08    0.05    0.26    0.23
Queue Length 95th (ft)                 0        7       0      25      22
Control Delay (s)                    0.1      5.3     0.0    11.9    24.4
Lane LOS                               A        A               B       C
Approach Delay (s)                   0.1      3.5            11.9    24.4
Approach LOS                                                    B       C
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                          5.7
Intersection Capacity Utilization                   47.8%       ICU Level of Service                   A
Analysis Period (min)                                   15




2010 Existing Conditions                                                                                       Synchro 7 - Report
KSP                                                                                                                        Page 1
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
3: Moore St & 4th Ave                                                                             3/4/2010



Movement                            EBL    EBR     SBL     SBR    NWL     NWR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                         1    41      214      3      50       75
Sign Control                        Stop           Free           Free
Grade                                0%             0%             0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.82   0.82    0.82    0.82   0.82     0.82
Hourly flow rate (vph)                 1     50     261       4     61       91
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                       None            None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)                                              1288
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume              476    263                     265
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                  476    263                     265
tC, single (s)                       6.5    6.3                     4.2
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                               3.6    3.4                     2.3
p0 queue free %                     100     93                      95
cM capacity (veh/h)                 508    757                    1271
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1   SB 1   NW 1
Volume Total                          51    265     152
Volume Left                            1      0      61
Volume Right                          50      4       0
cSH                                  748   1700   1271
Volume to Capacity                  0.07   0.16    0.05
Queue Length 95th (ft)                 5      0       4
Control Delay (s)                   10.2    0.0     3.4
Lane LOS                               B              A
Approach Delay (s)                  10.2    0.0     3.4
Approach LOS                           B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                        2.2
Intersection Capacity Utilization                 32.7%       ICU Level of Service   A
Analysis Period (min)                                 15




2010 Existing Conditions                                                                 Synchro 7 - Report
KSP                                                                                                  Page 2
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
5: Rees Ave & 4th Ave                                                                                                       3/4/2010



Movement                            EBL      EBT     EBR     WBL    WBT     WBR        NBL    NBT    NBR    SBL     SBT        SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                         4      22      121     49      39        1       28       8    21      2       17          4
Sign Control                                Free                    Free                      Stop                  Stop
Grade                                        0%                      0%                        0%                    0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.78    0.78     0.78    0.78   0.78     0.78      0.78   0.78   0.78   0.78    0.78       0.78
Hourly flow rate (vph)                 5      28     155       63     50        1        36     10     27      3      22          5
Pedestrians                                                                                                            1
Lane Width (ft)                                                                                                     12.0
Walking Speed (ft/s)                                                                                                 4.0
Percent Blockage                                                                                                       0
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                 None                    None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume                52                     183                       308    294    106    325      371         52
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                   52                      183                       308    294    106    325      371         52
tC, single (s)                       4.1                      4.1                       7.2    6.6    6.2    7.2      6.6        6.3
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                2.2                     2.2                       3.5    4.0    3.3    3.6      4.1        3.4
p0 queue free %                      100                       95                       94     98     97    100       96         99
cM capacity (veh/h)                 1546                     1392                      592    582    940    566      521        996
Direction, Lane #                   EB 1    WB 1     NB 1    SB 1
Volume Total                         188     114       73      29
Volume Left                            5       63      36       3
Volume Right                         155        1      27       5
cSH                                 1546    1392      684     573
Volume to Capacity                  0.00     0.05    0.11    0.05
Queue Length 95th (ft)                 0        4       9       4
Control Delay (s)                    0.2      4.4    10.9    11.6
Lane LOS                               A        A       B       B
Approach Delay (s)                   0.2      4.4    10.9    11.6
Approach LOS                                            B       B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                          4.2
Intersection Capacity Utilization                   33.9%       ICU Level of Service                   A
Analysis Period (min)                                   15




2010 Existing Conditions                                                                                       Synchro 7 - Report
KSP                                                                                                                        Page 3
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
11: 2nd Ave & US 12 EB Ramps                                                                       3/4/2010



Movement                            SET    SER     NWL     NWT     NEL      NER
Lane Configurations
Volume (veh/h)                       350    85      214     219      13       97
Sign Control                        Free                   Free    Stop
Grade                                0%                     0%      0%
Peak Hour Factor                    0.94   0.94    0.94    0.94    0.94     0.94
Hourly flow rate (vph)               372     90    228      233      14     103
Pedestrians                                                           1
Lane Width (ft)                                                    12.0
Walking Speed (ft/s)                                                4.0
Percent Blockage                                                      0
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                         None                   None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)                                        472
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume                              464             990      232
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol                                  464             990      232
tC, single (s)                                       4.2             6.9      7.0
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                                              2.3              3.6      3.4
p0 queue free %                                      79              93       86
cM capacity (veh/h)                                1065             186      757
Direction, Lane #                   SE 1   SE 2   NW 1     NW 2    NE 1
Volume Total                         248    215    305      155     117
Volume Left                            0      0     228        0     14
Volume Right                           0     90       0        0    103
cSH                                 1700   1700   1065     1700     555
Volume to Capacity                  0.15   0.13    0.21     0.09   0.21
Queue Length 95th (ft)                 0      0      20        0     20
Control Delay (s)                    0.0    0.0     7.5      0.0   13.2
Lane LOS                                              A               B
Approach Delay (s)                   0.0            4.9            13.2
Approach LOS                                                          B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                                        3.7
Intersection Capacity Utilization                 41.4%        ICU Level of Service   A
Analysis Period (min)                                 15




2010 Existing Conditions                                                                  Synchro 7 - Report
KSP                                                                                                   Page 4
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
18: Rose St & 2nd Ave                                                                                                             3/4/2010



Movement                            EBL   EBT      EBR      WBL     WBT     WBR         NBL     NBT     NBR      SBL      SBT        SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (vph)                       121     302       53        71    269       33          48    280      67       52     319          57
Ideal Flow (vphpl)               1900     1900    1900      1900    1900     1900       1900    1900    1900    1900     1900        1900
Total Lost time (s)                3.5      4.0     4.0       3.5     4.0                 3.5     4.0             3.5      4.0
Lane Util. Factor                 1.00    1.00     1.00     1.00    1.00                1.00    1.00             1.00     1.00
Frt                               1.00     1.00    0.85      1.00    0.98                1.00    0.97            1.00     0.98
Flt Protected                     0.95    1.00     1.00     0.95    1.00                 0.95    1.00            0.95     1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)                1770     1863    1583      1752    1814                1770    1809            1770     1820
Flt Permitted                     0.26    1.00     1.00     0.31    1.00                 0.35    1.00            0.39     1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)                  482    1863    1583       572    1814                 657    1809              721    1820
Peak-hour factor, PHF             0.89     0.89    0.89      0.89    0.89    0.89        0.89    0.89   0.89     0.89     0.89       0.89
Adj. Flow (vph)                    136     339       60        80    302       37          54    315      75       58      358         64
RTOR Reduction (vph)                 0        0      45         0       7       0           0      11      0         0       8          0
Lane Group Flow (vph)             136      339       15        80    332        0          54    379       0       58     414           0
Heavy Vehicles (%)                 2%       2%      2%        3%      3%      3%          2%      2%     2%       2%       2%         2%
Turn Type                       pm+pt             Perm     pm+pt                       pm+pt                   pm+pt
Protected Phases                     1       6                  5      2                    7      4                 3       8
Permitted Phases                     6                6         2                           4                        8
Actuated Green, G (s)             24.6    17.4     17.4     22.8     16.5               31.3    28.0             31.3     28.0
Effective Green, g (s)            24.6    17.4     17.4     22.8     16.5               31.3    28.0             31.3     28.0
Actuated g/C Ratio                0.35    0.25     0.25      0.33    0.24                0.45   0.40             0.45     0.40
Clearance Time (s)                 3.5     4.0      4.0       3.5     4.0                 3.5     4.0              3.5      4.0
Vehicle Extension (s)              3.0     3.0      3.0       3.0     3.0                 3.0    3.0              3.0      3.0
Lane Grp Cap (vph)                 302     463      393      293      428                346     724              372      728
v/s Ratio Prot                   c0.05    0.18              0.02    c0.18               0.01    0.21            c0.01    c0.23
v/s Ratio Perm                    0.11             0.01      0.06                        0.06                    0.06
v/c Ratio                         0.45    0.73     0.04     0.27     0.78                0.16   0.52             0.16     0.57
Uniform Delay, d1                 16.7    24.2     20.0     17.1     25.0                11.6   15.9             11.5     16.3
Progression Factor                1.00    1.00     1.00     1.00     1.00               0.70    0.86             1.00     1.00
Incremental Delay, d2              1.1     5.9      0.0       0.5     8.6                 0.2    2.6              0.2      3.2
Delay (s)                         17.7    30.1     20.0      17.6    33.6                 8.4   16.4             11.7     19.5
Level of Service                     B       C        B         B       C                   A      B                 B       B
Approach Delay (s)                        25.8                       30.5                       15.4                      18.6
Approach LOS                                 C                          C                          B                         B
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                           22.5        HCM Level of Service                      C
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio                        0.59
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                           70.0        Sum of lost time (s)                    15.0
Intersection Capacity Utilization                 60.6%         ICU Level of Service                       B
Analysis Period (min)                                 15
c Critical Lane Group




2010 Existing Conditions                                                                                            Synchro 7 - Report
KSP                                                                                                                             Page 5
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
19: Main St & 2nd Ave                                                                                                          3/4/2010



Movement                             EBL    EBT      EBR     WBL     WBT     WBR        NBL     NBT     NBR     SBL     SBT       SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (vph)                          22     113       33      49     137       42         21    335      57      30    382         33
Ideal Flow (vphpl)                  1900    1900     1900    1900    1900     1900      1900    1900    1900   1900    1900       1900
Total Lost time (s)                           4.0                      4.0                4.0     4.0            4.0     4.0
Lane Util. Factor                           1.00                      1.00               1.00    1.00           1.00    1.00
Frt                                          0.97                     0.98               1.00    0.98           1.00    0.99
Flt Protected                                0.99                     0.99               0.95    1.00           0.95    1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)                           1802                     1797               1770    1822           1770    1841
Flt Permitted                                0.94                     0.89               0.47    1.00           0.48    1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)                           1704                     1618                 868   1822             899   1841
Peak-hour factor, PHF                0.93    0.93    0.93     0.93    0.93    0.93       0.93    0.93   0.93    0.93    0.93      0.93
Adj. Flow (vph)                        24    122       35       53    147       45         23    360      61      32     411        35
RTOR Reduction (vph)                    0      14       0        0      13       0          0       7      0       0       3         0
Lane Group Flow (vph)                   0    167        0        0    232        0         23    414       0      32     443         0
Turn Type                           Perm                     Perm                       Perm                   Perm
Protected Phases                               4                        8                          2                      6
Permitted Phases                       4                        8                          2                      6
Actuated Green, G (s)                       15.1                      15.1              46.9    46.9           46.9     46.9
Effective Green, g (s)                      15.1                      15.1              46.9    46.9           46.9     46.9
Actuated g/C Ratio                          0.22                      0.22              0.67    0.67           0.67     0.67
Clearance Time (s)                           4.0                       4.0               4.0      4.0           4.0      4.0
Vehicle Extension (s)                        3.0                       3.0               3.0      3.0           3.0      3.0
Lane Grp Cap (vph)                           368                       349               582    1221            602    1233
v/s Ratio Prot                                                                                   0.23                  c0.24
v/s Ratio Perm                              0.10                     c0.14              0.03                   0.04
v/c Ratio                                   0.45                      0.66              0.04    0.34           0.05     0.36
Uniform Delay, d1                           23.9                      25.1               3.9     4.9            4.0      5.0
Progression Factor                          1.00                      1.00              1.00    1.00           1.29     1.09
Incremental Delay, d2                        0.9                       4.7               0.1     0.8            0.2      0.7
Delay (s)                                   24.8                      29.8               4.0     5.7            5.2      6.2
Level of Service                               C                         C                 A       A              A        A
Approach Delay (s)                          24.8                      29.8                       5.6                     6.1
Approach LOS                                   C                         C                         A                       A
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                             12.8       HCM Level of Service                     B
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio                          0.43
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                             70.0       Sum of lost time (s)                    8.0
Intersection Capacity Utilization                   51.7%        ICU Level of Service                      A
Analysis Period (min)                                   15
c Critical Lane Group




2010 Existing Conditions                                                                                          Synchro 7 - Report
KSP                                                                                                                           Page 6
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
24: Pine St & 2nd Ave                                                                                 3/4/2010



Movement                            EBL     EBR     NBL     NBT     SBT      SBR
Lane Configurations
Volume (vph)                         132      76      57     305     340       83
Ideal Flow (vphpl)                  1900    1900    1900    1900    1900     1900
Total Lost time (s)                   4.5                     5.0     5.0
Lane Util. Factor                   1.00                     0.95    0.95
Frt                                  0.95                    1.00    0.97
Flt Protected                       0.97                     0.99    1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)                   1683                    3444    3402
Flt Permitted                       0.97                     0.83    1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)                   1683                    2869    3402
Peak-hour factor, PHF                0.92   0.92    0.92     0.92    0.92    0.92
Adj. Flow (vph)                      143      83      62     332     370       90
RTOR Reduction (vph)                   27      0       0        0      24       0
Lane Group Flow (vph)                199       0       0     394     436        0
Heavy Vehicles (%)                    4%     4%      4%       4%      3%      3%
Turn Type                                          Perm
Protected Phases                       8                       2       6
Permitted Phases                                       2
Actuated Green, G (s)             8.2                       10.9    10.9
Effective Green, g (s)            8.2                       10.9    10.9
Actuated g/C Ratio               0.29                       0.38    0.38
Clearance Time (s)                4.5                        5.0     5.0
Vehicle Extension (s)             3.0                        3.0     3.0
Lane Grp Cap (vph)               483                        1093    1297
v/s Ratio Prot                  c0.12                               0.13
v/s Ratio Perm                                              c0.14
v/c Ratio                           0.41                     0.36   0.34
Uniform Delay, d1                    8.2                      6.3    6.3
Progression Factor                  1.00                     1.00   1.00
Incremental Delay, d2                0.6                      0.2    0.2
Delay (s)                            8.8                      6.6    6.4
Level of Service                       A                        A      A
Approach Delay (s)                   8.8                      6.6    6.4
Approach LOS                           A                        A      A
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                             7.0       HCM Level of Service    A
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio                         0.38
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                            28.6       Sum of lost time (s)   9.5
Intersection Capacity Utilization                  46.2%        ICU Level of Service     A
Analysis Period (min)                                  15
c Critical Lane Group




2010 Existing Conditions                                                                     Synchro 7 - Report
KSP                                                                                                      Page 7
Attachment D
Crash Data Sheets
                                                           REPORTED COLLISIONS THAT OCCURRED ON CITY STREETS IN THE CITY OF WALLA WALLA
                                                                        1/1/2004 THROUGH 9/30/2009 (2009 is considered preliminary)
                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                           COMP                                                                                                   #   P
                                                            DIST            DIR                 CITY AND MISC                                                     #       #   #   P   E
                                                           FROM            FROM                     ONLY         CITY AND MISC                                    I       F   V   E   D
                      PRIMARY     BLOCK     INTERSECTING    REF    MI or    REF    REFERENCE     SECONDARY      ONLY SECONDARY REPORT                 MOST SEVERE N       A   E   D   A
 JURISDICTION       TRAFFICWAY      #        TRAFFICWAY    POINT    FT     POINT   POINT NAME   TRAFFICWAY 1     TRAFFICWAY 2  NUMBER   DATE     TIME INJURY TYPE J       T   H   S   L        VEHICLE 1 TYPE

City Street     4                         MOORE                                                                               1548417   05/20/04 23:43 No Injury         0 0 1            Passenger Car
                                                                                                                                                                                          Pickup,Panel Truck or
City Street     N 4 AVE                   W MOORE ST                                                                          2726340   12/27/06 10:04 No Injury         0 0 2            Vanette under 10,000 lb

City Street     N 4 AVE                   W MOORE ST                                                                          2515250   11/25/06 11:25 Possible Injury   1 0 2            Passenger Car




                                                                                                                                            UNDER 23 UNITED STATES CODE  SECTION 409, THIS
              WSDOT                                                                                                                       DATA CANNOT BE USED IN DISCOVERY OR AS EVIDENCE
              COLLISION DATA and ANALYSIS BRANCH                                                                                            AT TRIAL IN ANY ACTION FOR DAMAGES AGAINST THE
              2/26/10                                                                             1 of 2                                  WSDOT, OR ANY JURISDICTIONS INVOLVED IN THE DATA
                                                                         REPORTED COLLISIONS THAT OCCURRED ON CITY STREETS IN THE CITY OF WALLA WALLA
                                                                                      1/1/2004 THROUGH 9/30/2009 (2009 is considered preliminary)



                                                  ROADWAY                                                                                                                                           VEH 1    VEH 1    VEH 2    VEH 2
                                JUNCTION          SURFACE           LIGHTING                                                       FIRST OBJECT    MV DRIVER CONT CIRC 1        MV DRIVER CONT     COMP DIR COMP DIR COMP DIR COMP DIR
    VEHICLE 2 TYPE            RELATIONSHIP       CONDITIONS        CONDITIONS                FIRST COLLISION TYPE                      STRUCK             (UNIT 1)               CIRC 1 (UNIT 2)    FROM      TO      FROM      TO
                          At Intersection and                                                                                   Tree or Stump
                          Related               Wet           Dark-Street Lights On   Fixed object                              (stationary)      Under Influence of Alcohol                       South   North
Pickup,Panel Truck or     At Intersection and                                         From opposite direction - both moving -
Vanette under 10,000 lb   Not Related           Snow/Slush    Daylight                head-on                                                     Exceeding Reas. Safe Speed None                  South   North    North      South
                          At Intersection and                                         From same direction - both going                                                                                                         Vehicle
Passenger Car             Related               Dry           Daylight                straight - one stopped - rear-end                           Exceeding Reas. Safe Speed None                  North   South    North      Stopped




                                                                                                                                                                             UNDER 23 UNITED STATES CODE  SECTION 409, THIS
              WSDOT                                                                                                                                                        DATA CANNOT BE USED IN DISCOVERY OR AS EVIDENCE
              COLLISION DATA and ANALYSIS BRANCH                                                                                                                             AT TRIAL IN ANY ACTION FOR DAMAGES AGAINST THE
              2/26/10                                                                                                   2 of 2                                             WSDOT, OR ANY JURISDICTIONS INVOLVED IN THE DATA
         REPORTED COLLISIONS THAT OCCURRED AT STATE ROUTE 12 (EXCLUDING MAINLINE, MILEPOST 336.03 - 336.77) AT 2nd AVE
                                                         INTERCHANGE
                                       1/1/2004 - 9/30/2009 (2009 is considered preliminary)
JURISDICTIO   STATE        SR   REPORT                      MOST SEVERE #   #FA #VE #PED #PED
     N      ROUTE (SR)     MP   NUMBER    DATE       TIME   INJURY TYPE INJ T   H   S    AL        VEHICLE 1 TYPE          VEHICLE 2 TYPE



State Route   012LX33652   0.12 1548021   09/30/04 15:18 Possible Injury   1   0   2            Passenger Car           Passenger Car

                                                                                                Pickup,Panel Truck or
State Route   012LX33652   0.12 1548329   03/16/05 16:50 Possible Injury   1   0   2            Vanette under 10,000 lb Passenger Car



State Route   012LX33652   0.12 C685233   04/25/07 16:45 Unknown           0   0   2            Passenger Car           Passenger Car

                                                                                                Pickup,Panel Truck or   Pickup,Panel Truck or
State Route   012P133621   0.36 E012432   12/16/08 15:00 No Injury         0   0   3            Vanette under 10,000 lb Vanette under 10,000 lb

                                                                                                Pickup,Panel Truck or   Pickup,Panel Truck or
State Route   012Q533676   0.00 1963187   02/08/05    9:22 No Injury       0   0   2            Vanette under 10,000 lb Vanette under 10,000 lb



State Route   012R533662   0.28 2284393   06/28/06 11:24 Possible Injury   1   0   2            Passenger Car           Passenger Car




                                                                                 UNDER 23 UNITED STATES CODE  SECTION 409, THIS
        WSDOT                                                                  DATA CANNOT BE USED IN DISCOVERY OR AS EVIDENCE
        COLLISION DATA and ANALYSIS BRANCH                                       AT TRIAL IN ANY ACTION FOR DAMAGES AGAINST THE
        2/26/10                                                                WSDOT, OR ANY JURISDICTIONS INVOLVED IN THE DATA
          REPORTED COLLISIONS THAT OCCURRED AT STATE ROUTE 12 (EXCLUDING MAINLINE, MILEPOST 336.03 - 336.77) AT 2nd AVE
                                                          INTERCHANGE
                 ROAD    LIGHTING       1/1/2004 - 9/30/2009 (2009
                                                            MV     is considered
                                                                DRIVER           preliminary)
                                                                            MV DRIVER      VEH 1 VEH 1 VEH 2     VEH 2
    JUNCTION           SURF   CONDITION                                     CONT CIRC 1    CONT CIRC 1 COMP DIR COMP DIR COMP DIR COMP DIR
  RELATIONSHIP         COND      S          FIRST COLLISION TYPE              (UNIT 1)       (UNIT 2)   FROM      TO      FROM      TO
                                          From same direction - both
At Intersection and                       going straight - one stopped -                                                                   Vehicle
Related               Dry     Daylight    rear-end                       Inattention       None        Southeast   Northwest   Southeast   Stopped
                                          From same direction - both
At Intersection and                       going straight - one stopped -                                                                   Vehicle
Related               Dry     Daylight    rear-end                       Inattention       None        Southeast   Northwest   Southeast   Stopped
                                          From same direction - both
At Intersection and                       going straight - one stopped -                                           Vehicle
Related               Unknown Unknown     rear-end                                                     Southeast   Stopped     Southeast   Northwest
                                          From same direction - both                       Operating
At Intersection and                       going straight - one stopped -                   Defective               Vehicle
Related               Ice     Daylight    rear-end                       None              Equipment   Southwest   Stopped     Southwest   Northeast

At Intersection and                       From opposite direction - one Did Not Grant
Related               Dry     Daylight    left turn - one straight      RW to Vehicle      None        Southeast   Southwest   Northwest   Southeast

At Intersection and                       From same direction - one        Follow Too                                                      Vehicle
Related               Dry     Daylight    right turn - one straight        Closely         None        Southwest   Northeast   Southwest   Stopped




                                                                                            UNDER 23 UNITED STATES CODE  SECTION 409, THIS
         WSDOT                                                                            DATA CANNOT BE USED IN DISCOVERY OR AS EVIDENCE
         COLLISION DATA and ANALYSIS BRANCH                                                 AT TRIAL IN ANY ACTION FOR DAMAGES AGAINST THE
         2/26/10                                                                          WSDOT, OR ANY JURISDICTIONS INVOLVED IN THE DATA
